* 2210315
* Collaborative Research: EPCN: Distributed Optimization-based Control of Large-Scale Nonlinear Systems with Uncertainties and Application to Robotic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Miroslav Krstic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Control and optimization need to be conducted simultaneously in numerous
applications: smart grids, transportation networks, cooperative robotics,
healthcare, and other autonomous systems interacting via wireless or physically-
linked communications. These two tasks are typically treated distinctly,
approached by independent designs. As a result, the two tasks interfere with one
another and require performance compromises in at least of the two. For
instance, optimality is obtained, but slowly, or convergence is rapid, but to
suboptimal motions. A deep integration of control and optimization holds great
promise. The integration is made difficult by the surge in complexity of
contemporary control systems, reflected in the dynamic order, model uncertainty,
and unreliable networking. The key challenge for concurrently running the
mutually interfering optimization and control is the stability of the overall
system or, if stability is ensured, the convergence rate. The control-
optimization interference has been the hallmark of both classical adaptive
control (controller-estimator interference) and extremum seeking (optimizer-
controller interference), which are special cases of concurrent control and
optimization. This project will advance the mathematical foundations of
distributed optimization-based control and develop new tools and methods for
real-time distributed optimization-based control design of large-scale and
nonlinear uncertain systems. The methodology will be validated by means of
cooperative robotic networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools developed in this
project, for real-time distributed optimization-based control algorithms for
large-scale nonlinear systems with uncertainties, are of transformative nature.
The algorithms designed will be applicable to heretofore intractable large-scale
systems, including uncertain networked nonlinear systems and robotic networks
described by Euler-Lagrange equations. To de-conflict the entanglement of
optimization and control, the PIs pursue three research tasks: (1) the synthesis
of distributed optimization algorithms that are robust to uncertainties, (2) the
design of tracking controllers for each local system to follow in real time the
desired output that aims to globally minimize certain global cost, and (3) the
integration of optimization and control algorithms for global convergence of
optimization algorithms and stability of the closed-loop network. The project
builds on the PIsâ€™ foundational contributions in nonlinear small-gain theory,
fortified uncertainty-attenuating controllers and estimators for modular
adaptive control design, and on their complementary skillsets in learning-based
control and in real-time optimization by extremum seeking. The deliverable is a
controller-optimizer co-design with a greatly enlarged applicability, in terms
of the generality of the nonlinear plants and the achieved robustness and
adaptivity, as compared to current methods which rely on linearly-bounded
interactions among the modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.