* 2210541
* Investigating Phase Separations as a Mechanism of Genome Compartmentalization Through In-vivo Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Alexandra Zidovska, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2027
* USD 180,000.00

The human genome consists of two meters of DNA stored inside the cell nucleus
barely 10 micrometers in diameter. The DNA molecule is packed in a structure
known as chromatin, whose organization inside the cell nucleus directly affects
the genome’s function, which in turn is critical for the proper function of the
cell. Hence, elucidating the principles underlying chromatin organization is
fundamental to understanding the genome in health and disease, as well as
designing new active and smart materials. Yet, the physical principles behind
the genome’s organization remain elusive. The goal of this project is to
generate a mechanistic picture of chromatin organization inside live human cells
by combining quantitative experimental approaches and theory from relevant areas
of physics. As a part of this project, the PI will develop educational and
outreach components with focus on recruitment and retention of women in physics
across different education and career stages. This project will also provide
novel educational and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, who will receive training in advanced optical microscopy techniques,
small angle X-ray scattering, image processing, and data analysis as well as
polymer physics, biophysics, and statistical mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The structure, organization and dynamics of chromatin inside the cell
nucleus control all aspects of DNA biology. Chromatin fiber is hierarchically
folded with increasing length scale into loops, topologically associated
domains, A and B compartments (transcriptionally active and inactive genomic
parts) and finally chromosome territories. Moreover, chromatin is
heterogeneously distributed across the nucleus into two types of compartments:
euchromatin, less dense and predominantly transcriptionally active regions, and
heterochromatin, denser regions containing mainly silenced genes. Despite this
detailed picture of the genome organization, its underlying physical principles
remain unknown. Moreover, the genome is immersed in a solvent, the nucleoplasm,
which was shown to organize itself, by undergoing liquid-liquid phase
separations, and forming functional liquid condensates. How to reconcile the
genomic and nucleoplasmic spatial organization remains an open question. The
overall goal of this project is to reveal the physical principles behind the
genome’s organization using state-of-the-art in-vivo experimental approaches and
data analytics, which will directly inform development of new models and
theories. By combining the latest quantitative techniques from polymer physics,
soft condensed matter physics, biophysics and cell biology, this project will
investigate the mechanism/s behind the genome compartmentalization and elucidate
the physical laws underlying such organization. These measurements will provide
fundamental insights into phase separation as the guiding physical principle for
compartmentalization of the genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.