* 2210346
* Active Matter Phases and Phase Transitions in a Model Social Bacterium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Joshua Shaevitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

The ability of groups of individual organisms to form complex and dynamic
spatial patterns is a key aspect of biological phenomena ranging from bird
flocking and fish schooling to multicellularity and embryonic development. In
bacterial populations, this often involves complicated signaling mechanisms
between cells. However, some species have evolved to take advantage of a special
kind of physics called active matter to perform specific biological functions
without the need for chemical signaling between cells. In the social bacterium
Myxococcus xanthus, the Shaevitz group have shown that cells can form
multicellular groups that resemble bird flocks, ant trails, and liquid droplets.
These cells can change the way they move in response to environmental cues to
change the behavior of the population. This project lays out a series of
experiments and theoretical analyses to understand these processes from a
physicist’s perspective, using tools to measure the spatial orientations, flows,
and forces in these populations. Results from this work will answer fundamental
questions about the mechanism and function of M. xanthus collective behavior and
inform our understanding of how groups of organisms act collectively. In the
future, this may lead to new methods for developing micro- and nanotechnologies
that self-assemble using the principles of active
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three questions: how
three-dimensional droplets form during starvation, how a surface-wave
instability aids predatory behavior, and how these behaviors manifest in
naturalistic soil-like environments. To understand how 3D fruiting bodies emerge
from 2D wetted layers, the investigators will track nematic order, cell motion,
and mechanical stress throughout the population during development. To
understand the instability that governs rippling behavior during predation, the
investigators will measure the height of the population and track cell motion
while perturbing motility, interactions between cells, and the environment. To
probe M. xanthus phase transitions on more realistic substrates, the
investigators will measure motility, fruiting body formation, and rippling on
curved substrates and artificial colloidal models of hydrated
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.