* 2210497
* CAS-Climate DCL: Workshop: Retrofitting Energy Justice
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Daniela Rosner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,994.00

The global transition to a renewable energy system requires engagement from all
parts of society. Innovative solutions to climate change require not only
constructing the new, but also retrofitting what exists, including adapting
existing buildings and climate proofing existing infrastructures. The workshop
supported by this grant aims to gather and extend work at the intersection of
maintenance and repair studies with environmental justice to examine the need
for infrastructure retrofitting. By bringing together researchers from the
fields of science and technology studies (STS), human computer interaction
(HCI), urban studies, indigenous studies, and environmental engineering with
diverse members of maintenance and repair communities, energy transition
initiatives can excavate, recover, and reclaim the retrofitting practices and
social histories that center repair as a life-sustaining practice and an
everyday form of sustainability. This examination will begin by centering equity
as an orienting approach to engineering not only a new physical relationship to
the environment, but also a new social relationship to energy
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop targets to make three central
contributions to research on energy justice and sustainable design. First,
disparate social science and environmental engineering conversations on
maintenance and repair will be connected to inform cross-disciplinary approaches
to emissions mitigation. Second, a broadened understanding of the roles and
effects of infrastructural retrofitting within the context of ongoing renewable
energy transition projects will be emphasized. Third, the range of values, skill
sets, and practices embedded in new and emerging forms of community-driven
adaptation around energy infrastructure will be featured. The workshop seeks to
locate retrofitting concerns at the core of energy transition thinking,
practice, and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.