* 2210343
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: JUNO3: End-to-end network slicing and orchestration in future programmable converged wireless-optical networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 236,260.00

Beyond 5G/6G and next-generation core networks promise a wide range of new
applications and industrial verticals such as digital enterprise, Industry 4.0,
and smart cities. Revolutionary technological breakthroughs in all domains,
including access fronthaul, edge clouds, and core networks, are necessary to
realize this unprecedented opportunity through timely end-to-end performance
guarantees. Several challenges must be overcome in order to achieve this.
Firstly, emerging applications often demand high availability and reliability
for mission-critical purposes. Secondly, edge-to-edge traffic flows gradually
dominate conventional cloud-to-user flows, transforming traffic patterns and
profiles. Thirdly, the explosive growth of the Internet and core network traffic
due to cloud services and the “new normal” following the COVID-19 pandemic
propel new programmable broadband data delivery. Lastly, seamless end-to-end
networking and management are necessary to support data-intensive, latency-
sensitive applications such as metaverse, digital twins, and remote surgery.
This project seeks to address these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this joint US-Japan project is to develop critical enablers to
realize the full spectrum of beyond 5G/6G applications. The specific aims are
to: a) Design resilient fronthaul architectures based on novel power-over-fiber
technology to provide wireless access survivability; b(Design automatic edge
cloud management and service chain deployment by leveraging machine learning
techniques and Markov decision processes; c)Design multi-petabit optical core
networks and efficient access-edge-core orchestration and slicing for stringent
service-level agreements; d) Prototype a wireless-optical network testbed and
evaluate end-to-end harmonization performance. This project brings unique
research synergy of US and Japanese researchers and will lay the theoretical,
algorithmic, and experimental foundation of end-to-end network slicing and
orchestration to enable future programmable converged wireless-optical networks.
The research outcomes will have overarching and transformative broader impacts
on technology and society through the harmonization of optical networking, edge,
and wireless domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.