* 2210180
* Transport studies of periodically driven electronic systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ramesh Mani, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 388,500.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The personal computer, the world wide web,
the cell phone, high-definition television, electronic sensors, and the expected
autonomous car and artificial intelligence, help drive the growth of the United
States gross domestic product and these growth engines rely heavily upon
technological advances made in semiconductor electronic materials. Although
associated electronic materials are typically utilized in their natural
equilibrium steady states in three dimensions, theoretical studies suggest the
possibility of realizing new capability when the constituent electrons in these
materials are artificially rearranged, such as confining them only to two-
dimensions. This research examines the electronic properties of two-dimensional
systems subjected to excitation from low energy light sources in search of
predicted physical phenomena, with a view towards potential applications. This
research is timely because recent advances in atomically layered materials has
greatly expanded both the universe of available materials for such studies and
scope of observable new phenomena. This research project is carried out at
Georgia State University, one of the universities which serves the most diverse
population in the nation. It will involve undergraduate and high school
students, including those from historically underrepresented groups and women,
and translate their abilities into the pursuit of career paths in the STEM
field, by providing them early exposure to a supportive, confidence building,
research experience. The project will also help to add underrepresented sections
of society to the nationâ€™s science and technology skill base for the
electronics, photonics, defense, and wireless communications industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This research
experimentally examines the magnetoelectronic response under low energy steady
state photoexcitation of semiconductor heterostructures and 2D atomic-layered
materials including mono-layer, bilayer, and twisted bilayer graphene,
atomically thin hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and possibly transition metal-
dichalcogenides. Photo-excited transport under steady state low energy
photoexcitation is mostly unexplored in the above-mentioned material systems
partly because of the experimental difficulties encountered in simultaneously
bringing together high magnetic fields, low temperatures, low energy
photoexcitation over a wide band, with good quality samples. The research team
consisting of graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students, will
build up layered semiconductor devices and 2D atomic-layered crystals by
applying electron beam lithography, plasma etch, and metallization; and examine
the properties of electrically contacted and non-contacted devices in the
presence of a magnetic field under microwave, mm-wave, and terahertz
photoexcitation. Here, some specific problems of interest include the study, to
measure particle characteristics, of radiation-induced magnetoresistance
oscillations and associated zero-resistance states, for electrons and composite
fermions, in the parabolic GaAs/AlGaAs and bilayer graphene systems, as well as
in the linearly dispersed monolayer graphene system. Another aim is to clarify
the dependence of the fundamental field for the radiation induced oscillations
for both electrons and composite fermions on the Fermi wave vector in monolayer
graphene. In the twisted bilayer graphene system, one aim is to study the
velocity renormalization versus the twist angle. In other STEM aspects, there
will be outreach to local high school science teachers to expose the students to
nanoscience via online lectures/seminars and host such high school students for
nanoscience-based laboratory investigations at Georgia State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.