* 2210464
* Biophysics of Branched Cells: Intracellular Transport, Scaling Laws and The Supply of Metabolic Demand
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathon Howard, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2025
* USD 645,000.00

Biological cells are active materials meaning that they continuously turn over
their constituent molecules as they dissipate energy obtained from metabolic
processes. The physics underlying this non-equilibrium state—the material and
energy fluxes together with the constraints that they impose on the organism—is
only just beginning to be defined. Branched cells, such as those of the nervous
and immune systems, pose especially difficult and interesting metabolic
challenges. In neurons, branched dendrites collect synaptic or sensory
information over a large area; yet the narrow, often bifurcated, dendritic
processes must also supply materials and energy to all parts of the cell,
especially to those locations undergoing growth or high activity. This project
will pursue a physics-inspired approach to understand how this balance between
the retrograde flow of information and the anterograde flow of nutrients impacts
the morphology and function of dendrites. In this project, the group will
formulate and test a supply-and-demand model that proposes that the supply of
nutrients by transport processes such as molecular motor proteins match the
metabolic demands of neuronal growth, activity and maintenance. The model
predicts that the diameters of branched dendrites change across branch points
according to specific laws that in turn depend on which cellular processes have
the highest metabolic demands. These laws will be tested in living cells by
combining state-of-the-art microscopy techniques with genetic and physical
manipulations. It is anticipated that this project will provide insight into how
the brain computes using so little energy (compared to man-made computers) and
may elucidate principles that could be used in computing and engineering. The
work may also improve our understanding of neurological diseases, which often
arise due to the disruption of metabolic or transport processes. This work will
entail training undergraduate, postgraduate and post-doctoral physics and
biology students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What sets the profile of diameters in
branched neurons? While electrical considerations must be crucial for setting
diameters, it is also necessary that axons and dendrites be of sufficient girth
to provide the flux of nutrients and energy to support the growth and activity
of the cell, including cytoplasm, membrane, and synapses. What are the tradeoffs
between information processing and material transport? Answering these questions
is important for three reasons: It will provide design rules and models that
increase our basic understanding of branched cells and tissues in general; it
may facilitate the segmentation of neurons for making connectomic maps and
classifying cell types; and it may provide insight into why aberrant dendritic
morphologies are associated with disease. Reconciliation of the different
interpretations of dendrite branching may give insight into how the brain
computes so energy efficiently, a holy grail for engineers and computer
scientists. Because of the deep mathematical connections between electrotonic
spread and diffusion, and between action potentials and active intracellular
transport, optimizing information processing and material flow may not be
mutually exclusive. Indeed, shared signaling and transport constraints may have
permitted the development of sophisticated brains that compute efficiently. This
insight, if it holds up to the scrutiny of this project, may change the way we
view evolution of the brain and may have applications in computing and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.