* 2210129
* The 2022 Collaborative Midterm Survey
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Peter Enns, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,999,713.00

Large federally funded surveys have long provided critical insights into
economic conditions, public health, and democratic political participation.
However, social and technological changes have led to declining survey response
rates and other challenges that can threaten the accuracy and increase the cost
of these surveys. To address these challenges, this research develops a
transparent, adaptive, and data-driven approach for generating valid, reliable,
and cost-effective survey results. We assess this method by conducting a survey
during the 2022 midterm elections using items from the American National
Election Study (ANES) as a project that will serve as a model to inform the
design of future surveys to improve accuracy, validity, and cost-effectiveness.
This research also benefits the public by making the data publicly available in
easy-to-understand formats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We selected several
organizations or teams of researchers who submitted proposals to collaborate on
a 2022 midterm survey, with each organization or team asking a core set of
identical questions, while also being encouraged to use innovative methods to
generate accurate and representative data in a cost-effective manner. The
different surveys allow us to assess the costs and quality associated with
different survey modes and samples. By requiring a hybrid probability/non-
probability sampling approach, this research allows for substantially increasing
the sample size and field period of surveys, while providing critical insights
into the relative accuracy of different sampling methods. This project provides
researchers, survey experts and public stakeholders with an unprecedented
ability to analyze national and state-level election dynamics and changes among
different segments of the electorate, while offering an open, transparent
assessment of the leading methods in the industry to inform current and future
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.