* 2210177
* Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Simmons, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 170,000.00

This award funds the research and professional activities of Professors
Elizabeth H. Simmons and R. Sekhar Chivukula at UC San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the award period, the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) will commence a third extended run which will collect substantially more
data than has been available to date, significantly extending our reach for
discovering new constituents of matter and uncovering new physical principles.
Professors Chivukula and Simmons will investigate whether there are extra
spatial dimensions which are too small to have been discovered thus far and
examine the experimental implications for such extra-dimensional theories at the
LHC. Professors Simmons and Chivukula will construct and analyze new theories
which describe the nature and properties of the Higgs Boson and the top quark
(the two most massive fundamental particles discovered so far), and delineate
the best experimental analyses for swiftly and decisively elucidating the nature
of any new dynamics discovered at the LHC. They will also explore the
complementarity between LHC results and other experimental searches for new
physics, including those designed to uncover the nature of the dark matter which
comprises most of the mass in our galaxy. These investigations are in the
national interest since they will promote the progress of science through the
examination of the fundamental forces of nature. This work will also have
substantial broader impact. Professors Simmons and Chivukula will focus on
improving student access and success and on the development of new and
continuing physics courses at UC San Diego, including classes on the causes of
and solutions for underrepresentation in physics. The PIs will also engage in
public presentations on science to audiences of all ages, in extensive work to
improve the environment in physics for all participants, and in continued
service to UC San Diego and the national and international physics community.
This research project will also involve students and postdoctoral researchers
and thereby contribute to the training and development of the next generation of
scientists in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Simmons
and Chivukula will combine particle searches with those from other experiments,
including those probing potential lepton flavor violation and searching for dark
matter. They will also study the theory and phenomenology of top-partner states
which are predicted in numerous composite-Higgs models and examine novel
strategies for discovering these states at the LHC and other experimental
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.