* 2210572
* III: Small: Bringing Transparency and Interpretability to Bias Mitigation Approaches in Place-based Mobility-centric Prediction Models for Decision Making in High-Stakes Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Vanessa Frias-Martinez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The covid-19 pandemic has brought to light the importance of place-based
mobility-centric prediction models in high-stakes settings. Place-based
mobility-centric prediction models (PBMC) use human mobility data - together
with other contextual information - to predict spatio-temporal statistics of
significance to decision makers. For example, mobility patterns that reflect
(lack of) compliance with travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders have been
used to predict the number of covid-19 cases over time. However, the data used
to train PBMC models can suffer from different types of bias that might in turn
affect the fairness of the predictions. For example, under-reporting in the
covid-19 case data used to train PBMC models might produce predictions that are
wrongfully low, which could lead a decision maker to, for example, not locate a
covid-19 testing unit in a given neighborhood. This project presents a set of
approaches to mitigate - in a transparent and interpretable manner - a diverse
set of bias present in PBMC models for two high-stakes settings: public health
and public safety. In addition, by providing insights into the processes that
led to the embedding of bias in the data and into the effects of bias on the
fairness of the models, this project will hopefully move PBMC models closer to
broad adoption in policy settings. This project will also offer educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students as well as computing
workshops for high school students and under-represented genders in computing
with a focus on the value of PBMC models, human mobility data and fairness for
high-stakes settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical contributions of this
project are divided in three thrusts. Thrust one will provide a novel PBMC
prediction model - that can work with different neural architectures - to
predict reported place-based statistics while mitigating for potential under-
reporting bias. Thrust two will create a novel sampling bias mitigation approach
to correct for under-represented groups in human mobility data collected from
cell phones. Thrust three will produce novel transfer learning approaches to
mitigate for algorithmic bias, i.e., low performing models in data-scarce
regions. The thrusts proposed have been designed in a modular way, to allow for
the layered combination of data and algorithmic bias mitigation approaches in
end-to-end mitigation frameworks that are evaluated for fairness and accuracy.
All bias mitigation methods are accompanied by novel interpretability approaches
to distill the social determinants that might explain how the bias was embedded
into place-based statistics and mobility dataÍ¾ as well as to identify the role
that different model components might play in the mitigation itself. Our
research outcomes will advance the state of the art in the design of transparent
and interpretable bias mitigation approaches for PBMC models with evaluations in
two high-stakes settings: public health and public
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.