* 2210918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Colonial Encounters of Sami Reindeer Herders in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Patrick Plattet, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 37,805.00

This dissertation research investigates the role of Sami reindeer herders in
Alaska, asking how relations among Sami, Alaska Natives, and government
officials shaped the American colonial history of the territory. Sami residents
in Norway were recruited in the late 1800s to instruct Alaska Natives in the
practice of reindeer herding. This experiment in pastoralism introduced a new
subsistence economy to Alaska, transforming Indigenous communities and human
relations with animals. This research will investigate the role of Sami in the
development of herding in Alaska, highlighting the concept of diasporic
indigeneity; that is, how Sami experienced indigeneity in the homelands of other
Indigenous peoples. Research will also contribute to the comparative study of
reindeer herding, a critical subsistence activity in many Arctic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs textual analysis and
photo elicitation in conjunction with semi-structured interviews to better
understand the Sami experience in Alaska and the colonial context in which Sami
lived and worked. The work will explore government documents reporting on the
reindeer program in Alaska, personal letters and accounts, and photos from
archives in the United States. The resulting dissertation and community
presentations in Norway and the U.S. will enhance understanding of linked Alaska
Native and Indigenous European histories and facilitate the visual repatriation
of photographs to Sami communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.