* 2210243
* SHF: Small: Toward Fully Automated Formal Software Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yuriy Brun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 615,852.00

Software is a critical part of our society, but, unfortunately, defects in
deployed software are typical, and the cost of failures is extremely high. One
promising method for improving software quality is formal verification, which
enables developers to mathematically prove properties of their code,
guaranteeing some aspects of software correctness. But writing such proofs
manually is incredibly difficult, even using proof assistants, which are
designed to help developers write high-level proof scripts and then automate
some of the proof processes. While such tools have seen some success in industry
(e.g., Firefox, Chrome, and Android use proof-assistant-verified cryptography
libraries for communication), the prohibitively high cost of formal verification
has ensured that, today, nearly all the software companies ship is unverified.
The central goal of this project is to develop techniques that learn from
existing proof scripts to automatically synthesize new ones, fully automating
formal verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea behind this project is
(1) to learn a predictive language model from a corpus of existing proof
scripts. This predictive model, given a partially written proof script, predicts
the likely next proof steps. And then (2) to use metaheuristic search to
synthesize potential proofs from scratch, guided by the predictive model and
using the proof assistant to constrain the search. The project is organized
around three thrusts. The first thrust develops a method for fully automating
formal verification of software properties using the Coq proof assistant by
modeling the proof script and proof state together. The second thrust uses the
inherent diversity of learned language models to increase the proving power of
the automated formal verification approach by efficiently combining the power of
multiple models. The third thrust develops a language-model-based method for
repairing proof scripts that break as part of software evolution. The project
improves the state of the art of automated formal verification toward improving
software quality and reducing the cost of software debugging and maintenance and
contributes to the scientific efforts to improve formal verification with
publicly accessible benchmarks and open-source verification systems. The project
also contributes to undergraduate and graduate education by incorporating formal
verification into relevant courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.