* 2210894
* Nitrogenated Hydrocarbon Cross-Product Formation during Combustion of Ammonia Co-Fired with Regular Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2025
* USD 360,705.00

Arguably the greatest challenge confronting our society today is to satisfy our
energy needs while reducing emissions that warm the planet. In this regard,
ammonia is gaining attention as a carbon-free fuel that can be burned with no
direct carbon dioxide emissions. It can be produced domestically from air and
water using clean electricity and is much more easily liquified than hydrogen.
Since ammonia has poor burning characteristics, in many applications it will be
co-fired with hydrocarbon fuels such as natural gas. This opens the door to a
novel area of fundamental combustion chemistry: the formation of nitrogenated
cross-products that combine carbon atoms from the hydrocarbon portion of the
fuel with nitrogen atoms from the ammonia. We have preliminary data that
verifies the formation of such cross-products and suggests that they chemically
suppress formation of soot particles from the hydrocarbon portion of the fuel by
sequestering carbon in a form that cannot grow to soot. The objective of the
proposed project is to systematically explore the formation of cross-products
when ammonia is burned with conventional fuels, determine their relationship to
soot formation, and identify the chemical mechanisms that produce
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use flame sampling and online
photoionization mass spectrometry to generate the first database of trace
hydrocarbon concentration profiles measured with a sensitive, broadband
diagnostic in flames fueled with ammonia + methane, ethylene, and other
hydrocarbons. It will measure soot volume fractions in the same flames and test
the hypothesis that cross-product formation chemically suppresses soot formation
from the co-fired hydrocarbons. It will characterize the morphology,
nanostructure, and atomic composition of soot particles sampled
thermophoretically from the flames to further determine the relationship between
cross-products and soot. The measurements will use a novel experimental design
to distinguish the chemical effects of ammonia from its physical effects by
comparing the ammonia + hydrocarbon flames with a corresponding set of nitrogen
+ hydrocarbon flames. The flames will be thoroughly characterized with respect
to temperature, major species, and boundary conditions so that they can be
computationally simulated to test and improve detailed kinetic mechanisms for
cross-products. The temperature measurements will further the development of a
novel X-ray fluorescence diagnostic that is uniquely capable of measuring
thermal boundary conditions and in-situ temperatures in all regions of sooting
flames with negligible interferences from particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.