* 2210112
* Quantum Coherent Applications of Superfluid 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* William Halperin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 440,151.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;There are two important challenges today
where physics plays an essential role. The first is to develop a new generation
of computers that can handle the complexity and vastness of the digital
information age. These putative quantum computers take advantage of quantum
states of matter which contain information that can be stored and manipulated at
sufficiently low temperature that neither thermal fluctuations nor impurities
destroy their coherence. One important class of such quantum states is a robust
form of superconductivity which does not have mirror symmetry and is called
chirality, analogous to twisted strands of DNA. The paradigm quantum material
having this property is superfluid 3He. Investigation in this project of quantum
coherence in 3He tests a fundamental prediction that the anomalous thermal Hall
can provide an unambiguous identification of chirality in any superconductor
that is a candidate material for quantum computation. There is a second
challenge. Our universe appears to be missing 70% of its mass, so-called dark
matter. Dark matter is unobserved except for its gravitational impact on star
distributions in galaxies. Its absence from all other observation is an
existential problem. Many attempts have been launched to develop high resolution
sensing tools to identify this missing mass as it floods throughout our
environment. A possible detector is based on high coherence of i nuclear spin
precession states in superfluid 3He. Its known coherence makes it a very
attractive choice for this purpose; yet the limits of coherence have not yet
been fully explored. A second unique benefit of 3He spin precession for mass
sensing, is its tunability allowing continuous measurements in situ to be made
over a wide range of dark mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid helium-three is a known topological quantum
condensed system, a model for understanding complex quantum materials and in
particular, odd-parity chiral superconductors; a subject of interest to
researchers in the burgeoning field of quantum information science. The project
Quantum Coherent Applications of Superfluid 3He, is a platform to improve and
demonstrate quantum coherence among chiral quantum systems including
superconducting quantum materials. Additionally, these materials provide an
opportunity for instrumentation development based on quantum sensing. One such
important application addresses the existential problem, how to determine the
nature of dark matter. For superfluid 3He, the paradigm system of choice, the
quantum degrees of freedom are its nuclear spin and orbital angular momentum
coherently manifest on a macroscopic scale. Superfluid 3He imbibed into very
high porosity (98%) uniformly anisotropic silica aerogel controls both the spin
and orbital angular momentum quantization axes. Using nuclear magnetic
resonance, the directions of these axes can be unambiguously determined. Recent
theory predicts that observation of a non-zero thermal Hall effect in the
superfluid in uniformly anisotropic silica aerogel defines the chiral axis
perpendicular to a thermal gradient. Confirmation of this theory provides a
unique tool, measurement of the transverse thermal conductance, that can be used
to determine chirality. The application extends to superconducting materials
relevant to quantum information science. Quantum sensing is a second application
in this project. The long-lived, quantum-spin coherent state of superfluid 3He
provides a promising detector for light dark matter. Importantly, in this case
high sensing sensitivity is combined with the advantage of continuous tuning for
the putative dark mass, thereby at the very least establishing limits on
galactic axion production, an existential problem in modern physics. Key to this
project is its partnership with theoretical physicists in both the fields of
superfluid 3He and dark matter, together with cryogenic and nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy expertise at Northwestern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.