* 2210316
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Auditory Hair Cells and Efferent Neurons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dolores Bozovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2025
* USD 552,302.00

The first level of processing of auditory information in the inner ear is
performed by hair cells – specialized cells that detect sound and transmit
information to the brain. These cells show extremely high sensitivity,
responding to movements smaller than a nanometer. Further, they show a broad
dynamic range, for they are able to withstand much larger deflections without
permanent damage. It is still not understood how the auditory system achieves
this sensitivity and how it can rapidly reduce it when exposed to a loud
environment. It has been proposed that efferent neurons, which transmit
information from the brain to the hair cells, serve a protective role that
reduces hair cell damage induced by loud sound. However, thus far there is very
little understanding of the physics behind this mechanism. The investigators in
this project will measure directly how stimulation of efferent neurons affects
the sensitivity of the hair cell, both in terms of its ability to detect weak
signals and to withstand strong stimuli. Their goal is to compare the
experimental findings to models based on nonlinear dynamics to explain how
efference may provide a dynamic feedback system that controls the sensitivity of
hearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inner ear contains an extremely sensitive
mechanical detector, which routinely responds to nanoscale deflections. At the
lowest perceptible levels, sound induces movements in the internal auditory
organs that are as small as few Å. Meanwhile, the applied pressures that the
auditory systems can withstand range over six orders of magnitude. A dynamic
gain control mechanism which would modulate the sensitivity of detection by a
hair cell would serve to explain how a system could simultaneously achieve such
remarkable sensitivity while maintaining the requisite robustness. The goal of
this project is to determine whether efferent neurons constitute the dynamic
feedback mechanism which tunes the nonlinear properties of the hair cell. The
investigators aim to explore how efferent activity affects the mechanical
responsiveness of the sensory system by direct measurements performed in vitro
on live and active hair cells under different levels of efferent activity. The
investigators will compare the findings to theoretical predictions based on
nonlinear dynamics theory, which has proposed that an internal control parameter
self-tunes the system to the vicinity of a Hopf bifurcation. This study is
therefore complementary to prior work in the field, and will serve to bridge
areas previously studied in vivo and in vitro, as well as in theoretical models.
The project will also provide important mentoring opportunities, as the PI aims
to recruit graduate students from underrepresented groups through participation
in the APS Bridge program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.