* 2210428
* Light Particles in the Lab and in the Sky
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Julian Heeck, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor Julian Heeck at the University of
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for --- and study of --- elementary
particles has contributed greatly towards our understanding of nature for over a
century. New particles, as motivated for example by the existence of dark matter
or the phenomenon of neutrino oscillations under which the different neutrinos
exchange their identities as they fly through space, could have escaped our
detection not because they are extremely heavy, as often assumed, but rather
because they have feeble interactions with the particles that we can more
readily observe. Such light feebly-interacting particles are the focus of
Professor Heeck's research. Axions and sterile neutrinos are prominent examples
of such particles, but many other well-motivated models exist that will be
systematically and thoroughly explored in this project, both from a theoretical
perspective and in terms of their detectability in present and future
experiments. Professor Heeck will focus on the exploration of novel search
strategies that may unlock new research perspectives. The results of such
studies could potentially broaden the physics motivations for many experiments
and ultimately lead to the ground-breaking discovery of entirely new elementary
particles, thereby advancing the national interest in fundamental science. This
project also has significant broader impacts. By touching upon many different
areas of particle physics, this project provides ample training ground for
graduate and undergraduate students. Professor Heeck will also organize
workshops that will connect particle physicists in the southeastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Heeck will construct a
catalog of viable and testable extensions of the Standard Model involving light
new particles, including many that have not been discussed in the literature
before. These particles will be embedded in effective field theories as well as
in realistic renormalizable models, with an emphasis on models that solve one or
more of the outstanding problems of particle physics. The phenomenology of these
particles will be studied exhaustively, most importantly at intensity-frontier
experiments (e.g., Belle II, DUNE, and Mu2e) that have the precision and
statistics to find feebly-coupled particles in rare decays and collisions. For
each candidate, the optimal search signature that suppresses the Standard-Model
background will be identified, ranging from missing-energy searches to
displaced-vertex signatures. In addition to these direct searches in the
laboratory, indirect signatures at the cosmic frontier --- most notably
potential modifications of the cosmic microwave background --- will also be
taken into account. Furthermore, their feeble couplings could render these
particles natural dark-matter candidates or mediators to a larger dark sector
--- an idea which will also be explored in this project. Viewed holistically,
this project will thus promote light feebly-interacting particles as a
complement to existing studies of heavy new particles, and will help to maximize
our chances of finding new elementary particles and
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.