* 2210902
* Electrically Driven Single Emissive Layer Based White Light Emitting Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Biwu Ma, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

White light emitting diodes (WLEDs) have changed the world over the last decades
with wide applications in full color displays and solid state lighting. However,
most practical WLEDs are optically pumped ones consisting of blue LED (e.g.
InGaN) chips and rare-earth based inorganic phosphors with limited utility,
energy, and cost efficiencies. Electrically driven WLEDs are highly desirable to
resolve the environmental and efficiency issues of optically pumped WLEDs.
However, electrically driven WLEDs based on either conventional inorganic
semiconductors or organic semiconductors still face serious issues and
challenges with high costs in both materials preparation and device
manufacturing involving high temperature and high vacuum processes. In this
project, the research team led by Prof. Ma at FSU aims to develop high
performance electrically driven WLEDs based on single emissive layers containing
solution processable halide perovskites and perovskite-related hybrid materials.
This project will generate new knowledge in materials chemistry, chemical
engineering, and device physics for an emerging class of hybrid optoelectronic
materials. With addressing one of the major challenges in the field of
electrically driven LEDs, that is producing low-cost high performance WLEDs
based on solution processable materials, the success of this project will have
significant technological impacts on optoelectronic devices with the potential
to revolutionize the full color display and solid-state lighting industries.
This project will also educate and train graduate and undergraduate students in
multidisciplinary research in materials and devices, and promote STEM education
through a variety of community outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description.&lt;br/&gt;The excellent optical and
electronic properties of halide perovskites and perovskite-related hybrid
materials make them of great interest for applications in a variety of
optoelectronic devices, including photovoltaic cells (PVs), LEDs, lasers, and
photodetectors. Recently, remarkable progress has been achieved in the
development of electrically driven monochromatic LEDs with emissions covering
blue to green, red, and near-infrared regions. Besides narrow emissions with
high color purity from delocalized free excitons, many halide perovskites and
perovskite-related organic metal halide hybrids have been discovered to exhibit
highly efficient broadband white emissions with contributions from self-trapped
excitons. While efficient photoluminescence has been achieved, obtaining
efficient electrically driven WLEDs or electroluminescence from self-trapped
excitons using these materials is challenging, partially due to their poor
charge transport properties. Taking advantage of the exceptional structural
versatility of halide perovskites and perovskite-related hybrid materials, this
project aims to develop new white emitting material systems with high charge
transport properties for electrically driven single emissive layer based WLEDs
with performance comparable to existing WLEDs. More specifically, this project
will (i) develop highly efficient white light emitting halide perovskites and
perovskite-related organic metal halide hybrids by molecular engineering of the
structures and compositions; (ii) investigate various processing approaches for
the preparation of white emitting thin films with controlled morphological and
electronic properties; (iii) integrate white light emitting thin films with
appropriate electron and hole transporting layers though appropriate device
engineering for highly efficient electrically driven WLEDs; and (iv) establish
the processing-structure-property-performance correlations for the new white
emitting materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.