* 2210535
* Micromechanics of the Neuronal Axon and its Structural and Functional Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Georgios Lykotrafitis, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2025
* USD 440,000.00

One of the most common and important traumatic brain injuries is the diffuse
axonal injury which happens when abrupt brain movements lead to significant
deformations of neuronal axons resulting in localized damage and subsequent
axonal degeneration. However, how localized defects can cause complete
structural and functional collapse of the axon is not known. To answer this
question, this project will investigate experimentally and numerically the main
biophysical mechanisms that regulate structural and functional stability of the
unmyelinated neuronal axon and determine the cascade of events causing
mechanically induced axonal collapse. The project will have a broader impact by
providing an improved understanding of innate mechanisms that regulate axonal
injury and it could lead to development of novel diffuse axonal injury diagnosis
protocols. In addition, the project will benefit undergraduate and graduate
students at UCONN by introducing them to virtual reality as an interactive
applied mechanics tool. The outreach activities will promote engineering and
science to high school teachers and students and will advance participation of
high school underrepresented minority students into science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical stability of the axon is supported by its
periodic axon plasma membrane skeleton (PAMS), which was recently discovered to
comprise a series of azimuthal ring-like F-actins connected longitudinally by
αII/βII or αII/βIV spectrin tetramers held under entropic tension forming an
orthotropic material. Internally, an axon comprises longitudinally oriented
interconnected microtubules and neurofilaments, which are attached to organelles
and to plasma membrane proteins such as Ankyrin G. If the axon only counts on
relative rigid cytoskeletal filaments, such as microtubules, for mechanical
stability, then under bending stress, microtubules will likely break and undergo
instability via depolymerization. This can cause the axon membrane to collapse
if there is not additional support by the PAMS. Furthermore, disruption of PAMS
could potentially lead to microtubules depolymerization and axon degeneration.
It is then likely that the hypothesis that dynamic equilibrium between PAMS and
microtubules play a very important role in mechanical flexibility and durability
of the axons is justified. Finally, it is currently unknown how distribution and
mobility of ion channels in the axon plasma membrane is affected during axonal
deformation and injury. The project will determine the structural and functional
behavior of an axon under dynamic extension, bending, and twisting, and the
cascade of events during a mechanically induced axonal collapse and effect on
action potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.