* 2210636
* Entanglement in the Structural Biology of Living Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Patricia Jennings, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2027
* USD 360,000.00

Protein folding from a linear polymer of amino acids into a three-dimensional
shape is an essential process for life. The polymer may become hopelessly
tangled and lead to loss of function and removal from the cell. However,
entanglement in specific locations within the biopolymeric protein can lead to
enhancement of stability, but the process by which specific entanglement occurs
is not understood at the molecular level. This project seeks to address how a
protein can form a deep intricate trefoil knot within the restrictive space of
the cell, where proteins are formed, as well as what is the overall function of
entanglement within the protein structure. Given the challenge and complexity of
knotting a “string of pearls” into an enzyme capable of catalyzing a chemical
reaction, the group proposes to combine the many facets of physical chemistry
and physics to elucidate the unique yet critical role the knot plays in biology.
Since the PI's discovery of a class of entangled pierced lasso proteins, this
growing class now includes well over 350 protein families, spanning a huge range
of fold types and biological functions. Through a combination of computational
and physical experiments, the PI seeks to further the understanding of threading
and knotting in proteins and expand upon their respective roles in biological
function. These principles continue to be challenging topics in mathematics,
physics and biology. Thus the continued investigation into the folding function
interplay with the breadth of this study advances the concept of interplay in
behavior and the strength of the interdisciplinary strategy. In the course of
this project the PI's group will train undergraduate students in a variety of
scientific areas related to knot formation and introduce them to the excitement
of scientific inquiry. In addition, the PI has recruited students from diverse
fields and (dis)abiledness to join the team of investigators, enriching the
learning experience for all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unexpectedly, proteins can
tie themselves into knots in their native folds. Since protein folding from an
unstructured polypeptide chain into the native-state is already complex, the
existence of knotted polypeptide chains immediately raises the questions: how
does the chain cross itself to form a knot and how does the knot affect
function? To address these questions, the PI will study the deep-knotted trefoil
methyltransferase (MT) families. Combining their strengths in this experimental
and theoretical efforts, the PI’s group will expand their efforts in probing the
mechanisms regulating knot threading/unthreading as well as the role of knots in
the native state to ask how specific regions (identified as staples) within
knots impact the fold, dynamics, and functions of proteins. Furthermore, the
investigators will study whether specific regions identified as barriers to
untying in the trefoil knotted proteins also contribute to functional
regulation. Further exploration building upon these foundational studies allows
them to investigate the interplay between the strained topology inherent in a
knotted conformation and communication between functional sites. Their previous
discoveries led to a protocol to explore threading mechanisms and untie a
knotted protein. This experimental advantage allows the investigators to ask
fundamental questions in the protein theory field: How can a protein form a
threaded element? How does knotting affect function? How can it fold into a
deeply knotted biologically active protein? To fully understand how nature
controls the topology of proteins, extensive theoretical, numerical, and
experimental progress is required. The goal of this project is to further expand
upon these proof-of-principle experiments to explore both the structural and
functional scope of the approach through an “all hands on deck” biochemical
approach that will include molecular biology, protein chemistry, optical
spectroscopy, and mass spectroscopy. This project requires the coordinated
effort of top researchers working at the interface of mathematics, biology,
chemistry, and physics. Ultimately, understanding the biophysical biochemistry
of knotted proteins can be used to design and engineer novel classes of proteins
that have superior mechanical and thermal stability properties. Knotting,
threading and slip-knotting in proteins are new and challenging topics in knot
theory for which new formalisms must be derived and must take into account
physical properties of these biological objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this project include mentoring of K-12, and undergraduate and
graduate students at UCSD. The PI has been involved in K-12 outreach activities
by performing scientific experiments at local grammar schools, which are greater
than 50% minority students, by performing experiments in special education
schools, by helping to train children in middle school for the Science Olympiad,
hosting High School students as research interns for the summer, and hosting
people interested in a career in teaching in primary and secondary schools as
research assistants in her laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Physics of Living Systems in the Division of Physics with support
from the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.