* 2210075
* Collaborative Research: Resolving Conflicting Thermobarometry and Stratigraphy in the Tethyan Himalaya: is Non-Lithostatic Pressure During Orogenesis Preserved at Crustal Scales?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Peter Haproff, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 212,432.00

Metamorphic rocks exposed in mountain belts record crustal burial and heating
during mountain building. The metamorphic pressures recorded by exhumed rocks
are commonly assumed to reflect their burial depth. Such pressures are in turn
used to reconstruct the evolution of mountain belts and refine our knowledge of
fundamental plate-tectonic processes. However, recent studies suggest that some
rocks record pressures that do not reflect their true burial depths (i.e., “non-
lithostatic pressure”), thus potentially complicating our understanding of
mountain building events. The Tethyan Himalaya in northwestern India is a unique
location to test the controversial concept of non-lithostatic pressure because
previous structural, sedimentological, and paleontological observations
regarding burial depths conflict with recorded metamorphic pressures. The
preservation of non-lithostatic pressure in the Tethyan Himalaya will be tested
via an integrated field and laboratory study to reveal the geometric,
temperature, and pressure relationships and assess the viability of non-
lithostatic pressure conditions recorded in the Himalayan orogen. This project
serves national interests by: (1) making fundamental advances in science through
testing and challenging the “lithostatic pressure” paradigm in the Earth
Sciences; (2) training graduate and undergraduate students in STEM; (3)
supporting three early-career faculty to establish globally competitive research
programs; (4) international collaboration with researchers and institutions; and
(5) development of a publicly accessible field-trip guide that will explore the
geology of the Himalaya of northwestern India and focus on how scientific
interpretations evolve with new observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether
pressures recorded by metamorphic rocks accurately reflect burial depths or can
represent non-lithostatic pressure conditions—so called tectonic overpressure—is
controversial. Numerical models and theory suggest that non-lithostatic pressure
conditions are possible, and even likely in several tectonic settings, but
direct, unambiguous observations of this phenomenon are rare. The research team
has identified a unique study site in the western Himalaya where decades of
sedimentological investigations of the Tethyan stratigraphic section are
inconsistent with metamorphic pressure estimates from basal strata that imply
~28+ km burial. Existing kinematic models from field studies do not suggest such
burial depths of the section, and thus the discrepancy between pressure
estimates and palinspastic reconstructions requires more systematic
investigation. The researchers hypothesize that metamorphic pressures from the
basal Tethyan strata reflect non-lithostatic pressure conditions at the regional
scale (10’s of km). This will be tested via a systematic research plan involving
geologic mapping, quantitative microstructural analysis, metamorphic
thermobarometry and petrochronology, detrital zircon geochronology, and low-
temperature thermochronology. Whether or not non-lithostatic pressure is
preserved in the geological record, and the length-scales over which it is
preserved, has been identified by the geoscience community as an important
research goal in the field of tectonics. Empirical support of regional-scale,
non-lithostatic pressures would require a paradigm shift in metamorphic
petrology and tectonics, with profound implications for understanding the
evolution of fault zones, orogens, and plate-scale dynamics. If the research
finds that non-lithostatic pressure is not required to explain the geological
discrepancies in the western Tethyan Himalaya, this study will still provide
important geologic relationships to evaluate and advance models of Himalayan
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.