* 2210804
* Reconfigurable Neuromorphic Computing to enable Energy-Efficient Edge Intelligence
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sahil Shah, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 352,148.00

The goal of this project is to develop an energy-efficient and smart extreme
edge device by taking inspiration from the human brain. Extreme edge devices can
enable a variety of applications. Specifically, the devices can be used for
remote tracking of rapid changes in the arctic, autonomous navigation of aerial
and ground robots for deep space exploration, and monitoring and securing
critical infrastructure. However, the current technology requires remotely
sensed data to be processed in the cloud. This framework has several drawbacks,
such as the delay between sensing and decision, shorter battery life due to high
power consumption, and privacy concerns related to data transfer. The hardware
developed as part of this proposal will seek to address the previously noted
challenges and will advance the state-of-the-art in extreme edge devices.
Specifically, the grant will enable the development of a reconfigurable brain-
inspired processor with the capacity to learn based on input data.
&lt;br/&gt;The hardware developed as part of this proposal will be used to train
and motivate the next generation of students in the areas of microelectronics.
Further, the hardware developed will use open-source computer aided design tools
to enable broader dissemination of the developed technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study proposes to develop a reconfigurable
mixed-signal neuromorphic hardware for processing data at the extreme edge. This
proposal aims to increase the energy efficiency of neuromorphic hardware by
employing mixed-signal circuits to model the neurons and synapses. Further, we
propose to incorporate programmable mixed-signal circuit topologies and explore
techniques to co-optimize the hardware and software models to learn and adapt
the network parameters in the presence of mismatch and variations. In addition,
the proposal will also explore circuit topologies to perform learning on-chip.
Based on these individual elements, the proposal will investigate a system
architecture to develop reconfigurable hardware that can compile a spiking
neural network with the capability to learn on-chip for performing extreme edge
tasks. The extreme edge task we plan to validate the developed hardware is
object detection using openly available datasets and a quadcopter with a limited
battery capacity to perform object detection. The proposal will address the
knowledge gaps in designing a learning algorithm for a mixed-signal spiking
neural network with variation and mismatch, circuit topologies and system
architecture for performing on-chip learning with limited resources, and advance
the state-of-the-art in energy-efficient neuromorphic
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.