* 2210361
* Towards New Discoveries in Particle Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Raman Sundrum, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,260,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Kaustubh Agashe, Zackaria
Chacko, Anson Hook and Raman Sundrum at the University of Maryland, College
Park. It also includes a NSF-BSF collaboration, between Professors Chacko and
Sundrum at the University of Maryland and Professor Michael Geller at Tel Aviv
University in Israel. The principal investigators will develop and study new
theories that extend the standard model of particle physics and cosmology, with
three primary goals in mind. The first is to provide well-founded theoretical
templates to guide experiments in fundamental physics. These range from the CERN
Large Hadron Collider and future particle colliders capable of creating exotic
new particles, to high-precision studies of the properties of known particles
such as the neutrino, to frontline cosmological, astrophysical, and
gravitational wave probes of the universe’s earliest phases and of its
mysterious “dark matter” components. The second goal is to delve further into
theory at the intersection of quantum mechanics, relativity and gravitation, in
search of new fundamental principles. The third goal is to promote teaching,
training and learning among students and postdoctoral researchers, and sharing
the excitement of the research with the broader community. The fundamental laws
of nature lie at the root of all the natural sciences, and therefore the
cutting-edge research in this project and the broad dissemination of its
findings will benefit the national interest and our modern
civilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the principal investigators
will study multiple new aspects of the warped extra dimensions paradigm (and its
AdS/CFT dual in terms of particle compositeness), including its early universe
phase transition and gravitational wave signals, the matter/antimatter
asymmetry, neutrino mass generation and properties, inflation, dark sector
dynamics, and collider phenomenology. Gravitational wave cosmology will be
developed to probe the early universe’s equation of state and thermal history. A
strategy to detect axionic strings in the polarized CMB will be developed. New
possible structures for dark matter interacting with dark radiation will be
studied and applied to current cosmological anomalies. New possibilities for
imprints of extremely heavy particles (far beyond collider reach) on primordial
inhomogeneities, such as large scale structure, will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.