* 2210106
* Degradation-Aware Self-Healing Control of Power Electronics Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Seungdeog Choi, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,001.00

Computational power is everywhere. Sensors are increasingly low-cost and
ubiquitous. Despite the extensive resources, modern power electronics systems
(PESs) cannot pinpoint its degradation status and, hence, cannot perform self-
healing to prevent costly failures. For example, wind turbines or photovoltaic
(PV) systems are subjected to extreme temperature and humidity swings from -30ºC
to 55ºC and 30% to 100% (e.g., offshore applications). Such a harsh climate and
thermal (C&amp;T) swings rapidly increase the failure rate and maintenance costs
by up to 30% of the overall generation cost. Suppose their degradation and,
hence, remaining useful lifetime (RUL) can be accurately measured or precisely
predicted in advance. In that case, we can utilize existing PESs software or
hardware to perform proactive self-healing through the adaptive control of
degradation evolution, accumulation, acceleration, and, hence, RUL changes of
the building blocks of power electronics in increasingly complicated modern
energy systems. This could substantially enhance reliability, scheduling
flexibility, and controllability while preventing costly downtimes. The outcome
of this project will be utilized for interactive and hands-on learning programs
to inspire K-12 children’s interest in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
model the degradation of wide bandgap (WB) power switches under real-world
C&amp;T swings, which poses the critical bottleneck of exploiting degradation-
aware self-healing (DASH) control in modern PESs. Specifically, we will develop
a cascade generative adversarial networks learning and data purification
strategy to effectively model the large reliability data of power electronics
under a real-world C&amp;T condition. The formulated data-driven models and
multi-sensory tools will be fundamentally more accurate than state-of-the-art.
Moreover, we will develop a systematic DASH control framework, enabling lifetime
managed PES operations by understanding four system health conditions (healthy,
intermediate degradation, self-healing, and failure) instead of a traditional
heuristic assumption (healthy and failure). The formulated RUL estimation and
DASH control tools are able to fundamentally transform the current design and
control practices, creating a seamless integration of reliable WB switches into
the wide spectrum of power electronics and energy systems under diverse C&amp;T
conditions. This will accelerate the migration toward an energy-efficient grid
and transportation electrification while minimizing development cost and period
and preventing unplanned downtime and catastrophic
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.