* 2210712
* Assessment of Regression Models with Noncontinuous Outcomes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lu Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 61,912.00

Regression models are widely used to synthesize researchers' knowledge about
relationships between predictors and an outcome of interest, for example, the
effects of treatments on mortality. However, researchers' prior information may
not adequately describe the patterns in the data. The resulting model deficiency
can lead to biased parameter estimates, misleading conclusions, lack of
generalizability of results, and unreliable predictions, among many other
detrimental consequences. Judging a model's adequacy to describe the data is
thus a routine and critical task in statistics. Currently, there is a lack of
valid tools for assessing regression models with noncontinuous outcomes.
Noncontinuous data are found frequently in many domains of science. Examples
include stages of cancer in medical research (ordinal), the number of offspring
of organisms in ecology (count), and rainfall amounts in climate research
(semicontinuous with a probability of zero corresponding to no rain). This
project will fill this gap and provide a framework for model assessment with
noncontinuous outcomes. The project outputs will benefit researchers and
practitioners in a wide range of areas by enabling them to draw conclusions from
their models with statistical confidence and find directions for model
improvements. The project will integrate research into course development and
graduate student mentoring and develop free software for broad dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessment of regression models with noncontinuous
(e.g., count, binary, ordinal, and semicontinuous) outcomes is challenging and
has many fundamental issues. In this context, standard regression model
assessment tools such as Pearson and deviance goodness-of-fit tests do not
follow their null distributions under the true model, calling into question the
legitimacy of model assessment based on these tools. In addition, existing
assessment tools might have little statistical power in detecting model
misspecification. The long-term goal of this project is to establish a
principled framework for assessing regression models with noncontinuous
outcomes. The envisioned framework includes first an omnibus goodness-of-fit
test for regression models with general discrete outcomes. This goodness-of-fit
test is based on the distance between the quasi-empirical residual distribution
function and its null pattern (the identity function). It can assist analysts in
obtaining p-values and confidence statements on the adequacy of their models.
The theoretical properties of the test statistic will be studied using empirical
process theory. Extensive simulation studies and real data analysis will be
conducted for evaluation. Second, the investigator will study a new type of
residuals for discrete outcomes, which can help identify potential causes of
misspecification and provide directions for model improvement. Third, this
framework will be extended to semicontinuous outcomes, which are scarcely
studied in the literature. Completion of this research will fill the gap between
regression models and an informative assessment framework for noncontinuous
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.