* 2210272
* Development of Modal Regression
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Weixin Yao, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 220,000.00

This project seeks to develop a set of new statistical regression models for
abnormal data, such as skewed, truncated, heterogeneous, or noisy data with
outliers, which are commonly seen in economics, sociology, medicine, and
biology. The new regression method, named modal regression, finds the
conditional most probable value (mode) of a dependent variable given covariates,
rather than the mean/quantile that the traditional regression models focus on.
As a complement to existing regression tools, the modal regression could reveal
interesting new data structure that is possibly missed by the conditional mean
or quantiles. In addition, modal regression is resistant to outliers and
measurement errors, and can provide shorter prediction intervals when the data
are skewed, such as salary, prices, and expenditures in economics and church
sizes and symptom indices in sociology. Furthermore, unlike traditional mean or
quantile regression, the modal regression can be directly applied to the
truncated data, which arises when the data are observed only when the dependent
variable has a lower or upper limit, such as an economic index measured within
some range. This work will benefit scientists and researchers who want to
analyze skewed or truncated data in fields that include economics, social
sciences, marketing, medical studies, public health, biology, and agriculture.
This project will provide training opportunities for graduate students. Software
developed for implementing the new modal regression will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallel to existing regression models, the
investigator will develop a wide variety of parametric and nonparametric modal
regression models for both independent and dependent (time series or spatial)
data by imposing some model assumptions on the conditional mode of a dependent
variable Y given covariates x. The new method avoids the nonparametric
estimation of conditional density of Y given x, which is difficult when the
dimension of x is large. The investigator will develop a modal expectation-
maximization algorithm to simplify the computation of the modal regression. The
convergence rate and sampling properties of the resulting estimators will be
systematically studied. For high dimensional data, the investigator will
consider a new feature selection tool and variable selection methods for modal
regression. In addition, the investigator will develop a new sufficient
dimension reduction method to reduce the dimension of covariates for modal
regression. Furthermore, the investigator will develop a modal clustering tool
for heterogeneous/mixture data where multiple modal regression curves exist. The
modal clustering method can serve as an alternative tool for mixture regression
models to reveal the clustered/inhomogeneous data structure and provide a
natural way to estimate the number of components/clusters, which has long been a
challenging problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.