* 2210384
* NeTS: JUNO3: Cloud-Carrier Cooperation for Efficient and Ultra-Reliable Programmable Backbone Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sifat Ferdousi, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

With the emergence of next-generation 5G/6G networks, backbone networks need to
evolve to accommodate heterogeneous cloud services with stringent requirements
in latency, bandwidth, and reliability. Traditional designs, based on
inflexible/monolithic architectures, are challenging for individual
carrier/provider networks to achieve ultra-reliable end-to-end communication,
especially during resource crunch (due to network congestion or large-scale
disasters such as earthquake, tsunami, etc.), when cloud services can be
severely disrupted due to failures in both carrier network and cloud
infrastructures. In such cases, cooperation among multiple network entities,
viz. carriers, Datacenter Providers (DCPs), Internet Service Providers (ISPs),
etc., can bring greater benefit in terms of fast and efficient service
provisioning vs. relying on individual networks. However, when network and cloud
infrastructures are owned by different entities, confidential information, such
as detailed network topologies, failure/damage scenario, resource availability,
etc., is not disclosed, due to regulatory policies. This calls for a new
cooperative framework among multiple stakeholders, such as network operators and
service providers, to create a platform for flexible utilization of available
and distributed network and compute resources within an integrated network-cloud
ecosystem. Such innovation will exploit services of a neutral third-party
mediator/broker, called Provider Neutral Exchange (PNE) (similar to Internet
exchange points (IXPs) or colocation centers) to facilitate cooperation among
multiple entities while preserving information confidentiality. This project
will investigate novel network architectures, aided by advanced network
programmability, to enable reliable cloud-carrier cooperation in programmable
backbone networks. This research will develop new insights to improve US
national network infrastructures and provide benefits for Internet users in
terms of high availability of critical communications and services at times of
resource crunch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint National Science Foundation and
Japan National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)
project will develop a novel cooperation framework among network carriers and
service providers for efficient and reliable service provisioning. There are
three main research areas of cloud-carrier cooperation: i) Cloud-Carrier-ISP
cooperation strategies. Novel cooperation strategies among network carriers,
ISPs, and DCPs will be studied to develop an efficient framework for flexible
resource sharing and reliable end-to-end service provisioning with the aid of a
third-party broker/entity, PNE, while ensuring information confidentiality among
different entities. ii) Physical-layer-aware failure management for reliable
cooperation. Pre-emptive failure detection mechanisms considering
degradation/disconnection at the physical layer and robustness strategies
against cascading failures will be developed to ensure reliable cooperation in
backbone networks. iii) Reliable Carrier/Management (C/M) plane design for
cloud-carrier-ISP cooperation. A reliable C/M-plane architecture for the third-
party entity, PNE, will be developed to facilitate cooperation across various
entities/domains and a decentralized end-to-end C/M plane will be developed to
enable extended integration of network and cloud services. Evaluation of the
proposed approaches will be performed using the NICT testbed in
Sendai.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.