* 2210371
* Bayesian Learning for Spatial Point Processes: Theory, Methods, Computation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Guanyu Hu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 151,210.00

Scientists, engineers, economists, and sports practitioners are increasingly
aware of the importance of accurately understanding underlying clusters when
trying to recover complex patterns that vary across time and space. Examples of
such patterns include earthquake occurrences over North America, tree locations
in Barro Colorado Island, field goal attempts of professional players over
basketball courts, and bullet-screen comments from live streams. When performing
statistical analysis on such complex point process patterns, the scientific
goals often involve either intensity estimation or cluster learning. To help
achieve the scientific goals, this project will develop methods to reveal hidden
spatial homogeneity within spatial point processes and underlying heterogeneity
among different univariate or multivariate processes. The project will advance
knowledge within the statistical sciences and contribute useful tools to the
work of government agencies, environmental scientists, social scientists, and
practitioners in the sports industry. The project will also provide training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will fill the gap between nonparametric Bayesian methods and spatial
point processes, including intensity estimation and heterogeneity learning for
univariate and multivariate processes. The research will focus on three topics
based on a nonparametric Bayesian framework with applications to different
socio-economic problems. In the first topic, the investigator will construct a
Markov constraint nonparametric Bayesian prior to learn the point process’s
intensity surface of with spatial homogeneity. The investigator will develop a
method for jointly estimating intensity surfaces and latent group information
for multiple point processes in the second topic. Lastly, the investigator will
develop a multivariate point process model with complex intensity function and
latent group structure for each type of points. The investigator will establish
consistency and asymptotic distributions of the new estimators and develop
eﬀicient algorithms together with publicly available
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.