* 2210616
* CNS Core:Small:Revisiting Process Isolation with Compound Processes
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jakob Eriksson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,985.00

Modern computer software commonly consists of groups of programs executing
together. This may be as simple as a web server and a database, or as complex as
thousands of virtual machines, each running dozens of programs, all working
together toward the same goal. Such groups of related programs are often started
by a single user, who may even think of them as a single unit or "stack". Today,
this common model of a stack of software, working toward a single goal on behalf
of a single user is not reflected in the way the software actually executes.
Instead, each individual layer of the stack is painstakingly guarded against
incursion by other layers, through a mechanism called process isolation. What is
more, many modern stacks consist of groups of virtual machines (VMs), where an
additional layer of safeguards is imposed between VMs, often resulting in high
overheads and low efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a
new concept, a "compound process" which better reflects the realities of modern
software. A compound process may host several "guest" programs in a single trust
domain, eliminating expensive and often redundant safeguards between components
of a single software stack, to yield substantial performance benefits. The
project will proceed along three main thrusts: (a) a basic compound process
loader and support libraries, allowing the user to run arbitrary combinations of
programs (guests) as threads in a single compound process, (b) runtime supports
for individual guests sharing a single thread, allowing further efficiency
improvements, and (c) automatically running all of the processes of an entire a
virtual machine as guests within a single compound process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By improving the efficiency of execution of popularly used
software stacks, this project aims to reduce the equipment needs and increase
the energy efficiency of the software that runs the modern world. Beyond direct
research impact, experience from the project will both enrich the computer
systems curriculum and provide research opportunities to both undergraduates
students at UIC, a Minority (MSI), Asian American and Pacific Islander
(AANAPISI) and Hispanic (HSI) Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.