* 2210283
* Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology at UC Irvine
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,020,000.00

Particle physics stands at a crossroads. The discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider has completed the Standard Model of particle physics, but
many mysteries remain. Observations of the Universe indicate that components
such as dark energy and dark matter which the Standard Model does not describe,
and the fact that the Universe is predominantly composed of matter (as opposed
to anti-matter), all point to dynamics beyond those contained within it.
Understanding these mysteries requires theoretical interpretation to realize the
implications of the vast amount of data currently being collected by particle
physics experiments such as the Large Hadron Collider and cosmological
observations and to propose future experimental searches. The research supported
by this award will develop innovative ideas in particle physics and cosmology,
and at their interface, to address outstanding problems in a wide variety of
fields, including searches for new particles, neutrino physics, the nature of
dark matter and its observable signatures, particle cosmology, and advancing our
understanding of quantum field theory. It advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in its most fundamental directions: the work
will deepen our understanding of the physical Universe at both the smallest and
largest length scales and further our knowledge of the basic building blocks and
forces that make up and shape our Universe. The broader impacts of the group's
activities are aimed at increasing public interest in and improving public
understanding of the exciting results of physics and astronomy research. The
group's activities include developing and teaching a COSMOS summer course on
particle physics and cosmology to high-achieving high school students from
diverse socio-economic backgrounds, programs to strengthen the representation of
underrepresented minorities in physics and other STEM fields, a wide array of
public talks and outreach activities through print and web-based media, the
training of postdoctoral researchers and graduate students both at UC Irvine and
around the world, and significant contributions in the area of professional
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research will be
accomplished by applying cutting edge tools in theoretical physics, including
quantum field theory, numerical simulations, and machine learning algorithms to
advance our understanding of particle physics and cosmology to propose new
models of fundamental particles and interactions, to realize the implications of
the vast amount of data currently being collected by particle physics
experiments and cosmological observations, and to propose future experimental
searches. Through applications of these techniques, this work will advance our
knowledge of dark matter, neutrino physics, and particle
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.