* 2210023
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Deplatforming and Online Hate Speech Across the Social Media Ecology
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Neil Johnson, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,768.00

Social media platforms have recently begun to respond to pressure to remove or
"deplatform" harmful content and malicious actors. This project analyzes whether
current deplatforming strategies mitigate harmful communication. The project
analyzes whether removing hate speech and extremist actors and communities curbs
the spread of malicious content throughout social media. The analysis also can
reveal whether whether deplatformed actors regroup on fringe platforms, reappear
in potentially larger numbers, grow more cohesive communities, or attract a more
extreme following with increased levels of hateful content, perhaps on platforms
that do not moderate this content. Through this research, the project provides a
new understanding of how content moderation and deplatforming affect the
development of online hate and extremism, leading to the design of effective
policies to limit malicious content online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
collecting data on online hate clusters, or groups, across multiple social media
platforms. The project team is constructing a machine-learning tool that can use
these data to classify a wide range of hate speech types and targets, and the
extent to which social media posts contain these types and targets. The team
uses statistical models to analyze the effects of deplatforming events on the
use, volume, and toxicity of hate speech, as well as on the extent to which
groups reorganize on unmoderated platforms. The ultimate goal of the project is
to build a dynamic, mathematical model to quantify how deplatforming affects the
emergence of extremist groups and their evolution over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.