* 2210610
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Structure-Function Relationships and Efficiency of Bacterial Flagellar Motors Using Computational Fluid Dynamics and Directed Evolution Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bruce Rodenborn, Centre College of Kentucky
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2025
* USD 119,999.00

Bacteria are among the oldest organisms on Earth. Through biological evolution,
many bacteria have acquired a biomechanical flagellum consisting of a helical
appendage that is rotated by a molecular motor to move them through their fluid
environment. Flagellar genetic organization, regulation, and structure are
broadly conserved across bacterial species, and flagella play vital roles in the
bacterial life cycle, including in host-microbe interactions. Thus,
understanding bacterial motility has broad implications in medicine, in biology,
and in the development of micro-robotic swimmers. This research aims to
understand how the energy efficiency of the bacterial motor has influenced the
evolutionary development of the bacterial motility system. The project will
create precisely calibrated computational tools to study variants of the
medically important organism Pseudomonas aeruginosa with different motor
properties. The energy efficiency of each variant will be measured and
associated with structural changes in motor components. The computational tools
and a library of these motor variants will be made publicly available so that
other researchers may use them for related research. The experiments and
computations required for this work will all be conducted in tandem with
undergraduate students, with the goal that many of them, including students from
underrepresented backgrounds, will pursue careers in interdisciplinary
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has uncovered the
molecular structure of the stator unit responsible for generating torque in the
bacterial flagellar motor. This project aims to characterize the relationships
between specific structural properties of the bacterial stator and its energy
efficiency. Strains of P. aeruginosa with suboptimal stators will be created and
used in directed evolution experiments to select for variant strains with
improved motility. Quantitative microscopy will be used to measure bacterial
motion as they move through different fluid environments. Experimentally
determined trajectories will be input into precisely calibrated computational
fluid dynamics simulations to determine the energy efficiency of the stator. The
determination of sequence and structural features of evolved stators with
different energy efficiencies will provide insights into the relationship
between the mechanical properties and biomolecular structures of nanomotors.
Additionally, to study how the presence of a nearby boundary affects the
swimming efficiency of the evolved strains, motility experiments will be
performed near smooth surfaces and surfaces with tunable viscosity and
electrostatic properties. The surfaces will be constructed from lipids and
proteins to mimic the environments that P. aeruginosa commonly encounters in its
natural environment as it undergoes motile-to-sessile transitions. The
calibration measurements will allow other researchers to create additional
precisely calibrated computational fluid dynamics models and develop similar
computational probes as used in this project. The publicly available library of
evolved motor variants and the structure-function map for the stator will deepen
the understanding of the relationship between motor proteins and motor
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.