* 2210760
* Collaborative Research:  Rational design of Ni/Ga intermetallic compounds for efficient light alkanes conversion through ammonia reforming
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yizhi Xiang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 280,282.00

The transformation of cheap and abundant light alkanes (from natural gas) could
have far-reaching implications on the chemical and energy sectors yet remains a
formidable challenge due to the lack of efficient catalysts/catalytic systems.
While various processes for alkane transformation to a host of petrochemical
products have been extensively studied during the past decades, only steam
methane reforming, propane dehydrogenation, and steam ethane noncatalytic
cracking are produced at large-scale. This project explores an alternative to
current catalytic systems known as ammonia-assisted reforming (ammoreforming) of
light alkanes. Ammoreforming involves reacting ammonia (NH3) with a light alkane
(such as ethane, C3H8) to produce hydrogen cyanide (HCN – an important
industrial chemical) and hydrogen (H2). Significantly, the reaction avoids
production of either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide, thus setting the stage
for circular usage of carbon with minimal generation of greenhouse gas. The
project will strengthen academic research and educational programs in
chemistry/chemical engineering at both Mississippi State University and Northern
Illinois University. The project leverages several programs at both institutions
aimed at stimulating K-12 students’ interest in STEM careers and providing
underrepresented undergraduates opportunities to develop research
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the design and synthesis of
efficient non-noble metal - NixGay intermetallic compound (IMC) based catalysts
- by the understanding of the structure/performance relationships and catalytic
mechanisms of the ammoreforming of light alkanes. The project focuses on several
fundamental aspects of ammoreforming over the IMC catalysts, including (1)
understanding the effect of oxalate precursor’s composition on the structure,
surface properties, and particle size of the NixGay IMC catalysts and their
relationships to the catalytic performance of ethane ammoreforming; (2)
understanding the influence of oxalate thermo-decomposition and annealing on the
structure and surface properties of the NixGay catalysts and the catalytic
performance; (3) elucidating the reaction-induced surface/bulk reconstruction
and identifying the surface reaction intermediates and catalytic mechanism. The
research will be carried out through the combination of in-situ/operando X-ray
characterizations (including XRD, SAXS, and XAS) at the Advanced Photon Source
of Argonne National Laboratory, operando-DRIFT-MS, and relaxation type transient
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.