* 2210179
* Observational Evaluation of the Effects of Atmospheric Temperature and Turbulence on Hydrometeor Fallspeed
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Timothy Garrett, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 747,029.00

Forecasts of severe weather events and climate extremes depend heavily upon
accurate computer model representations of how fast snowflakes fall. Providing
this information has proved an immensely challenging measurement problem because
snowflakes are delicate, they evaporate quickly, and their shapes and sizes are
exceptionally varied depending on the conditions in which they formed. No
weather or climate model currently accounts for how snowflakes swirl as they are
buffeted by turbulence during their fall. This is largely because the settling
of particles in a moving fluid remains unsolved, despite that fact that the
problem has very general importance to a wide range of fields in the physical
and biological sciences. The study aims to advance our knowledge of these
problems by using a unique suite of instruments deployed to a field site at a
high-elevation location in the Wasatch mountain range of Utah, that includes the
capacity to automatically track individual snowflake motions in a laser light
sheet, quantify the magnitude of air turbulence in their direct environment, and
subsequently measure their mass, size, shape, and density. The projected
outcomes of this three-year study include revised formulations for the
relationship of snowflake fall speed, mass, and density to air temperature, and
of the extent to which precipitation rates are enhanced or retarded by
turbulence in storms. Anticipated improvements to weather instrumentation will
assist commercialization through a University of Utah spin-off company for wider
availability to the weather measurement, infrastructure resilience, and
transportation safety sectors. Public outreach includes data classification
through citizen science and data dissemination to snow-sports
enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Snowflakes are denser in warmer air, and they
display a highly non-linear response to turbulence whose impact on their average
settling speed remains to be determined. This study aims to develop a more
sophisticated understanding of two of the principle atmospheric processes
determining how fast precipitation particles fall, temperature and turbulence.
The University of Utah is uniquely poised to address this problem with its
development of two new instruments with prior National Science Foundation’s
support that permit the first direct, automated, measurements of individual
hydrometeor mass and density. These devices will be deployed to a snowy high
elevation field site alongside temperature, wind, and turbulence sensors, as
well as a laser light sheet and fog machine. Particle Imaging Velocimetry will
be used to track the motions of snowflakes and surrounding turbulent air. The
expected project outcome will be revised parameterizations describing the
relationship between atmospheric temperature and hydrometeor size, mass and
density, as well as quantified metrics for how atmospheric turbulence affects
individual hydrometeor mass flux and collective precipitation rate. In terms of
its broader impacts, the study will exploit a combination of machine-learning
and citizen science to facilitate hydrometeor classification. Additionally,
anticipated improvements to instruments will be made available to the wider
scientific and societal resilience communities through commercialization by an
established University of Utah spin-off company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.