* 2210570
* Quantum Control of Vanadium Nuclear Spin Registers Surrounding a Single Ytterbium Ion in a Crystal
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Andrei Faraon, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

Understanding and controlling solid state quantum systems at the level of single
atoms, or atom-like systems, interacting with their environment is at the
forefront of scientific research as it provides a window into the most
fundamental quantum interactions in solid state. In recent years, multiple types
of atoms embedded in solids have been studied, including elements in the
lanthanide series of the periodic table, also known as rare earths. In this
work, the group will study the interaction between single ytterbium atoms and
the nearby vanadium nuclei in an yttrium orthovanadate crystal. The nuclei can
act as a local memory element for quantum information. They could be utilized to
create future optical quantum networks that could lead to transmitting
information with high security. The techniques developed in the project may also
be utilized for future protocols relevant for quantum sensing and quantum
computing. Quantum technologies are expected to help the society at large as
they may lead to substantial improvements in communication security, computing
and sensing. This project will provide the opportunity to train graduate
students that will constitute the workforce in a future quantum
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between the ytterbium and the
nearby nuclei will be studied by measuring the ytterbium atom that is coupled to
nano-photonic resonators. The group has already characterized the Hamiltonian of
this interaction, developed techniques to polarize the nuclei and
stored/retrieved the quantum state of the ytterbium qubit into/from the vanadium
ensemble. The localized spin ensemble surrounds every ytterbium qubit in an
identical manner, thus providing a highly versatile resource for quantum
technologies. In this work the group will employ dynamic Hamiltonian engineering
to explore augmented quantum control of the vanadium spins including the
creation of nuclear Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger (GHZ) states, number-resolving
measurements of the vanadium nuclear spin excitations and storing multiple
quantum excitations in the register. Direct driving of the nuclear spins via
radio frequency fields will be realized, leading to increased memory storage
time, which is necessary for future implementations of quantum repeater
networks. This is the first exploration of a quantum system of this type, which
provides new insights into the quantum many body physics of dense nuclear spins
in a crystal. The impact of this research is multi-faceted. On one side, it has
pure scientific value as it allows for studying and controlling the new regime
of quantum interaction between a single qubit and a dense but discrete nuclear
spin ensemble. On another side, controlling this quantum interaction enables
local quantum memory registers that are very important for implementing quantum
machines like quantum repeaters for long distance quantum networks that will be
utilized in interconnecting future quantum computers and establishing secure
quantum communications. Quantum technologies are seen as an area of strategic
scientific growth for the United States and are aggressively pursued under the
context of the National Quantum Initiative. It is expected that quantum
technologies will impact computing and communications in a profound way that
will lead to the next technological revolution. The techniques developed in this
research specifically for ytterbium in yttrium orthovanadate can be extended to
other quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.