* 2210391
* High-Fidelity Ternary Quantum Logic for Near-Term Algorithms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Irfan Siddiqi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 330,000.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is entering the noisy intermediate-scale
(NISQ) era, where executing algorithms that reach beyond classical computational
capability becomes realistic. Applications impacting several fields, ranging
from pharmaceutical design to resource allocation optimization, have been
proposed for NISQ-era quantum computers. Vital towards this effort is an
exploration of the fundamental physics determining the characteristics and
dynamics of QIS implementations, and how this understanding can be utilized for
improved quantum control. This project focuses on extending the resource
efficiency of modern processors, by leveraging the naturally rich structure of
superconducting circuits to develop a ternary quantum logic processor. With QIS
experiencing such growth, it is essential to recruit and train an engaged and
diverse workforce of scientists. Research for this project will be conducted by
graduate students, with mentorship from senior personnel, gaining the skills
required for future careers in academic and industrial research. Developing the
field is not limited to graduate students already involved in academia. In a
summer internship program, students from local East Bay Area high schools will
be introduced to the topics and skills involved in QIS research, as well as
engaging in hands-on experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central challenge here
is development of high-fidelity two-qutrit (quantum trit) gates, an essential
ingredient for generating entanglement and universal quantum computation. To
accomplish this, the processor utilizes a tunable coupling scheme to generate
strong interaction for fast gates, while allowing for suppression of unwanted
interactions. To verify these gate techniques, scalable qutrit processor
benchmarking is developed and employed, measuring state-of-the-art fidelities
compatible with a multi-qutrit processor. Finally, the processor is used to
execute hybrid quantum-classical algorithms, such as the quantum approximate
optimization algorithm (QAOA), well suited to ternary quantum logic. NISQ-era
algorithms specifically utilizing ternary logic demonstrate the power of such a
processor, while adapting and developing necessary error mitigation techniques
vital to accuracy in the presence of noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.