* 2210064
* Functional Regression and Classification for Data Supported on Complex Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eardi Lila, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 119,981.00

This project aims to develop novel statistical methods for functional/imaging
data that are located on complex geometries. Thanks to advances in imaging
technology, such data are now ubiquitous in the fields of medicine, biology, and
climatology, among others. Perhaps the most common task is to use these complex
data (for example, brain activity on the cortical surface) to predict a response
variable (for example, age or disease status) by employing regression and
classification models. The project will develop a novel framework for regression
and classification that leverages mathematical tools including partial
differential equations and differential geometry to integrate additional
information available and define more accurate models. Moreover, efficient
computational implementations and theoretical guarantees on the models'
performance on previously unseen data will also be provided. The software
implementations of the new models will be made publicly available. The research
activities will offer numerous opportunities for interdisciplinary research
training of the next generation of statisticians and data
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework under development will generalize
current functional data methodology to complex settings that arise from the
analysis of modern imaging data. Specifically, the research activities include
development of regularized linear models and generalized linear models for
predictors that are functional data supported on multidimensional non-linear
domains. These models will be formulated as an infinite-dimensional minimization
over spaces of smooth functions. To efficiently approximate their solutions, the
project will employ tools from numerical analysis of partial differential
equations and elements of calculus of variations. Further, the new framework
will be generalized to situations where the functional predictors display tensor
structure, which can be leveraged to control the complexity of the solution via
low-rank constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.