* 2210237
* Conference: 2022 Marine Microbes GRS and GRC
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Chase James, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 26,300.00

The Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Marine
Microbes together create an international forum for sharing cutting-edge
research on the ecology, evolution, and function of microorganisms in the ocean
biosphere. The meeting brings&lt;br/&gt;together top scientists from around the
world who have diverse backgrounds and expertise in order to provide an
integrated program on marine microbial life, covering cutting edge research on
viruses, Bacteria, Archaea and Eurkarya protists, spanning pelagic and benthic
realms, trophic food web dynamics (photoautotrophy, chemoautotrophy,
heterotrophy and mixotrophy) and their interactions and impact on biogeochemical
cycles. Both the Seminar and Conference are organized in thematic sessions, with
the goal of highlighting new methodological approaches and emerging questions in
the field while stimulating rigorous discussion. This award enables early career
participants (postdoctoral researchers and graduate students in the marine
microbiology research community with diverse backgrounds) to attend both the
2022 Gordon Research Seminar (May 28-29, 2022) and Gordon Research Conference
(May 29- May 29, 2022) on Marine Microbes. The rationale is to facilitate the
attendance and participation of postdocs and graduate students in the GRS so
they have an opportunity to present their research among peer scientists and
establish connections and confidence in this setting. The GRS exposes young,
early-career scientists to cutting-edge research on marine microbes (ranging
from computational to theoretical to experimental to observational, and spanning
all relevant disciplines from ecology to biogeochemistry to evolution), provide
opportunities to network among peers, and foster relationships that will
hopefully lead to lifelong collaborations. It also provides career guidance and
scientific mentoring through the participation of select senior-level research
mentors and discussion leaders. The GRS increases student and postdoc
participation in the subsequent GRC which has oral presentations from a diverse
group of young and established scientists who play leading roles in marine
microbial research. The 2022 meeting is of special importance since the 2020
meeting was postponed due to the global COVID- 19 pandemic. It is even more
important now that researchers can reconnect and have vital discussions about
novel research, in an environment that fosters networking and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The respective themes of the 2022 Marine
Microbes GRS and GRC are “Integrated Microbial Oceanography” and “Interconnected
Microbial Ocean.” These themes highlight some of the pressing challenges and
opportunities for innovation and collaboration in the field of marine
microbiology. The “Integrated Microbial Oceanography” GRS focuses on research at
the nexus of approaches of study marine microbes that bridges across methods,
experimental systems, and scales to form a more holistic understanding of the
ocean microbiome. The complementary GRC is on the “Interconnected Microbial
Ocean,” and aims to highlight the vital functional roles of microorganisms,
their ecological interactions, and their feedbacks on marine physiochemical
environments. The Marine Microbes GRS/GRC are arguably the only meetings that
coalesce such a diverse array of researchers (from career stages, disciplines,
areas of expertise) related to marine microbes. The GRC meeting format
emphasizes personal interactions, unpublished, cutting-edge research, and
community-building. As such, these meetings continue to be an exceptional
opportunity for the exchange of scientific ideas, developing new collaborations,
gaining experience in presenting research (especially for early-career
scientists), and are a crucial platform for addressing pressing challenges and
opportunities for the field of marine microbiology. The meetings are highly
interactive, stimulating environments that drive scientific conversations and
community forward. A critical part of achieving our meeting goal is
participation from a diverse array of scientists to the meeting
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.