* 2210386
* Towards Understanding Fine-Scale Microbial Diversity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Daniel Fisher, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2027
* USD 178,192.00

A major discovery of the DNA sequencing revolution is the huge number of
bacterial species. Remarkably, this bacterial biodiversity extends far below
species level down to the finest scales of genetic differences. For common human
gut bacteria, people on opposite sides of the Earth may have very closely
related strains, while people in the same household may have very different
strains, and individuals can have multiple strains that are continually
competing and evolving. For Prochlorococcus, a tiny, enormously abundant
bacterium that dominates photosynthesis in the tropical oceans and fixes more
carbon than all croplands combined, a bucketful of seawater includes a multitude
of strains, some closely related, some very distant. The traditional explanation
for the diversity of species is that each has its own ecological niche, or live
in different locations so they do not compete. But for relatively simple
bacteria that are mixed together by human motion and their interactions or by
ocean currents, it is implausible that each strain has its own ecological niche.
Why doesn't survival of the fittest drive almost all the strains extinct? The
goal of the Project is to begin to unravel this puzzle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Project will bring a spectrum of approaches to bear.
A major part will be developing and exploring potential scenarios for creating
and sustaining extensive diversity within microbial species. To understand
whether and how scenarios might work, simple models that caricature the most
important features will be studied theoretically. The simplicity of models is
essential. The alternate approach of making as-realistic-as-possible models and
simulating them on computers is highly problematic: how could one learn which
features and predictions might apply to other species? But simple models do not
mean they are simple to understand: the Project will involve developing new
theoretical methods combining approaches from ecology, evolution, and
statistical physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the scenarios that will be
explored arises from the perpetual battle between bacteria and phages -- viruses
that attack bacteria. If a phage strain effectively attacks an abundant
bacterial strain, it can kill off much of that strain, leaving room for other
strains to bloom, which then stimulate other phage strains to evolve to attack
them, as well as enabling mutant bacteria that resist the most abundant phages
to arise and prosper. This "Red Queen" dynamics -- everyone running hard just to
stay in place -- can cause an ecological and evolutionary chaotic state that
could potentially drive and sustain extensive diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
A key part of this Project is, from each scenario explored, to glean predictions
that might obtain in Nature and find ways of testing these, especially by
extensive DNA sequencing. In parallel with the theoretical developments, the
Project will involve collaborations with microbial ecologists and experimenters
to explore several bacterial species in depth via DNA sequencing from large
numbers of single cells and from large populations of similar bacteria (and
phages) extracted from natural environments or humans. To combine data of
multiple types, and to extract the most significant understanding, will involve
finding new statistical quantities and methods to measure them, together with
mathematical analyses of the processes that might produce them. One of the
important questions is to what extent the evolution of bacteria -- long thought
to be primarily asexual -- is shaped or even dominated by exchange of DNA
between them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the diversity and evolution
within bacterial species that live on or in humans, or play crucial roles in the
environment, is important for human health and for understanding how climate
change will affect the fundamental processes that shape the oceans and
atmosphere. And scientifically, diversity within a species is the root from
which higher level diversity develops: advancing understanding of it will
advance understanding of evolution and bio-diversity more broadly. This Project
will bring together students and postdocs from a spectrum of backgrounds,
including, academically, physics, biology, and computer science or statistics.
Training them in all the needed disciplines is important for the Project's
success and for the broader development of science and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.