* 2210586
* Rational Design of Conjugated Polymers with Cleavable Side Chains to Achieve Morphological Stability of Polymer Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2026
* USD 284,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Polymers
Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Wei You of the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill intends to explore rational design
of conjugated polymers with cleavable side chains, aiming to enhance the
stability of such conjugated polymer-based solar cells. The success of this
project would significantly enhance the understanding of the function of side
chains in balancing the solubility of conjugated polymers and the thermal
stability of such polymer-based solar cells, and result in polymer solar cells
of improved thermal stability and high efficiency. All participants in this
project will have the opportunity for interdisciplinary learning from synthesis
to device fabrication, as well as sophisticated characterization tools via a
number of established collaborations. The PI's group will actively recruit and
train students of diverse backgrounds, in addition to conducting outreach
activities for the general public and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically, conjugated polymers used in high
efficiency solar cells often show low glass transition temperatures, leading to
instability of such solar cells during operation by heat. Thermally removing
cleavable side chains is an effective approach to offer the necessary solubility
of conjugated polymers during solution processing, and re-gain the high glass
transition temperature of conjugated polymers via thermal removal of side chains
after the film formation. The You group recently proposed a balanced approach
where some side chains would be cleaved to gain morphological stability while
keeping other side chains to maintain the pre-established morphology to largely
retain the efficiency. The objectives of this project are: (1) to design the
synthesis of poly(thiophene)s with cleavable side chains and unsubstituted
thiophene units to further improve the efficiency and stability, (2) to develop
milder methods for cleaving alkyl chains to minimize the thermal impact on
morphology, (3) to conduct morphological investigations to develop structure-
morphology-stability-efficiency relationships within these model systems, and
(4) to explore the cleavable side chains in high-performance conjugated polymers
and small molecule acceptors to achieve high device efficiency and high
morphological stability. The success of this project would lead to development
of a low-temperature process to achieve the cleavage of side chains, achieving
PSCs of high morphological stability and high efficiency, and elucidating the
structure-morphology-stability-efficiency
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.