* 2210107
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: EIC: Inclusive-ScamBuster: Inclusive Scam Detection Methods for Social Media to Design Assistive Tools for Protecting Individuals with Developmental Disabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Matthew Peterson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,248.00

Preventing social media-based scams is a critical challenge for cybersecurity.
There exist tools to protect individuals during online browsing, however, they
are not tailored towards vulnerable subpopulations like individuals with
developmental disabilities (e.g., Autism). Such individuals become targets
without dedicated support to assist with threat identification in potential scam
posts. This project aims to understand the distinctive comprehension and
attention patterns displayed by individuals with Autism and Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), to improve scam detection tools to assist
these subpopulations. The project’s novelties include a multidisciplinary
approach combining social computing, cognitive psychology, special education,
and computational linguistics research to address existing biases in Artificial
Intelligence methods of Natural Language Processing (NLP) used in scam detection
tools, based on behavioral studies of browsing patterns displayed by vulnerable
subpopulations. The project’s broader significance is in integrating insights of
human behavior into cybersecurity tools, leading to better protection of
vulnerable subpopulations and greater inclusiveness in cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project pursues two goals. First, it develops an
eye-tracking study to discover variations in attention patterns observable
across populations with and without developmental disabilities when exposed to
scams and legitimate social media posts. Second, it uses observed variations in
attention patterns to highlight representation biases in the labeled datasets of
NLP-based scam detection models. It further creates a novel set of linguistic
attributes that can be used to train scam detection models tailored to aid
vulnerable subpopulations. Project outcomes include a better understanding of
social media scams for vulnerable subpopulations, the development of an
inclusive NLP model for scam detection, and an open-source browser plugin
prototype to aid individuals with developmental disabilities via tailored scam
alerts. The project also creates a web portal (Inclusive-ScamBuster) hosting
labeled scam datasets to highlight representational biases and open-source
educational resources to support Special Education programs in teaching and
training cybercrime prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.