* 2210456
* High-Dimensional Nonstationary Processes for Spatial Analysis and Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Huiyan Sang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 179,970.00

Numerous application problems in geosciences, climate and environmental
sciences, public health, social sciences and traffic statistics involve large
amounts of spatial data collected from complex constrained domains with non-
trivial geometries, such as irregular boundaries with sharp concavities,
interior holes due to geographic constraints, and river or road networks.
Practitioners are interested in modeling complex spatial dependence because it
plays the most important role in the estimation and prediction of spatial
problems. However, there is very limited tool for the estimation and prediction
of spatial problems on complex domains. This project aims to develop new
statistical models and algorithms to better characterize the potentially much
more heterogeneous spatial dependence in large data sets while respecting
irregular geometries in the data. The methodology will be applicable to a broad
range of real problems in multiple interdisciplinary fields. The proposed
research initiatives will offer numerous opportunities for interdisciplinary
research training at undergraduate and graduate levels, with a particular focus
on advancing diversity and inclusion in statistical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a new class of
nonstationary models with flexible locally stationary dependence structures for
large spatial data. The detection of locally stationary structures is achieved
by a novel manifold partition model with flexible partition boundaries while
respecting irregular shapes of domain boundaries. The project will further
develop a novel framework to build a valid stochastic process model to knit
together local models. Both parameter estimation and prediction can be performed
under a unified framework, and both discontinuities/abrupt changes and
smoothness in spatial random field can be captured. Moreover, the project will
result in new scalable and parallelizable divide-merge-conquer inference tools,
harnessing the power of locally stationary assumptions. The performance of the
proposed methods will be tested with simulation studies and applied to real-life
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.