* 2210812
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Distributed Fragmented Software Design Meetings
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Adriaan van der Hoek, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 467,236.00

While many software development teams were already operating in a distributed
manner, COVID-19 has caused a seismic shift to remote work across the entire
tech industry. This shift appears to be long-term: many organizations are
planning or have already decided to make hybrid work or full work-from-home a
permanent option. Design remains as important as ever in these settings. A
common practice that has emerged is distributed fragmented software design
meetings. These meetings, conducted on a regular schedule and online, bring
together a core team to address day-to-day design issues. Unfortunately, the
discontinuity and lack of proper tool support cause the meetings not to be as
effective and efficient as they could and should be, with many varied issues
arising that negatively affect the quality of the resulting software and the
schedule by which it is being produced. By studying several teams engaged in
distributed, fragmented software&lt;br/&gt;design meetings, this research
project will document the issues encountered in distributed, fragmented software
design meetings and the impact these issues have on the project. It will then
design, implement,&lt;br/&gt;evaluate, and make available new tools and
practices to overcome the issues. Finally, it will adapt the tools and lessons
learned for use in the classroom, so students become better prepared for future
careers in which they must engage in hybrid and remote software
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A guiding concept throughout the project will be
important design bits (IDBs), short excerpts from past design meetings that
capture information that may be relevant to future design meetings. IDBs will
serve as the primary lens for analyzing the design meetings to be studied and as
the organizing unit of support in the planned novel tools. Combining video
analysis, interviews, surveys, tool design, and assessment, the research will
uncover current practices, strengths, issues, and opportunities for improvement,
as well as create tools that support distributed, fragmented software design
meetings through lightweight capture and retrieval of IDBs. The insights learned
will enable organizations large and small to evaluate their practices and
implement improvements; the novel open-sourced tools will be adoptable by any
software organization to support their distributed, fragmented software design
meetings; and the classroom interventions will be integratable in typical
software engineering capstone courses as taught in nearly any computing
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.