* 2210569
* Collaborative Research: Modernizing Mixed Model Prediction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jiming Jiang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 139,678.00

The information explosion in many areas of society, from medicine to economics
and business to social media, has resulted in pressing questions for modern data
science regarding subject-level knowledge, such as in precision medicine,
focused marketing, family economics, and many other areas. These include
effective methods for data analysis and prediction in important areas of
application ranging from privacy protection via differential privacy (DP) to
precision medicine and public health disparities focusing on the prediction of
epigenetic markers, and to predictions with employment data from the U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS). This project aims to develop and employ new methods
known as mixed model prediction. Particularly, for the DP application, the
investigators will apply the methods to the publicly released 2020 U.S.
decennial census; for the BLS application the investigators will target
questions regarding volatility during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic that thus
require robust modifications from traditional approaches. The research will be
carried out in conjunction with collaborators who are immersed in a particular
application area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will
focus on three major aims: 1) multivariate mixed model prediction (MMP) in
genomic prediction problems where correlated DNA methylation markers reflect
underlying disease biology and improved prediction accuracy is possible by
borrowing strength across this multivariate structure; 2) MMP for differentially
private (DP) data in which cluster or grouping identities are contaminated by
design and not released to protect privacy; and 3) MMP with non-Gaussian random
effects and errors, which greatly can expand the range of circumstances in which
MMP can be applied beyond the classical normality assumptions that do not fit
many modern datasets. The investigators will develop the required methodology
for each aim, study the procedures theoretically, and carry out extensive
empirical simulation studies to compare the new methods with other methods.
Furthermore, the investigators will work closely with their collaborators in the
subject fields on implementing the methods developed in this project to
answering practical questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.