* 2210997
* Conference Proposal: Two-Year/Four-Year Campus Research Communities Examining STEM Transfer Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Sabrina Solanki, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 10/31/2023
* USD 99,944.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The University of
California-Irvine (UCI) will convene a conference of two- and four-year campus
research communities (CRCs) within the California Public Higher Education sector
in July 2022 to examine the STEM Transfer Pathway at Hispanic-serving
institutions in the state. Latinx students comprise a significant fraction of
undergraduates in California and across the nation, yet colleges are less
successful at retaining Latinx students within STEM fields, resulting in their
under-representation within the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the conference aims to (1) empower CRCs to
leverage institutional data to determine the degree to which the campus’ STEM
students achieve transfer success; (2) expand the definition of transfer pathway
success by collectively identifying a set of student socialization outcomes
(such as sense of belonging) and corresponding validated instruments that
participants can use to measure success; and, (3) evaluate the effectiveness of
a transfer support structure at each participating campus by implementing the
institutional data analysis plan and testing the survey instrument. Each CRC
will consist of a two-year college and a neighboring four-year university,
resulting in partnerships that are beneficial for students at both institutions
and the establishment of relationships that extend beyond the conference. CRCs
will include STEM faculty, campus administrators, institutional research staff,
and individuals involved in transfer student programming. This broad
representation will ensure that CRCs include the necessary stakeholders to take
advantage of project findings. This conference design will familiarize each
campus with accessing and analyzing their institutional data, often an under-
utilized resource, for future decision-making processes. A website and case
study will be developed from conference activities and will be disseminated
broadly. The conference outcomes have the potential to inform other higher
education systems on successful transfer and retention practices in STEM for
populations historically underrepresented in these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.