* 2210962
* RCN: Enhancing Global Plant Transformation Capacity through Research, Training, and Partnerships
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wayne Parrott, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,395.00

Worldwide crop production needs to increase at least 50% to meet the demands for
food, feed, and fiber of a growing population. The need for increased production
coincides with a time of changing climate that makes crop production more
challenging. Hence, it has become more important than ever to understand how
plants work, and specifically to identify genes that allow plants to have high
yields and adapt to adverse growing conditions. The most powerful tool available
to identify gene function, which plays an important role in improving plants, is
gene editing. However, gene editing can be prohibitively expensive and can only
be efficiently used in a handful of crops. The goal of this Research
Coordination Network is to make it easier for researchers from across the U.S.
and beyond to exchange information and ideas to develop new approaches to
improve gene editing efficiency in plants. It will also act as a central
repository of information and organize training opportunities to ensure that a
new and diverse generation of scientists will be available to take on gene
discovery research needed to advance agricultural productivity and the U.S.
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant genetic engineering (transformation) and
gene editing are critical tools for the advancement of plant functional genomics
research, and genomics-based crop improvement. Current transformation systems
are significantly limited by inefficient, complicated methods, and a lack of
training and expertise in the art and science of transformation biology and
techniques. There is a critical need for increasing plant transformation
capacity worldwide. Improving capacity will require 1) research advances across
transformation technologies; and 2) enhanced knowledge exchange and training in
transformation biology and techniques. With NSF support, the Plant Genetic
Engineering Network Research Coordination Network (PlantGENE) has been
established to facilitate research and to ensure sharing of technology,
knowledge, and expertise. The goal of PlantGENE is to ensure that existing
knowledge and new information gained from research and development on
transformation are rapidly and inclusively shared across the research community.
To meet this goal, PlantGENE will 1) establish a global network of researchers
from public and private organizations to collectively address the current
challenges; 2) facilitate collaboration and training opportunities; 3) exploit
established relationships with international research institutes to enable
transfer of knowledge, technologies, and methodologies to laboratories in
underserved regions; 4) share proven and state-of-the-art methods, develop
training modules, and offer virtual and in-person workshops designed and led by
experts in plant transformation; and 5) engage with plant biotechnology
organizations such as the Society for In Vitro Biology (SIVB) and the
International Association of Plant Biotechnologists (IAPB). All project
information and outcomes will be made available to the broader plant research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.