* 2210210
* Leveraging Background Knowledge for Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects in the Presence of Latent Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Emilija Perkovic, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 48,612.00

This project focuses on causal inference using observational data and expert
knowledge. Estimating causal effects is a goal of many scientific endeavors, and
often, the only available data are those from observational studies. However,
estimating causal effects based on observational data alone is not always
possible. A hybrid method that leverages both expert knowledge and observational
data may help estimate a causal effect or narrow down a range of likely
estimates. Such hybrid methods are currently limited to assuming that all
variables in the causal system are observed and measured. This assumption is
often too stringent for many real-world applications. This project will develop
methods for using expert knowledge to help estimate causal effects from
observational data in the presence of hidden variables. The methods developed in
this project would be immediately applicable to an extensive range of scientific
disciplines, most notably epidemiology, economics, personalized medicine, and
the study of algorithmic fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this
project is grounded on probabilistic graphical models that can be used to
represent conditional independence relationships on the observed set of
variables. In general, based on observational data alone, the causal graphical
model can be identified only up to an equivalence class of such graphs. The
first goal of the project is to develop a complete set of rules for updating the
set of compatible graphical models based on expert knowledge of certain causal
relationships. The second goal of the project concerns the development of
graphical criteria for causal effect identification and estimation based on the
updated set of models. Furthermore, the investigator will study the updated
equivalence class in terms of computational and statistical
efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.