* 2210912
* Developing Modern Spatial and Shape Analysis for New Heterogeneous High-dimensional Geospatial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Qiwei Li, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,999.00

Modern data science involves more and more heterogeneous geospatial data where
the features of objects are measured as discrete variables. The quantification
of spatial correlation of qualitative marks has been a longstanding focus in
spatial statistics. It is a key aspect of population forestry and ecology theory
but receives little attention in biomedicine. Recent developments in deep
learning and biotechnology have greatly facilitated generating massive high-
dimensional genome sequence count data with spatial information. This creates an
urgent need for innovation to analyze such complex data, driving the
methodological modernization and theoretical developments in spatial statistics.
In this project, the investigator will develop a series of computationally
efficient spatial and shape methods that are theoretically sound and practically
useful for addressing the heterogeneity issue commonly seen in the new
geospatial data (e.g., spatial transcriptomics data). The investigator also
plans to develop user-friendly and open-source software. The project will expose
undergraduate and graduate students to advanced science, technology,
engineering, and mathematical skillsets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will develop three modeling frameworks to analyze heterogeneous geospatial data
at different spatial resolutions. First, an energy-based framework that
characterizes heterogeneous spatial patterns for both grided and point data will
be developed. Compared with the traditional kernel-based methods, the new method
is more robust to noise and computationally more efficient. Towards the goal,
the investigator will incorporate a novel feature selection mechanism into the
framework to jointly identify multiple spatial patterns for the high-dimensional
geospatial data. Then, the study will explore how to construct an interpretable
low-dimensional representation of the geospatial data. In particular, the
investigator will focus on integrating multi-modal geospatial data to improve
the accuracy and resolution of spatial domain partition. Once the spatial
domains have been segmented, an immediate task is to characterize their complex
shapes. Finally, a landmark-based framework that quantifies a spatial domainâ€™s
boundary will be studied to account for heterogeneous boundary roughness. The
developed methodologies will contribute to much-needed theories and applications
in Bayesian spatial and shape analysis. The investigator will also study the
potential benefits and shortcomings of parametric and nonparametric Bayesian
methods in this context from both theoretical and computational aspects. Results
will be disseminated through workshops, publications, and new
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.