* 2210613
* Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of Quantum Criticality in Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nicholas Curro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 479,313.00

Non-technical Abstract: Electrons in solids may exhibit a wide range of
important phenomena, ranging from superconductivity to magnetism. Often this
behavior can be tuned by controlling some external parameter such as
temperature, pressure, or magnetic field. This project investigates several key
materials through a set of controlled nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
experiments with the aim of understanding how to tune and control their
properties. Such tuning can lead to dramatic and unexpected changes in the
material behavior, believed to emerge from a phenomenon called "quantum
criticality". This work advances fundamental understanding of quantum
criticality by probing the nature of exotic electronic states within a set of
carefully selected materials, and provides modern physics training and mentoring
to graduate and undergraduate students for the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The objective of this
proposal is to develop a deeper understanding of the behavior of strongly
correlated electron materials near quantum phase transitions. Strongly
correlated electron materials hold tremendous potential for new technologies,
but a fundamental understanding of their relevant many-body physics remains one
of the greatest challenges in condensed matter physics. Often the most
interesting science arises at a quantum critical point, where unconventional
superconductivity emerges and non-Fermi liquid behavior dominates the normal
state behavior. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful tool to
investigate the fluctuations that drive much of these effects, but requires
controlled experiments to disentangle the effects of spin and charge degrees of
freedom. This project utilizes new NMR techniques to probe these dynamics under
both hydrostatic pressure and uniaxial strain in complementary systems,
including a model heavy fermion system exhibiting a Fermi surface jump at a
quantum critical point, and a metal with ferro-quadrupolar order of localized
f-electrons. Several theoretical predictions are being tested in this project
about the nature of the excitations in the vortex cores of a spin-triplet
superconductor with a multicomponent chiral order parameter, and how the spin
fluctuations in the normal state respond to uniaxial
strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.