* 2210004
* CIF: Small: Latent Neural Factor Models for Radio Cartography From Bits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Xiao Fu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 483,975.00

In the next generation of intelligent, cognitive and software-defined wireless
systems, everything is expected to be connected, literally. Advanced radio
frequency (RF) awareness techniques will be the cornerstone of wireless resource
management, interference avoidance, transmission optimization, and decision
making in a highly crowded, self-organized, and heterogeneous wireless
communication environment. To advance RF awareness, spectrum cartography crafts
a "radio map" across multiple dimensions (e.g., time, frequency and space) from
limited sensors and measurements. Prior approaches often rely on over-simplified
RF environment models (e.g., smooth and static radio maps) and problem settings
(e.g., using unquantized overhead), which lowers performance when applied in
real-world settings. Leveraging recent advances in artificial intelligence, this
project aims to develop spectrum cartography theory and methods under complex,
heavily shadowed and dynamic environments using limited (i.e., a few bits of)
information exchange, which are largely uncharted research waters. In
particular, the project seeks to design a class of latent neural factor analysis
(LaNFAC) models to represent the RF environments in a parsimonious way. Using
the LaNFAC models, the project will offer spectrum cartography approaches to
reconstruct realistic RF environments from limited and quantized measurements.
Theory and methods developed in this project may find wide application in such
disciplines as geoscience, food science, video processing, and medical imaging.
The research will bolster undergraduate education and offer training
opportunities in optimization, deep learning, tensor analysis, and sensing to
students from under-represented and under-served groups with the aim to enhance
their career prospects in signal and machine
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a suite of
analytical and computational tools for provable, robust and efficient spectrum
cartography from a small number of measurement bits, by way of developing a
variety of LaNFAC tools for radio map modeling. The LNFAC models are a judicious
integration of latent factor analysis models (e.g., tensor decomposition) and
neural generative models. The work will first develop the basic framework of
limited feedback-based and LaNFAC-assisted spectrum cartography in realistic RF
environments. Then, the project will consider more challenging scenarios (e.g.,
no training data) and develop provable spectrum cartography from quantized
information feedback/exchange using untrained LaNFAC models. The last research
thrust will validate the theory and evaluate the algorithms using carefully
designed simulators and software-defined radio experiments using real data.
Using untrained neural models retains strong expressiveness without relying on
training data, which will facilitate distributed, exchange-limited, and adaptive
spectrum cartography. Real-data acquisition and releasing will assist the
research community to develop effective and reproducible spectrum cartography
approaches, and ultimately advance understanding of the RF awareness problem in
a collective way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.