* 2210402
* Modeling and Inference for Data with Network Dependency
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kehui Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Data with complex interpersonal dependency characterized by networks are
increasingly encountered in many scientific areas. For example, in some survey
studies for school students, a friendship network among students may also be
collected in addition to traditional variables collected on each unit such as
drug use, smoking and mental health status. The response of interest such as
drug use is likely to have dependency across units through friendship networks.
As another example, brain functional connectivity studies have consistently
discovered functional linkage among brain regions, where dependency among brain
regions arises through a network structure. The analysis of network-linked data
calls for statistical inference tools and theories that consider network
dependency. The developed methods will be applied to data analyses of stress and
suicidal studies, helping understand the pathological and biological mechanisms
underlying suicidal behaviors. The principal investigator (PI) plans to develop
open-source software packages to disseminate the results and provide training
opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the
research focuses on developing methods and theory for the inference of
regression coefficients and dependency measures between two variables of
interest, when there is network dependency across sample units. In the second
part of the research, the PI will focus on analyzing network-linked data with
replicates. In some applications, multiple independent units may exist, and the
observed multivariate data within each unit may have dependency through a
network structure. The analysis of this type of network-dependent data exhibits
its own features due to the availability of independent realizations. The
challenges of dealing with network dependency are at least twofold. The first
challenge is the infinite dimensionality, which can be understood through the
notion of network neighborhood growth. The second challenge is node
heterogeneity, which means a general network does not have the symmetric
structure as in a Euclidean lattice space. This research will develop new
statistical inference tools and theories addressing these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.