* 2210382
* RAPID: A comparative online simulation tool for COVID-19 vaccine allocation
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Laura Matrajt, FRED HUTCHINSON CANCER CENTER
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,295.00

This project will develop a mathematical model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission that
takes into account the use of several types of vaccines, genetic variation in
the virus, and multiple age groups. The COVID-19 pandemic has produced immense
suffering throughout the world, with over 5 million deaths as of January 2022,
but low- and middle-income countries have carried an increased burden both from
the health crisis and from the economic crisis arising from the pandemic. While
high-income countries have vaccinated the majority of their eligible
populations, less than 2.3% of the population of low-income countries have been
immunized. This is expected to change in the following months, as more vaccines
will be available to these countries. As more vaccines become available to them,
public health officials in these countries will likely develop vaccine
allocation strategies based on a mix of vaccines (there are currently over 20
vaccines available worldwide) that differ in effectiveness against circulating
variants, arriving at different times, and in different quantities. However,
these countries usually lack resources to develop models to guide vaccine
allocation. This project will develop a free, user-friendly online tool that
will simulate country-specific multi-strain COVID-19 epidemics in conjunction
with vaccination campaigns with multiple vaccines. By simulating the epidemic
and producing key outcomes including expected numbers of deaths,
hospitalizations, and cases, this tool will allow decision-makers in up to 177
countries around the world to compare scenarios of vaccine
allocation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a multi-strain,
multi-vaccines mathematical model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and vaccination
that will then be used to develop an open-source, online, free, user-friendly
comparative tool for vaccine allocation. This tool has the potential to to
evaluate in-silico different vaccine allocations with country- or region-
specific characteristics. The tool will allow users to input a variety of
country-specific parameters including: the type, effectiveness and quantities
(coverage, number of doses, distribution) of vaccines; co-circulating variants
with different transmissibility, virulence, and cross-protection; social
distancing interventions, demographics; and variable time horizons. It will
simulate different vaccine allocation scenarios and project for each of them key
outcomes (expected numbers of deaths, hospitalizations, and cases).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in collaboration with the CDC to
support rapid-response research projects to further advance federal infectious
disease modeling capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.