* 2210072
* The function of Gli proteins in the specification of ossification pathways in pectoral girdle development and evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Tetsuya Nakamura, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,153,200.00

One of the long-standing, and extensively debated, questions in evolutionary
biology is how vertebrates transitioned from water to land. The transition
required dramatic changes to the composition and architecture of the skeleton to
enable terrestrial feeding, respiration, and locomotion. Despite the critical
importance of the skeletal changes for vertebrate evolution, the sparse fossil
record has rendered its evolutionary trajectory and the underlying mechanisms
largely unknown. This project investigates the genetic mechanisms of the
skeletal transition of shoulder girdle bones from fish to tetrapods. The
integrative nature of our research is well-suited for a training of bridging
multiple disciplines (comparative anatomy, genetics, and genomics) to create a
dynamic environment where students learn through hands-on research activities
and group discussion. Towards the goal of embedding multidisciplinary science
into undergraduate curriculum, the PI established a new educational program that
explores fish-to-tetrapod transition with the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH) in 2018. Students that take this course will participate in group
discussions at Rutgers U and AMNH, learn how to bridge different disciplines,
and address questions related to the fish-to-tetrapod transition. Collectively,
this integrated research and educational program will reciprocally facilitate
the deep understanding of fish evolution, foster undergraduates and graduate
students, and inform lay people with the answers to the mysteries of the
“missing link” which attracts large amount of interest in our society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to identify the
specification mechanisms of the two distinct types of bones found in
vertebrates, intramembranous and endochondral, focusing on the pectoral
(shoulder) girdle. Focus on the pectoral girdle is based on the established
appreciation that during the evolution into tetrapods changes in the ratios of
two bone types in fish disconnected the pectoral girdle from the skull, thus
paving the way to the terrestrial locomotion and way of life. Intriguingly,
previous studies showed that one of the gli family gene gli3 regulates a balance
of intramembranous and endochondral ossification in pectoral girdle development.
Prior work also determined that Gli3 regulates genes involved in osteoblast and
chondrocyte differentiation. Objective 1 will identify the roles of the Gli
level in the specification of intramembranous and endochondral ossification, and
characterize the embryonic and adult phenotypes of gli family gene knockout
fish. Objective 2 will test the hypothesis that the amount of Gli regulates the
battery of genes involved in osteoblast and chondrocyte differentiation.
Objective 3 will test the function of Gli target genes in the specification of
ossification pathways using transgenic fish. These objectives will reveal how
two distinct types of bones are specified in the vertebrate pectoral girdle and
suggest that changes in this signaling pathway could underly the pectoral girdle
evolution from fish to tetrapods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.