* 2210082
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Evolutionary Insights into Digital Ecologies of Fear
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* John Ziker, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,997.00

The internet is a virtual social environment, where it can be difficult to
discern genuine threats. The goal of this research is to develop new insights
into parents' perceptions of online risks to their children. The project focuses
on the parents of children in middle childhood, ages 6-12. The main goal is to
gain insights that will inform the development of digital environments that more
accurately align online dangers and parental fears. To address this alignment,
this project brings together experts in evolutionary anthropology, computer
science, and digital experience design in a novel interdisciplinary
collaboration. The project will shed light on a theoretical framing, the digital
ecology of fear. The project will advance a burgeoning new area of research and
design that can impact cybersecurity for families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will pursue the following three objectives: (1) develop method and
theory to build basic behavioral knowledge that can inform new designs for
digital ecologies that more accurately align risk and fear, (2) identify design
guidelines, taking into consideration the effects of the digital ecology of
fear, and (3), enrich the collaboration between computer science and
anthropology by cross-training graduate students in relevant methods and
concepts from both disciplines. Ecologies are influenced by several factors:
environmental context, threats, risk perception, adaptive response, costs, and
benefits. This project is identifying the ecological factors that influence the
digital ecologies of fear using established research techniques and
investigating new techniques to reveal the ecological, social, and individual
factors activating fear of the digital-real world continuum. The project's
mapping of the digital ecology of fear will identify guidelines that consider
and ameliorate the effects of those factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.