* 2210041
* Instrumentation and methods development for millisecond time-resolved studies of protein dynamics using quenching crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,245,633.00

An award is made to Cornell University to develop new technology and methods for
time-resolved study of proteins in action. Proteins are dynamic machines that
interact with other molecules to perform myriad functions required for life.
Three dimensional structures of proteins determined using X-ray crystallography
reveal their atomic construction, provide insight into how they function and
malfunction, and provide the basis for understanding the molecular mechanisms of
protein function. Even more could be learned if these static structures could be
complemented by “molecular movies” of proteins in action, for example, as they
catalyze chemical reactions to generate new molecules. The technology to be
developed here promises to provide an effective and efficient approach to making
these “movies” with millisecond time resolution, allowing time-resolved
crystallography to be applied to far more biomolecular targets by more
researchers at more diverse institutions. This development work will engage a
diverse science and engineering team, with efforts made to recruit participants
who will benefit most from the hands-on and interdisciplinary training provided.
If this work is successful, there is a clear path for commercial development to
maximize the technology’s impact. These research efforts are complemented by
longstanding efforts in undergraduate education and teacher training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Powerful methods using free-electron laser X-ray sources
have been developed for time-resolved study of biomolecular reactions initiated
by light or by chemical mixing, but their application is resource intensive and
not well suited to broad scientific and biotechnological use. An alternative
approach has been demonstrated in which reactions initiated in crystals are
quenched within tens of milliseconds by ultra-rapid cooling, and X-ray data
collected from these crystals via standard mail-in cryocrystallography. This
approach separates the timescale of the reaction from that of X-ray data
collection, yields more useful data per crystal, and minimizes the number of
crystals required for structure determination at each time point. Here,
instrumentation and methods for reaction initiation and rapid cooling will be
developed to decrease achievable time resolution toward 1 ms, and key parameters
for design of time-resolved experiments will be measured. The goal is to deliver
a solution for millisecond time-resolved studies of protein dynamics that can be
used by anyone in their home lab on any protein crystal system that can host the
reactions and/or structural changes of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.