* 2210261
* Conference: Western States Section of the Combustion Institute Spring Meeting 2022
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Matthias Ihme, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 01/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The objective of this award is to provide support for the 2022 Spring Technical
Meeting of the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute, which will be
hosted by Stanford University March 21-22, 2022. The broader significance and
importance of this meeting is providing a forum for graduate students,
postdoctoral students, faculty and other researchers to network and share
progress in this area of research. This conference is a gathering of combustion
researchers in academia, industry, and government from the West Coast and
Mountain regions of the United States. The conference's technical program
consists of a series of plenary lectures, contributed oral presentations, and
informal gatherings. The funding from NSF will be used to support students who
attend the meeting. The combustion institute is the premier academic
organization organizing this conference. The conference facilitates the exchange
of combustion research results through plenary lectures and oral presentations.
Unlike the International and National meetings, the paper deadline is only a few
weeks before the conference, allowing participants to showcase brand new
results. The fact that the required paper is not a formal publication also
allows participants to present work in progress. Both of these factors enhance
the information exchange at the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
brings together leading experts to give plenary talks in several areas. Sessions
will include the topic areas of Computationally and Data Intensive Research,
Detonations and Supersonic Combustion, Diagnostics, Fire Research, Heterogeneous
Combustion/Spray and Droplets, IC Engines, Gas Turbines, and Rockets, Laminar
Flames, Novel Energy Conversion Techniques, Reaction Kinetics and Fuels, Soot
and Nanomaterials, Turbulent Flames. A particular focus of this conference is on
graduate and undergraduate students: providing an opportunity for these students
to present and get feedback on their research and enhancing their oral
presentation and technical writing skills. The support from NSF will be used to
award travel grants to non-local students and registration support for local
students in an effort to increase student participation at the meeting,
particularly students from underrepresented institutions that may not have the
financial means to fully support student travel to
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.