* 2210415
* Research Infrastructure: Moving and Improving the Florida Museum of Natural History Fish Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lawrence Page, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 253,050.00

The collection of preserved fish specimens at the Florida Museum of Natural
History is the second largest and one of the fastest growing in the U.S. It
serves as a vital source of information on the diversity and distributions of
fishes for national and international researchers, as well as local scholars,
students, natural resource managers, and government agencies. A new building on
the University of Florida campus built to house the collection and associated
scientists and students will provide state-of-the-art storage and research
facilities. This award will support the movement of the collection to the new
facilities and will provide the opportunity to make several improvements to
collection management that will better serve the research and education
communities. Enhancements include reordering the massive collection into a more
space-efficient container-size arrangement, rather than grouping specimens by
type, and barcoding specimen containers so individual specimens are easier to
locate. A large-scale imaging program will be conducted for improved online
access to the collection. The enhancements to collection data and a more cost-
efficient physical reorganization of one of the world's most important
collections of fishes will serve as a model for future collection management.
The project also will improve the public interface of the Museum through
increased opportunities for professional development of K-12 teachers. Teachers
will be paired with project scientists through the Thompson Earth Systems
Instituteâ€™s (TESI) flagship program, a Scientist in Every Florida School (SEFS),
and a series of professional development opportunities on best practices in
science communication will support teachers as they collaborate with scientists
and prepare scientists for in-person or virtual classroom visits with students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new facilities and improved management will guarantee
preservation and increased accessibility of specimens of exceptional value to
science. Additionally, a more trouble-free replacement of problematic taxonomic
and other data will allow researchers, staff, and other users to access
specimens and information more easily. Ecology and evolutionary biology rely on
natural history collections to provide resources for answers to questions of
fundamental importance, and through this project more accurate and updated
online specimen-based data will be linked to genomic and phenomic data, mapped
to show distributions and changes over time, and contribute to analyses related
to environmental change. Upon completion of the project, the collection will
share only current names for fishes with data aggregators, greatly improving the
utility of the data. Locating individual specimen lots will be simplified,
whether the work is done by staff or a visiting researcher. This project will
assure the integrity of specimens and data, better serve the scientific
community and public, and through its success, serve as a model for improvement
of other large and important collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.