* 2210437
* Quantum Error Correction with A Dual Species Atomic Qubit Array
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Quantum computing is attracting great interest due to its potential for solving
practical problems that are intractable on classical computers. Areas of
application include cryptography, design of new functional materials or chemical
compounds, and speed up of machine learning systems for artificial intelligence
using quantum mechanical phenomena. Today’s classical computers are extremely
reliable because they incorporate circuitry for correcting infrequent, but
unavoidable electronic errors before they disrupt the operation of the computer.
For quantum computers to achieve their full potential they will also need error
correcting circuitry. Correcting errors on a quantum computer is much more
difficult than correcting errors on a classical computer because quantum states
have a continuous range of values, not just the binary 0 or 1 of a classical
computer. This project will demonstrate new approaches to implementing error
correction on a quantum computer. The approach will use two different atomic
elements, with one element holding the data to be protected while the other
element will be used to detect errors that occur. When an error is detected
operations will be applied to the data to correct the errors. These ideas will
be demonstrated experimentally in a prototype, small scale quantum computer with
error correction. Aditionally the project will contribute to scientific
workforce development through training of students. The training will be
interdisciplinary, drawing on methods and ideas from atomic and laser physics,
electronic and computer based control systems, and quantum information theory.
Research results will be incorporated into the University teaching
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the state of the art
in quantum computation using atomic qubits. It will implement novel approaches
to quantum error correction using two different atomic elements in a single
experiment. A two-species array with data qubits encoded in Cs atoms and
ancillas in Rb atoms will be used to demonstrate correction of quantum errors
and the protection of encoded logical qubits against decoherence. One of the
species (Cs) will be used to encode data qubits. The other species (Rb) will be
used as measurement qubits. Quantum information will be transferred from Cs to
Rb using a two-species quantum gate, and the Rb atoms will then be measured as
part of the error correction protocol. The two-species array will use a novel
technique that requires only a single wavelength of trapping light to confine
two different atomic elements in spatially interleaved arrays. Quantum logic
gates to create entanglement between pairs of atoms of the same type as well as
pairs of atoms of different types will be performed by exciting atoms to Rydberg
states with laser pulses. The major goals of the project will be to demonstrate
preparation of logical qubits using the surface code and the 7-qubit Steane
code. The coherence properties of logically encoded states will be studied and
gates will be demonstrated between logical qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.