* 2210127
* CAREER:  The role of chloroplast signaling in regulating plasmodesmata
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Tessa Burch-Smith, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 532,604.00

This project will study how plant cells share information and resources among
themselves, identifying possible targets and strategies for developing plants
with optimized nutrient partitioning to meet human needs, while creating hands-
on learning opportunities for Deaf/Hard-of-Hearing high school students and
University of Tennessee undergraduates. In plants, pores in the cell wall are
conduits for nutrient distribution and signaling during plant growth,
development and defense, but little is known about how these pores work or are
controlled by the rest of the cell. The research will investigate how the
photosynthetic organelles in the cell, chloroplasts, control the structure and
function of these pores. The project will include experience learning
opportunities for high school and undergraduate students as a mechanism for
improving learning. This will involve students who are typically not given these
opportunities, including Deaf/Hard-of-Hearing and economically disadvantaged
students. The curriculum of a senior-level course will also be re-designed to
transform it from a traditional upper-level biology course into an opportunity
for experiential learning, using the research as the source of real-life
questions for student engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytoplasmic pores in the
cell walls called plasmodesmata (PD) are important routes for cell-to-cell
communication in plants. There is evidence that chloroplasts can influence
trafficking between cells via PD. The underlying hypothesis of the research is
that expression of nuclear genes that affect cell-to-cell communication in
plants is controlled by chloroplasts via signaling to the nucleus. The goal of
this project is to identify the chloroplast signals that change nuclear gene
expression, define the nuclear gene networks and signaling modules that alter PD
structure and function and then determine how PD structure change in response to
chloroplast signaling. The research will use reverse genetics, bioinformatics,
molecular and biochemical approaches, and state-of-the-art microscopy. This work
will likely advance understanding of the mechanisms used for intracellular
communication between the chloroplast and nuclear genomes and provide insight
into the chloroplasts-PD relationship, thereby increasing understanding of how
plants integrate local physiological and environmental cues perceived by the
chloroplasts into decisions that have systemic implications. Importantly, the
research may also identify genes that are likely important for cell wall
processes that facilitate the formation and modification of
PD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.