* 2210780
* Selective Synthesis, Structures, and Properties of Oxynitride Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* James Neilson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 453,639.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern society is enabled by
technology, and new materials enable modern technologies. In this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Ceramics programs in
the Division of Materials Research, Prof. James Neilson and his research team
will advance the science of materials synthesis to expand an underrepresented
family of materials that have been historically challenging to synthesize. The
targeted chemistries of this project present novel materials systems for
applications in energy harvest, conversion, and storage that move toward all-
solid-state lithium ion and next-generation, beyond Li-ion batteries needed for
the immediate national interests of vehicle electrification and grid-based
energy storage. This research has the potential to impact fields beyond its
immediate scope by discovering new materials for efficient lighting,
electronics, and catalysis. This project integrates a broadly impacting
educational outreach program to develop and distribute Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education activity kits that provide
90-minute authentic research experiences in the field of the chemistry of
functional materials to secondary schools throughout
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
and Ceramics programs in the Division of Materials Research, seeks to
selectively synthesize new oxynitride-based materials and to understand the
resulting structure/property relationships. For the heteroanionic materials that
have been discovered, the result of having two anions enables enhanced and
unique properties relative to their single-anion congeners. However, oxynitrides
are hard to synthesize with stoichiometric control, particularly for later
transition metals. This project seeks to expand this underrepresented class of
oxynitride-based materials by employing recent advances in solid-state materials
chemistry synthesis science. Specifically, this project 1) synthesizes new
oxynitride materials in targeted, exploratory chemical reactions, 2) understands
the structure and compositional relationships of oxynitrides, particularly as it
pertains to anionic disorder, and 3) understands the unique electrochemical and
ionic properties of these materials for potential applications in
electrochemical energy storage. This project also 4) provides educational
outreach throughout Colorado by developing and distributing Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education activity kits that facilitate
90-minute research experiences on the chemistry of functional materials in
secondary school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.