* 2210063
* FET: Small: Optimizing quantum circuit design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Rebekah Herrman, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2022
* USD 399,995.00

The quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) is a leading candidate for
leveraging quantum computing techniques to solve complex combinatorial
optimization (CO) problems. The algorithm is performed in iterations; while it
has been proven always to find an optimal solution to a CO problem, it may not
always find the solution in a finite number of iterations. Thus, better
techniques are required to find optimal solutions to CO problems more quickly.
This project investigates a new modification to the algorithm called ma-QAOA,
which expands the number of parameters that QAOA uses and allows for additional
degrees of freedom. These changes increase the likelihood of finding optimal
solutions to CO problems more quickly. If successful, this project will develop
new techniques for solving currently intractable problems from a diverse range
of applications, including operations research and computer science. This
project will also become the basis for a graduate-level quantum algorithms class
that expands competency in quantum-based optimization and operations
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main restriction for quantum computing
applications is the reliability of gates. Errors increase exponentially with the
number of gates used in a circuit, and the larger the error, the more samples
are required to obtain high-fidelity solutions. The time required to collect
these samples can outweigh any time savings associated with a given solution. By
relying on classical optimization and graph theory techniques, this project
seeks to reduce the total number of gates needed to solve complex combinatorial
optimization problems. The first objective of this project is to determine how
many iterations of QAOA are required to achieve results comparable to those of
ma-QAOA for specific problem instances. The second objective is to use machine
learning methods to determine how to select parameters for ma-QAOA optimally.
The third objective will use graph theory techniques to design circuits that can
efficiently implement ma-QAOA, and the fourth objective is to determine the
physical significance of incorporating additional parameters into the
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.