* 2210729
* SCience-INtegrated Predictive modeLing (SCINPL): a novel framework for scalable and interpretable predictive scientific modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Simon Mak, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Scientific modeling is at a critical and defining crossroads. With breakthroughs
in experimental technology, high-quality data can now be obtained for complex
scientific and engineering problems. However, the generation of such high-
quality data entails large experimental and computational costs, resulting in
limited data for scientific investigation. While predictive modeling provides
some relief, recent work has revealed two key shortcomings with existing models:
they often yield poor predictive performance when trained with limited data, and
can violate established scientific principles, which may lead to erroneous and
spurious scientific conclusions. This project will develop a novel SCience-
INtegrated Predictive modeLing (SCINPL) framework which addresses these
limitations. SCINPL paves the road for transformative scientific research,
equipping practitioners with accurate, cost-efficient and interpretable
predictive models for guiding scientific progress. This framework can catalyze
closer collaborations between the scientific and data science communities, by
demonstrating the practical advantages of science-driven statistical learning
and data-driven scientific discovery. SCINPL provides a radical paradigm shift
for scientific discovery in a broad range of fields, enabling scientists to push
forward the frontiers of scientific knowledge and engineering via improved
science-based data science tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCINPL features a suite
of new probabilistic Bayesian models, which are capable of integrating a wide
range of prior scientific domain knowledge as prior beliefs for predictive
modeling. This integration of scientific knowledge with data-driven models not
only provides improved predictive performance with reduced uncertainty, but also
enables better interpretability and thus scientific discovery given limited
training data. The first model, called the Boundary-constrained GP model,
integrates known boundary information for the response surface within a Gaussian
process (GP) framework. The second model, the Graphical Multi-fidelity GP model,
embeds dependency information between scientific models for predictive modeling.
The third model, the Gaussian Process Subspace regression model, integrates
subspace information representing dominant physics for GP modeling. For each
model, the investigators will (i) establish a solid theoretical foundation for
predictive modeling, which demonstrates the improved predictive performance via
the integration of scientific information, (ii) present a comprehensive
methodological framework and efficient suite of algorithms for performing this
desired integration of scientific principles within probabilistic modeling, and
(iii) demonstrate the usefulness of such models for cost-efficient,
interpretable and principled scientific discovery. Major emphasis is placed on
demonstrating the effectiveness of SCINPL in tackling a broad range of complex
and expensive scientific problems, including the design of 3D-printed aortic
valves, the study of heavy-ion collisions, and the optimization of rocket
engines for spaceflight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.