* 2210832
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Core: Medium: Program Synthesis for Schema Changes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xinyu Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 466,000.00

Many programs interact with databases and make assumptions about the underlying
data schema. In reality, however, the schema often needs to change (e.g., for
performance reasons). As a result, both the underlying data and program code
need to be updated to reflect this schema change. This poses significant
challenges to developers and is considered to be a tedious and time-consuming
aspect of program evolution. This project aims to simplify the schema
modification process through the use of program synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop synthesis
techniques to help developers with different aspects of changing data schemas.
In particular, the project will develop new techniques for migrating data
between different formats as well as techniques for updating the code that
interacts with a modified schema. The project’s novelties are a suite of novel
program synthesis techniques that can be used to automatically migrate the data
to the desired format and modify any existing code to be consistent with the new
schema. The project's impacts are to significantly reduce the manual software
engineering effort involved in the schema modification process. The project is
introducing undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to computer
science research via research internships through programs at both institutions
and mentoring workshops at formal methods and programming languages
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.