* 2210226
* STTR Phase I:  Integrated High Lift Propulsor
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Byron Ward, WAYFARER AIRCRAFT RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,843.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to enable the affordable and energy-efficient design of advanced
powered lift aircraft, creating aircraft capable of transporting people and
things to new locations. The reduction in transport cost and emissions made
possible by this project may ensure that the advanced air mobility market,
expected to grow to $120 Billion by 2030, develops community-compatible,
economically- and socially-relevant mobility capabilities. The fundamental
aerodynamic technology developed by this project may be applicable to a wide
range of aircraft sizes and missions, enabling new capability in defense, public
safety, and humanitarian roles as well as improving the quality of life for the
public by enabling affordable, advanced mobility and logistics in urban,
suburban, and underserved rural areas. The increased efficiency of the
technology may enable these benefits to be realized while reducing the
environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project seeks to
confirm the feasibility of a new method of distributed electric propulsion for
lift augmentation that combines high lift for low-speed performance with low
drag, cruise-efficient wing design using a novel integrated propulsor. The
project will explore the complex and incompletely understood aerodynamic
interaction of a propeller and wing, which is key to technical and commercial
success. The technical objectives include: characterizing the slipstream
influence on the wing pressure distribution and boundary layer characteristics,
the influence of variations in propeller and wing configuration and location on
high lift performance, and the aircraft level effects and tradeoffs of the
configuration. The project seeks to meet these technical objectives with a
combination of experimental wind tunnel research and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulations and analyses to thoroughly understand and
characterize the complex flow physics and their impacts on aircraft performance
and design. The effort may advance the propeller-wing interaction aerodynamics
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.