* 2210012
* Advancing Graph Signal Processing Techniques for Monitoring and Control of Electric  Distribution Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Anna Scaglione, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 360,000.00

This NSF project aims to incorporate the physical modeling of the electric grid
in the theory of machine learning algorithms, to benefit the monitoring and
control of energy delivery systems. While the basic theory we will develop
applies broadly to transmission and distribution systems, the section of the
grid we are focusing on is the one that is undergoing the greatest
transformation, which is the distribution grid. This section of the system not
only poses unique modeling challenges, it is also undergoing significant changes
because of the integration of distributed energy resources and the control of
responsive demand and storage. These are the key ingredients to sustainable
energy delivery, and the project will bring transformative changes to the
digital technology and machine intelligence that can accelerate this transition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposal explores a novel
mathematical approach for the analysis of grid signals, rooted in fundamental
power systems graph-based methods and born out of interpreting the system state
as an instance of graph signals. The goal is to use the insights that come from
Graph Signal Processing (GSP) and from graph Fourier analysis, to extract
signals features that allow to improve data driven inference and decision
algorithms. At this time, GSP machine learning tools are designed for real
signals and are not physics based. The project will fill this gap, by providing
the underpinning for a theory of grid graph signals. This entails extending the
GSP tools to tackle complex signals, incorporating the grid system parameters in
the algorithm and considering realistic power measurements systems. The goal is
to have a better representation of the spatial-temporal characteristics of the
data as compared to generic machine learning algorithms and advance the
theoretical tools in GSP which are not based on systems whose properties are
captures by the signals envelopes and on the physics of the grid. The tools
developed will be made available open source. In addition to the advances in
GSP, the project will have broader impact through its outreach to New York City
public schools and create a short program for K-12 students, supported by an
illustrated book, explaining how energy is delivered and the path that advanced
societies need to follow to achieve the goal of a decarbonized
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.