* 2210590
* Advancing Processability and Material Performance of Synthetic Polyamino Acids with Transformable Secondary Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Yao Lin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2027
* USD 576,428.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties and performance of
many biological materials rely on the structures and organization of their
constituent molecules, which can be in the form of helices or sheets.
Interestingly, dynamic transition from helices to sheets in fibrous proteins
facilitates a remarkable increase in the strength, stiffness, and energy
dissipation capacity. The fact that advanced and diverse material performance
can be achieved by remarkably simple structural blocks and their transformations
has inspired researchers to develop new polymeric materials based on the same
concept. Polyamino acids (PAAs), also known as synthetic polypeptides, can adopt
analogous structures. However, inducing the structural transitions in the solid
PAA of high molecular weights (MWs) is a largely unmet challenge. As a result,
many of the PAA materials either have poor thermomechanical properties or are
incompatible with polymer processing techniques such as extrusion and
compression molding. This project aims to develop a general strategy to
significantly improve the thermomechanical properties and processability of
synthetic PAAs by taking advantage of metastable, transformable structures of
PAAs and control over their in-situ transition and hierarchical organization.
Successful completion of the research will break the constraint of solution
process and prepare new PAA materials in the melt for large-scale production of
films/bars/fibers with morphological and properties control, using standard
polymer processing techniques. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained on bioinspired polymeric materials and acquire skills in polymer
synthesis, material characterization, mechanics, and computer simulations. The
program will integrate the research into the new and existing course, promote
interdisciplinary education and high-quality research experiences, and
demonstrate the application of materials research through lectures and workshops
for the public. Emphasis will be given to involving underrepresented students at
all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prepared by ring-opening polymerization of amino
acid N-carboxyanhydride monomers, high-MW PAAs are polypeptide model systems
that form stable alpha-helix or beta-sheet structures. With the recent
development of living cooperative polymerization and other strategies, PAAs with
complex architectures and controlled molecular structures have been synthesized
on large scales at high yield and purity. Still, structural biological materials
made from fibrous proteins have far more advanced material performance, and they
have more diverse mechanical behaviors than their organic counterparts. Equipped
by a new knowledge on how to synthesize PAA copolymers capable of transforming
from alpha-helices to beta-sheets, the planned research seeks advancements in
the mechanical properties and processability of solid PAA materials. Control
over ordered secondary structures of PAAs, their in-situ transformation and
hierarchical organization in the solid state are central to this study.
Carefully designed PAA copolymers containing transformable secondary structures
will be utilized to make hard thermoset materials, semi-hard strain-stiffening
materials, and materials that are soft at low stress but have high tensile
strength and extensibility. The findings from this project may enable the
generation of polymeric systems that will approach the level of sophistication
and versatility found in some of nature’s biomaterials. The research also
provides a model system of synthetic polymers with intrinsic secondary
structures in which the different partitioning of intramolecular and
intermolecular networks determines the macroscopic properties of materials,
enabling comparison of the experimental results with predictions from
simulations and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.