* 2210612
* General Mechanisms of Morphogenesis on Multiple Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Boris Shraiman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2027
* USD 181,389.00

This project aims to advance the understanding of Morphogenesis - the process of
biological “shape formation” – which is central to animal and plant development
and is a fundamental open problem in the study of Living Matter. Recent
discoveries in this interdisciplinary field have established the importance of
mechanical interactions that guide growing tissues into diverse shapes and forms
of adult organisms. The present project will address the problem on multiple
scales, from subcellular to organismal, focusing on several laboratory model
systems of animal and plant development. Planned work aims to understand
intracellular processes underlying generation of mechanical tension in tissues,
and will investigate the role of mechanical interactions during embryonic
development. The project will also provide a general mathematical description of
how patterns of tissue growth define the shapes of animal limbs and plant
leaves. Progress in understanding morphogenetic processes across developmental
systems is fundamental to the advancement in health and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the interplay
between active mechanical self-organization of tissues and the genetically
encoded developmental signals that guide morphogenesis. On the subcellular
scale, it will seek to identify the dynamical mechanisms underlying the adaptive
response of cells to mechanical stress and the rate of strain. On the scale of
tissues, the project will investigate the role of mechanical feedback-driven
self-organization in morphogenetic tissue rearrangement in the fruit fly embryo.
Lastly, on the organismal level, the project will investigate alternative
spatio-temporal strategies of two-dimensional (2D) tissue growth that define
three-dimensional (3D) shapes in both plants and animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a
mechanical self-organization model of epithelial tissue flow during gastrulation
of the Drosophila embryo and validate it by comparing with the quantitative data
from collaborating labs. This study is motivated by the recently uncovered
failure of the widely accepted gene expression-based model to quantitatively
explain such morphogenetic flow. If successful, this project will change the
conceptual framework underlying a key aspect of embryonic morphogenesis of the
fruit fly, an important model system in the study of animal development.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a model of junctional cytoskeleton self-assembly - an
example of intracellular morphogenesis - to elucidate the sub-cellular mechanism
of feedback that, by sensing the rate of strain, stabilizes mechanical self-
organization on the tissue scale. This model will also define experimental
diagnostics for the otherwise inaccessible dynamic state of the cytoskeleton.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a general representation of 3D shape formation by
anisotropic growth of 2D epithelial sheets, and characterize the space of
alternative morphogenetic growth strategies leading to the same final shape.
This project will frame the problem of the selection of growth strategies as a
general variational principle, and test the ideas by comparing predictions with
quantitative observations of morphogenetic growth trajectories in different
biological systems, specifically: the growth of flower primordia, and the growth
of a crustacean limb.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden its impact the project
will leverage the convening infrastructure of the KITP Interdisciplinary Biology
Initiative led by the PI to organize an online “Tutorial Forum” connecting
biophysics and developmental biology with the goal of attracting young
scientists to this field and increasing its demographic diversity. The PI will
also organize a one-day online Teachers' Conference for high-school science
teachers across the US, aiming to bring to them the intellectual excitement of
interdisciplinary science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.