* 2210067
* Uncovering Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Christopher Verhaaren, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Christopher B. Verhaaren
at Brigham Young University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of natureâ€™s
smallest scales is truly remarkable. The Standard Model of particle physics has
been confirmed by a wide variety of impressive experimental tests. Nevertheless,
the Standard Model must be extended to address the big questions of particle
physics. These include understanding dark matter and why there is more matter
than anti-matter in the Universe. This research advances the national interest
by engaging in a primary scientific goal: the discovery and understanding of
physical laws. This understanding may relate to new particles with only small
connections to the Standard Model. Such particles are often said to belong to a
dark sector because they are challenging to detect. Professor Verhaaren builds
models of dark sectors that can answer the big questions of particle physics and
determines how to test these ideas experimentally. This work will also lead to
significant broader impacts. Professor Verhaaren will include graduate and
undergraduate students in this research, providing essential training for
beginning physicists seeking to enter and impact this field. He is also
developing new course curricula intended to both aid new students as they learn
about these topics and prepare interested undergraduate and graduate students to
engage in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Verhaaren will develop the theory and phenomenology of richly varied dark
sectors. This includes models that seek to understand the electroweak scale, and
attributes of the Higgs boson, through new symmetries. The symmetry partners to
Standard Model particles may reside in a dark sector and can provide an
explanation of dark matter. Solitons of dark sector fields may also make up some
or all of the cosmological dark matter. These less-studied possibilities have
novel aspects and physical effects. Often, their study requires original
theoretical and numerical methods to determine and describe their
characteristics. Developing these theoretical methods serves the dual roles of
advancing our understanding of quantum field theory as well as making concrete
predictions of how these dark sector objects can be discovered
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.