* 2210664
* New Statistical Methods for Computer-Assisted Inversion with Applications to Satellite Remote Sensing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yves Atchade, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 365,262.00

The transformation of satellite-based remotely sensed data into useful climate
and geophysical information requires solving radiative transfer equations. Due
to the need to process data at the scale of the entire planet, the methodologies
currently used to approximate solutions of these complicated equations are
limited and do not systematically exploit multi-sensor measurements, ground
measurements, and the temporal dynamics at play. At the same time, countries
around the world are increasingly turning to remote sensing data to cope with
the challenges related to climate change and environmental degradation. To
accurately inform stakeholders, better statistical models are needed,
particularly for imaging of regions in the developing world where ground
measurements are limited. The goal of this research is to develop a new
generation of statistical methods for solving, at a more local level, the
equations at the heart of satellite remote sensing data
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformation of satellite-based remotely
sensed data into useful climate and geophysical information requires solving
some highly non-trivial radiative transfer inverse problems. This project aims
to develop a Bayesian framework that combines algorithm unrolling deep learning
models and a forward computer code into an inversion map. A transfer learning
and a reinforcement learning framework will be developed to combine the
inversion map learned in-silico with ground measurements, to adjust for
distributional mismatch and to maintain the accuracy of the inversion procedure
over time, even as the satellite data distribution changes over time. The
project will also contribute at the theoretical level to a statistically deeper
understanding of reinforcement learning and algorithm unrolling models. The
project aims to improve analysis of global remote sensing data with applications
to climate change, bridging of the disciplines of remote sensing, machine
learning, and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.