* 2210083
* Electromechanical Effects of Ferroelectric Nematic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Samuel Sprunt, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 441,565.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on investigating
liquid crystals which exhibit a recently discovered special property called
“ferroelectric nematic phase”. Ferroelectric nematic materials are remarkable in
that even though they carry no net electric charge, they generate a spontaneous
electric field, somewhat analogously to how certain materials such as iron
become magnetic without the action of an external agent. Moreover, because
ferroelectric nematics are fluid, the direction of their permanent electric
orientation can be altered with a relatively small applied voltage. These
properties make ferroelectric neumatic materials very attractive for new
technological solutions for motion-control and energy conversion, which are
important in applications ranging from soft robotics to green electricity
generation. The project enables mentoring students at all levels in physics,
chemistry and materials science, with a special focus on under-represented
groups via the McNair Scholar and Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
programs. It provides young scientists with interdisciplinary training that
enable them to secure productive careers in cutting-edge STEM enterprise. An
additional priority is the integration of highlights of the team’s research into
hands-on, publicly accessible educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Linear
electromechanical coupling is an inherent property of ferroelectric materials,
but has previously been explored only in crystals, polymers, and positionally
ordered liquid crystals. The project’s research on ferroelectric nematic liquid
crystals (FNLCs) explores the specific dependence of this coupling on both
polarization and nanostructure. Complementary flexoelectricity studies
illuminate the elastic and electric properties and reveal the role of
ferroelectricity on flexoelectricity. The team’s materials’ synthesis effort
furnishes an expanding library of FNLC compounds with optimized properties.
Various experimental techniques are deployed to measure key material parameters,
including ferroelectric polarization, dielectric constants, elastic constants,
orientational viscosities, and intermolecular correlations that test current
models predicting spatial modulation of the polarization orientation as an
important feature of the ferroelectric phase. Detailed characterization of the
collective molecular fluctuations elucidates the nature of phase transitions
between different variants of polar nematic phases and explains variations of
the electromechanical effects in antiferroelectric, ferroelectric, and modulated
phases. The basic experimental results guide the way to new, comprehensive
microscopic theories in addition to providing pathways to potential applications
in emerging technologies such as soft robotics and clean electric energy
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.