* 2210185
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Studying Social Engineering Attacks Targeting Vulnerable Refugee Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Murtuza Jadliwala, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2024
* USD 296,470.00

Two recent world events, an ongoing pandemic together with continuing regional
wars and conflicts, have resulted in a sizable number of refugee population
being forcibly displaced and resettled in the United States. Lack of English-
language and digital literacy skills have made the refugee community an easy
target for new and increased social engineering attacks. This project’s
overarching goal is to study how language and linguistic features impact the
perception and response of refugees to social engineering attacks. The project’s
novelties are a) a language- or linguistic-centric approach for understanding
social engineering threats to refugees resulting in development of novel
educational materials, open access datasets, and improved cybersecurity policies
to counter these threats, and b) tailored digital literacy and educational
programs and workshops to raise awareness and mitigate social engineering
threats among the refugee population. The project’s broader significance and
importance are a) improved protection models and prevention techniques against
social engineering attacks, b) informed policies and tools, resulting in better
social and economic security, and reduced inequity gap within the vulnerable
refugee population, and c) enhanced refugee integration into the U.S. society
through increased awareness of cybersecurity threats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team systematically study the linguistic cues and triggers associated
with social engineering attacks such as phishing and vishing. The deliverables
and key contributions of the project include a) preliminary results documenting
the impact of linguistic traits of the refugee population on their
susceptibility to real-world social engineering attacks, b) open-access datasets
of phishing emails, and voice calls, with attributions of interactions to
promote further research, c) recommendations to improve cybersecurity policies
including vulnerable population, resulting in the creation of new STEM
educational material for the refugee population, and d) follow-up educational
workshops to debrief, discuss, and disseminate relevant educational material to
the target refugee population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.