* 2210308
* SBIR Phase II:  A Safe, Fast, and Cost-Effective System for Tissue Removal in Laparoscopic Transabdominal Hysterectomy and Myomectomy
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Daniel Francis, CLARIA MEDICAL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to make minimally invasive surgeries
involving tissue removal safer, faster, simpler, and more cost-effective through
the introduction of a novel tissue containment and removal system. The initial
target market will focus on improving procedures for hysterectomy or uterus
removal, usually because of enlargement due to uterine fibroids. Gynecologic
surgeons perform approximately 500,000 hysterectomies per year in the United
States and there is an urgent need for improved solutions for tissue removal.
The proposed system: (1) lowers the risks of morbidity and mortality during
minimally invasive surgery; (2) saves substantial time; and (3) enables
conversion of open hysterectomies to minimally invasive with faster and safer
tools, reducing healthcare costs by thousands of dollars per patient.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project aims to provide a hysterectomy and myomectomy tissue containment and
surgical extraction system. This project has three main objectives: First,
demonstrate that a novel laparoscopic system is an effective barrier in
preventing potential upstaging of occult cancers, passes electrical safety
testing, passes sterilization validation, and passes biocompatibility testing.
Second, develop an appropriate training program for surgeon users. Third,
demonstrate that the laparoscopic system is intuitive to use, safe, and
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.