* 2210203
* EAGER: Using machine learning to develop a calibrated, remote sensing-based age model to improve late Quaternary slip-rate estimates in arid environments
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2022,08/31/2022
* Francisco Gomez, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 175,183.00

This study aims to improve the methods surrounding surface landform dating, and
thus methods for determining rates of fault slip. Accurate slip rates are
essential for tectonics and earthquake hazards research, and often require
numerous surface ages. Such dating efforts can be challenging due to a lack of
datable materials, cost concerns, or accessibility of field sites. Recent
investigations have directly correlated specific remote sensing observations to
the absolute age of surface landforms. Using a large repository of remote
sensing data and recent advances in data science and machine learning, this
study will integrate multiple, distinct types of remotely sensed data with
published age data, to develop a calibrated age model that will be applied to
faulted landforms in southeastern California. The methodology will be applied to
the eastern Garlock fault, a major strike-slip fault in this region, and aid in
answering longstanding questions about the role of the fault in southern
California tectonics. This study will make a significant contribution to
earthquake hazard analysis of many active faults in southeastern California, a
region under threat of damaging earthquakes and with a population of more than 3
million people. Improved earthquake hazard assessments are critical for federal,
state, and local agencies and regulatory bodies, a broad spectrum of industry,
and the public. The model produced by this study can also form a framework for
future surface age studies around the world. Additionally, this study will
contribute to the development of the STEM workforce by advancing the education
and training of a female graduate student and at least two undergraduate
students, as well as the professional development of two early-career
researchers, including a female assistant professor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic slip rates are essential components of seismic
hazard analysis and critical to addressing many pressing questions at the
forefront of tectonics and seismological research. However, discrepancies of
Late-Cenozoic and present-day slip rates continue to be debated, particularly
when slip rate estimates span different timescales of activity. Discriminating
true slip rate discrepancies from observational biases / limitations requires an
accurate (and self-consistent) view of slip rates and their temporal and spatial
variability. However, obtaining robust slip rates remains challenging, due to
lack of dateable materials, cost concerns, or accessibility of field sites.
Addressing these challenges, recent investigations have directly correlated
specific remote sensing indices to the absolute age of landforms. Using the
broad combined repository of remote sensing data from the past 20 years and
recent advances in data science and machine learning, the investigators will
expand on these efforts and integrate several types of remotely sensed data with
published geochronology data to develop a calibrated surface property-age model
that will be applied to faulted landforms in the Eastern California shear zone /
southern Walker Lane of southeastern California. The ensemble model will
incorporate different modeled responses between sensed values and surface age.
Ensemble modeling uses a variety of statistical and computational models to fuse
an array of single variate models to solve classification and regression
problems. With the variety of remote sensors, bands, and spatial scales
available, a wealth of data can be consolidated into a cohesive, robust model.
The investigators believe such rigorous data treatment may yield significantly
improved uncertainties on resulting ages compared with individual models. When
implemented, the proposed effort will yield a calibrated means of estimating
surface ages using remote sensing data and new slip rates for the eastern
Garlock fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.