* 2210172
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Global Change on Terrestrial Mercury in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kevin Schaefer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2025
* USD 653,001.00

Northern hemisphere permafrost contains a large amount of mercury (Hg) bound to
frozen organic matter. The Arctic is warming at two to three times the global
average rate. As permafrost thaws, microbial decay of the organic matter will
resume, releasing mercury into the environment. The scientific community lacks
the process-based terrestrial mercury models needed to understand the impacts of
permafrost thaw on the Arctic and global mercury cycles. This project will build
such models by leveraging existing models of the terrestrial carbon cycle to
advance our understanding of terrestrial mercury processes in permafrost regions
at multiple temporal and spatial scales. The project will use these models to
predict the pan-Arctic and global impacts of Hg released from thawing
permafrost. For the first time, this project will reveal the emergent behavior
of two linked components of the Arctic system: the carbon and mercury
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage and enhance existing
models to evaluate how Hg from thawing permafrost will influence the Arctic and
global Hg cycles. The project has two objectives: 1) Quantify how different
environmental conditions affect Hg accumulation with associated uncertainties;
and 2) Quantify how Hg released from thawing permafrost impacts the global Hg
cycle with associated uncertainties. This project uses three models of the
terrestrial Hg cycle: 1) the full-physics Simple Biosphere Carnegie-Ames-
Stanford Approach (SiBCASA) model; 2) the Global Terrestrial Mercury Model
(GTMM) coupled to 3-D atmospheric transport and ocean circulation models; and 3)
a simple Global Biogeochemical Box Model (GBBM). Simulations from 1400 to 2300
CE using SiBCASA will provide estimates of future Hg releases from thawing
permafrost. Simulations with GTMM will quantify global impacts of Hg released
from thawing permafrost. Monte Carlo simulations with GBBM will quantify
uncertainty. These models require enhancement based on the latest knowledge of
Hg uptake and release pathways. These enhancements include new biogeochemical
pools such as soil water, new processes such as fire, and new computational
techniques such as Monte Carlo simulations. The Broader Impacts of this project
include the mentoring of early-career researchers, the organization of a
training workshop to bridge the Hg and carbon research communities, and the
production of publicly available products, which include an updated Hg emissions
dataset, the models themselves, output from the models, and an on-line tool to
visualize the model results. This project leverages extensive knowledge of
terrestrial carbon pathways to parameterize Hg pathways and couple the
terrestrial Hg and carbon cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.