* 2210158
* Mechanics of Organic Mixed Ionic-Electronic Conductors (OMIECs)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kejie Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,098.00

This grant will focus on understanding the mechanical behavior of organic
conductors in interaction with conduction of ions and electrons. Organic mixed
ionic-electronic conductors are the core functional component of organic
electrochemical devices such as organic electrochemical transistors,
electrochromic devices, energy harvesters/storage, and light-emitting devices.
While most efforts on mixed conductors are currently focused on the charge and
ion dynamics, the strong coupling of the electronic/ionic conduction with
structural changes and mechanical deformation is largely unknown. This project
will formulate a theoretical framework and experimental protocols for the
understanding, evaluation, and improvement of organic mixed conductors for
mechanically reliable, high performance organic electronics. The research will
create fundamental knowledge on the concurrent ionic-electronic transport and
chemomechanical responses in polymeric conductors via a close integration of
theoretical and experimental approaches. The interdisciplinary nature of the
project provides unique training opportunities for students at different levels.
The various outreach activities, in collaboration with the Women in Engineering
Program at Purdue, will focus on the engagement of underrepresented minorities,
and will promote the interest of undergraduate and K-12 students toward the
engineering career pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
research is to understand the interplay between electronic, ionic, and
mechanical responses in organic conductors using coordinated multi-physics
continuum theories, multi-scale computational modeling, and experimental
validations. The project includes three specific tasks. (i) Formulate a
continuum theoretical framework that describes the underlying physics of mass
transport, electron/hole conduction, and mechanical stresses. Develop a finite
element model to simulate the electrochemical/mechanical processes in organic
comductors. Perform electrochemical/moving front experiments on the doping
kinetics and stress-sensitive kinetics to feed the theory. (ii) Understand the
mechanical constitutive behavior and the molecular-scale structure-property
relationship through complementary tools of in-situ nanoindentation and
molecular modeling on intermolecular interactions. (iii) Understand the
mechanical damage using finite element analysis and experiments. Conduct
mechanical tests to evaluate interfacial strength, perform cyclic voltammetry to
evaluate the electrochemical performance, and employ optical microscope and
absorbance spectroscopy to identify mechanical damage. Unravel the correlation
between the mechanical reliability and device performance and determine the key
material and geometrical parameters that govern the damage initiation and
evolution in solid-state organic devices. The fundamental understanding on the
mechanics of organic mixed conductors will shift the research paradigm towards a
complete design spectrum of concurrent ionic and electronic conduction and
mechanical reliability in electrochemical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.