* 2210322
* Viscous and Inertial Nonlocal Rheology of Dense Suspensions of Frictionless Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 475,603.00

Immersed granular media or dense slurries are densely packed grains suspended in
a viscous liquid. They are found in natural environments, such as landslides,
mudslides, and underwater avalanches, and in industrial settings, such as
propellant slurries and ceramic material processing. Such materials play a
crucial role in environmental hazards in which large volumes of dense slurries
become mobile and slump triggered by heavy rainfall, earthquakes, and human
influences. In such catastrophic flows, grains may lose contact and spread for
long distances in a short time. The goal of this award is to develop
experimental, theoretical, and computational methods to accurately predict the
spread of these dense slurries when the grains are not in frictional contact.
This understanding is essential to avoid or reduce the impacts of natural
disasters. In addition, data acquired will be useful to researchers interested
in developing new engineering materials. Results from this award will be
incorporated into classes at Cornell University to promote active learning and
student success in mathematics and physics. Various outreach activities are
planned to inspire interest in engineering among K-12 students by illustrating
the societal impact of engineering science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers
have recently provided well-resolved experimental data demonstrating that the
transition from viscous to inertial regime in dense frictionless suspensions
occurs at a surprisingly small particle Reynolds number. The results suggest a
hypothesis that the interplay of colloidal and hydrodynamic forces leads to the
formation of clusters of particles which dominate the transmission of momentum
across the material. Therefore, larger length scales than the particle size may
play a role. Consequently, the current local rheological laws based on binary
collisions and transfer of momentum are inadequate in explaining the behavior of
dense suspensions and their transition. This award will develop a theoretical
description of cluster formation based on collisional dynamics. Nonlocal
constitutive equations accounting for the viscous stresses and inertial impacts
acting on the clusters will be derived using insight into the microstructure
obtained from discrete element simulations and experiments. Advanced force
microscopy will be used to characterize interparticle interactions at nanometer
separations and guide the development of model suspensions. Advanced
experimental techniques such as optical indexed-matching, X-ray radiography, and
computed tomography will be coupled with conventional rheometry techniques to
understand the details of microstructure while measuring the macroscopic
stresses. Experimental flows will be designed and studied in which transient
effects and inhomogeneous shear fields are present. The theory will be applied
to predict the dynamics of practical flows such as lab-scale immersed sediment
flows and will be refined by comparing the results with experimental
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.