* 2210011
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Improving Human Discernment of Audio Deepfakes via Multi-level Information Augmentation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Vandana Janeja, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2024
* USD 315,839.00

This project increases listeners’ discernment of audio deepfakes through
augmentation of information, both technological and sociolinguistic. This
project establishes an innovative pathway for collaborative research across
sociolinguistics, human centered analytics, and data science and lays the
groundwork for future analyses of deepfakes that are broadly relevant across
disciplines, informed by human behavioral perspectives. The project will address
the societal challenge of misinformation by generating insights that can
increase the ability of listeners – particularly college students, whose lives
are indelibly shaped by technology – to evaluate the veracity and authenticity
of information online. The project's broader significance is to address the
societal challenge of misinformation by generating insights that can help
empower listeners to make decisions about how to evaluate the veracity and
authenticity of information they encounter online. The project improves
understanding and modeling of how deepfakes are involved in spreading
misinformation and tracking how language technology is adapted for social harm
and/or used in unethical ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
increase listeners’ discernment of audio deepfakes through augmentation of
information that draws upon integrated interdisciplinary knowledge and advances
data augmentation as an important tool for deepfake detection. The objectives of
the project are to: (1) Study and evaluate listener perceptions of audio
deepfakes that have been created with varying degrees of linguistic complexity;
(2) Study and evaluate the efficacy of training sessions that increase
listeners’ sociolinguistic perceptual ability and improve their ability to
discern deepfake audio content; (3) Augment the audio deepfake discernment via
multi-level temporal and linguistic signatures, informed by training and
linguistic labeling; (4) Evaluate the impact of augmented signature information
on listener perceptions of audio deepfakes; (5) Create open-access online
modules and materials with social science and data science student involvement
to improve listeners’ discernment of audio cues on a wider public
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.