* 2210495
* Symmetric Informationally Complete Measurements and Quantum Computation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Blake Stacey, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

So far, most of quantum information science has been developed in terms of the
textbook presentation of quantum theory, which chiefly amounts to the
mathematical language of vectors and matrices of complex numbers. But this
language may hide as much as it reveals. This is hinted at by certain quantum
foundational approaches such as Quantum Bayesianism where finding alternative
ways to represent the theory in terms of probabilities (nonnegative real
numbers) does most of the conceptual heavy lifting. This is because these
representations live much closer to the goal of analyzing the distinction
between classical and quantum in terms of decision theory. This suggests that
representations of this nature may also be of critical importance to developing
quantum information technologies, for instance by providing benchmarks for how
to best simulate quantum systems using conventional computational resources and
certifying quantum supremacy. Developing an efficient language for quantum
information processing in these terms is the goal of this project, which will
have influence across disciplines thanks to the connection it makes between
quantum mechanics and number theory, an area of mathematics foreign to the
physics curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years much research has
focused on the most symmetric possible of such representations—those based on
“symmetric informationally complete quantum measurements” or SICs—for their
simplifying power and optimality in a surprising number of applications: From
optimal quantum-state tomography, to entanglement detectors, novel key
distribution schemes, components in device-independent random number generation,
dimension witnessing, and more. However, the promise of these representations
comes with two catches. First, it is not known whether the conditions for SIC
existence can always be satisfied for qudit systems (though SICs are currently
known to exist in at least 264 dimensions and strongly believed to exist in all
others). Second, when the conditions for existence can be satisfied, except for
the global symmetry defining them, the solutions always appear monstrously
complex. In this project, the group plans to remedy the latter matter, if not
the former, by exploiting recently discovered connections between SICs and
algebraic number theory, particularly Hilbert’s 12th problem. Essentially what
is called for is the development of a tool pack of special (transcendental)
functions by which to make the representation more manageable. With the tool
pack in hand, the group will reexamine a number of phenomena from this more
efficient perspective and build an open-source code base to facilitate applied
research more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.