* 2210645
* Travel: Support for US graduate students and postdocs to attend the 2022 BEPSII international field school
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Jeff Bowman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 01/31/2023
* USD 28,440.00

Sea ice plays a critical role in polar ecosystems and in regional and global
climate. Sea ice moderates the exchange of carbon dioxide and other gases
between the atmosphere and ocean, supports global ocean circulation through salt
drainage, acts as an insulator between the warm ocean and cold atmosphere, and
plays a key role in polar food webs. Sea ice remains understudied despite its
significance due to the difficulty of accessing and analyzing sea ice samples.
The sea ice environment is dynamic and presents numerous hazards that require
considerable expertise to mitigate; also, because ice is a solid, samples often
require more complex preparation for biological and chemical measurements than
for seawater. These challenges may be considerable barriers for new
investigators, who typically learn how to overcome them through one-on-one
training by a mentor, supervisor, and advisor. This award supports travel for US
PhD students and postdoctoral researchers to attend an international sea ice
field school hosted by the SCAR expert group Biogeochemical Exchange Processes
at Sea Ice Interfaces (BEPSII) and SCOR working group Essential Climate
Variables in Ice (ECVice). The field school is taking place at the Canadian High
Arctic Research Station, a state-of-the-art field station located in Cambridge
Bay, Nunavut, Canada. Students at the school receive comprehensive training in
field and laboratory best from international and local experts in sea ice
physics, biogeochemistry, ecology, and operations, which will help broaden
participation within the sea ice community and encourage new investigators to
undertake sea ice studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sea ice plays a key role in
Arctic and Antarctic biogeochemical cycles. The physical nature of sea ice
presents challenges to safe and effective study that serve as a considerable
barrier for new investigators. Typically, knowledge of how to safely operate on
sea ice, design experiments, and make biogeochemical measurements is transmitted
vertically from a mentor, supervisor, or thesis advisor to a student or postdoc.
While effective, this compartmentalizes knowledge and excludes new investigators
with different expertise, perspectives, and backgrounds from sea ice
biogeochemical studies. To broaden participation within the sea ice
biogeochemistry community and encourage new investigators to undertake sea ice
studies the Biogeochemical Exchange Processes at Sea Ice Interfaces (BEPSII)
SCAR expert group and SCOR working group Essential Climate Variables in Ice
(ECVice) is hosting an international field school at the Canadian High Arctic
Research Station Campus in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut, Canada in May of 2022. The
field school brings together international and local (Iqaluktuurmiut) experts in
sea ice physics, biogeochemistry, ecology, and operations to provide a
comprehensive training program for early career scientists. The school combines
classroom and practical sessions and cover topics including snow and ice
sampling, the sea ice carbon cycle, gas flux measurements and theory, nutrient
cycles, primary and bacterial production, and biogeochemical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.