* 2210046
* SBIR Phase I:  A real-time precision nutrient analysis and management system for hydroponic farming operations
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Kumar Agrawal, ENVONICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to promote the viability and sustainability of small-to-medium
indoor, urban, and controlled environment agriculture (CEA) farms. As the global
population grows to 10 billion by 2050, the agriculture industry will need to
produce 70% more food using only 5% more land. Indoor farming can make a
significant contribution to meet this demand sustainably. Indoor farmers are
also seasonally and geographically independent, which means they can help meet
demands for locally produced fresh foods and are protected from extreme weather
events. These farms primarily use soilless growing methods, such as hydroponics,
that currently suffer from critical needs for efficient and affordable methods
to monitor and manage nutrients and water in order to be financially viable and
environmentally sustainable. The proposed project provides an innovative
solution for nutrient management in hydroponic farming, thereby lowering the
costs, increasing the yield potential, and supporting the viability of such
farms. By supporting the expansion of the national hydroponics industry, this
project will increase the local production of and expand access to fresh
produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop a nutrient
management system to provide CEA farmers with real-time information about the
nutrients in the growth solution of their crops. The proposed solution will
utilize ion-selective electrode (ISE) technology and a decision support system
powered by machine learning (ML). This project will focus on the critically
needed engineering and data analytics research and development to de-risk major
technical challenges in the development of the nutrient management system,
providing proof-of-feasibility. The key objectives of this project are to: 1)
design a special chamber for the sensors to minimize the interference and
increase accuracy, 2) validate the feasibility and accuracy of this new design
in a greenhouse setting, 3) develop a predictive algorithm to automatically
calibrate the sensors, and 4) measure and predict deficiencies in leafy greens
production: collecting empirical evidence of nutrient deficiency to train ML
models to identify, and ultimately, predict a deficiency prior to when it is
observable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.