* 2210390
* New Pathways Connecting Theory and Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lawrence Hall, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Hitoshi Murayama and
Lawrence Hall at the University of California,
Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of the Large Hadron Collider,
advances in observational cosmology, and progress in underground experiments,
modern high-energy physics has entered a data-rich era. As part of their
research, Professors Murayama and Hall aim to investigate and create critical
ties between theory and experiment by building new theories, working out their
predictions, and proposing new ideas for experiments to test. This research is
guided by the goal of uncovering deep secrets that span from the smallest scales
of particles and strings to the largest scales of the Universe, including
collider physics, dark matter, neutrinos, quark flavor, and observational
cosmology. This research is therefore in the national interest, furthering the
development of fundamental science within the United States. This research is
also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professors Murayama and
Hall will train graduate and undergraduate students who will collaborate with
them on their research, and will also reach out to high-school teachers and
their students through the QuarkNet framework. They will also give public
lectures, many of which will be recorded and made available on YouTube. Finally,
they will continue their significant leadership roles within the broader
particle-physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Murayama's funded research has two major components. The first is physics beyond
the Standard Model, in particular building models of dark matter, dark energy,
supersymmetry, and neutrinos, and studying their phenomenologies. By contrast,
the second focuses on formal aspects of field theory, in particular its
mathematical structure and its relevance to other areas of physics. Professor
Hall will investigate several different new ideas concerning the possibility of
a heavy QCD axion, possible gravity waves from late reheating, cosmological
implications of Higgs parity, and implications of parity restoration for
neutrino masses and flavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.