* 2210291
* The Energy Landscape for Folding and Function of Biomolecules: From Proteins to Chromatin
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2027
* USD 725,000.00

This project focuses on developing models to explore chromatin structure and
dynamics, and protein complex assembly. Chromatin is the material of which the
chromosomes of organisms other than bacteria are composed. This project will
create computational models needed to investigate the genome organization in
different species and phases of the cell cycle. At the biomolecular level, this
project will integrate structural models and computer simulations to understand
structure, dynamics, and function of large biomolecular complexes, like
chromatin. Broader Impacts of this project include the development of publicly
available software/web-servers for protein and chromatin folding, dynamics, and
function. Emphasis is also given to training, particularly of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the project goals,
models will be developed to explore chromatin structure and dynamics and protein
complex assembly. In the genome architecture research, the Minimal Chromatin
Model (MiChroM) will be expanded to determine new parameters necessary to
accommodate several different species. Going beyond the current parameters that
have been optimized for chromosomes at the interphase, new parameters will be
needed to explore chromosome structural ensembles across the cell cycle, going
from the interphase through the metaphase. Predictions of these models will be
validated against microscopy data. Also, full nucleus simulations will
investigate chromosome ensembles in the context of all other chromosomes and
also the influence of nuclear lamina-chromatin interactions. The current
chromatin model will be generalized to go beyond just a few types and subtypes
and predict these chromosome 3D structural ensembles with a completely general
energy function; a direct inversion of Hi-C data. Such generalization will be
needed to understand features that are not currently considered by standard
MiChroM and to investigate genomes of species that show little compartment
formation on their chromosomal structures. The second aspect of this project
will be on the investigation of large protein complexes using a combination of
Structure-Based Models (SBM) and Direct Coupling Analysis (DCA) to predict their
global structural and functional landscape. These results will be integrated
with physical simulations that are needed to understand detailed energetics of
local structural conformations and quantitative predictions of the transitions
between these conformations. Although the research will focus on Structural
Maintenance Chromosome (SMC) protein complexes and the Spyke protein in SARS-
CoV-2, this strategy may also be applied to several other large biomolecular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Physics of Living
Systems in the Division of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.