* 2210686
* Exploring and Solidifying Functional Calibration of Computer Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Derek Brown, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Scientists and engineers rely on computer models to study complex physical
systems when physical experiments are financially expensive, time-intensive, or
potentially harmful to public health or the environment. For example, computer
models are used to predict the performance of large wind turbine blades,
estimate the time to evacuate burning buildings, and model thermal conductivity
for nuclear fuels. Computer model calibration is the process of comparing
computer model output to physical data so that the model can be tuned to
represent reality as faithfully as possible. This project will explore a version
of calibration known as functional calibration, in which the appropriate values
of the calibration inputs change with different experimental settings. This
research will equip practitioners with well-grounded tools to help them better
understand the systems they are studying. With these tools, practitioners can
improve computer codes and make more precise predictions. Further, this project
will provide opportunities for graduate students and under-represented
minorities to participate in innovative research at the intersection of
statistics, applied mathematics, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator (PI) aims to develop novel Bayesian models, theory, and
algorithms for functional computer model calibration. The first aim is to use
tools from the variable selection literature to distinguish functional
parameters from constants and to learn new physics when calibration parameters
have physical meaning. The project also seeks to characterize the
identifiability of functional parameters more completely in the presence of
model bias. The identifiability work will encompass the so-called “mixed”
calibration in which a computer model contains both constant and functional
parameters simultaneously, optimal basis function representations, and relevant
asymptotics. The PI will study the parameters from the infinite-dimensional
perspective rather than with discretization, allowing for the use of the
calculus of variations when deriving necessary and sufficient conditions for
identifiability, as well as providing insight into properties that would be
missed with a finite-dimensional treatment. Further, the PI will wed the
Kennedy-O’Hagan model, orthogonal priors, scaled Gaussian processes, and related
advents to calibration methodology, with advances in active subspaces to
facilitate feasible and meaningful calibration with extremely high-dimensional
models. The methods will be illustrated in both simulated settings and models
of, for example, plastic deformation of materials and building energy use. The
PI will develop software compatible with existing packages, thereby maximizing
the accessibility and impact of this work. This project is jointly funded by the
Statistics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.