* 2210420
* Defects and Extended Objects in Quantum Field Theory and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Yifan Wang, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Yifan Wang at New York
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matter rarely appears in nature as a pure
substance. More commonly it exists as a complex mixture of multiple components.
In cases when the matter is almost homogenous, the remaining irregularities or
discontinuities are known as defects. Examples of physically interesting defects
range from those encountered in daily life such as fat droplets suspended in
milk and impurity atoms in metals, to extreme scenarios such as heavy particles
in an exotic state of matter known as the quark-gluon plasma where immense heat
and pressure crush the nuclei to make a soup of elementary particles. It has
been found that defects have profound consequences for the physical behavior of
the materials, give rise to novel phase transitions and critical phenomena, and
provide sensitive probes for detecting phases of matter. An important challenge
in theoretical physics is to develop tools to analyze defects and their
properties. Quantum field theory, which is arguably the most successful physical
theory for systems with a large number of constituent elements, provides the
natural framework to describe defects. However much of the success of quantum
field theory dwells on the fundamental principles of symmetry and locality, and
to incorporate defects requires a refinement of these principles. This in turn
uncovers an abundance of intricate mathematical structures to be understood.
Professor Wang aims to advance the understanding of defects in quantum field
theory by pursuing the following questions: How do we predict the effects from
the defects? Are there universal patterns in the properties of defects? Are
there principles behind how defects behave? Addressing these questions would
promote the progress of science and advance the national interest by potentially
discovering and understanding new physical laws. Professor Wang's work will also
produce broader impacts in the form of the development of new courses, training
undergraduate and graduate physics students, as well as mentoring postdoctoral
researchers through collaborations on these projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Wang aims to pursue a thorough investigation of defects
in quantum field theory from multiple complementary angles. This includes
deriving universal constraints to delineate the landscape of admissible defects,
developing analytic tools to access defect observables and clarify their
features, and exploring generalized symmetries and anomalies from defects. By
the celebrated holographic duality, defects in ordinary quantum many-body
systems are also closely related to extended objects in quantum gravity, known
as branes (such as D-branes in string theory). These branes are essential for
the consistency of quantum gravity at the non-perturbative level, but the
spectrum and dynamics of such branes remain under-explored. In parallel to his
field-theoretic exploration of defects, Professor Wang also plans to deduce
consequences for the non-perturbative branes in quantum gravity. To achieve the
aforementioned goals, a combination of techniques will be employed and further
developed along the way, including conformal bootstrap, topological field
theory, supersymmetry, integrability, and large-N limits. One immediate impact
of the proposed work will be an integrated perspective of the extended operator
algebra in quantum field theory that incorporates defects, and an improved
understanding of renormalization-group flows in both high-energy and condensed-
matter systems. Another promising outcome would be a systematic analysis of
(non-supersymmetric) D-branes in string theory and more general extended objects
in quantum gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.