* 2210562
* String Theory and Quantum Field Theory: From the Planck Scale to the Hubble Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jacques Distler, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 280,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Elena C치ceres, Jacques
Distler, Willy Fischler, Can Kilic, and Sonia Paban at the University of Texas
at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of Professors C치ceres, Distler,
Fischler, Kilic, and Paban is focused on discovering and understanding the laws
that govern the universe at the most fundamental level. This research utilizes
diverse and multi-pronged approaches to achieving this mission. These include
studying the extensions to the so-called Standard Model, which governs the
behavior of the elementary particles, and the associated experimental signatures
of such extensions. These also include the study of early-universe cosmology and
present-day astrophysics, and exploring the physics of black holes, which may
shed light on how a quantum theory of gravity may be formulated. Finally, this
research also includes studies in relativistic quantum field theory (the
mathematical language in which theories of the elementary particles are
expressed) and string theory (which aims to unify all of the different particles
and forces in nature). Since the early days of modern physics, the United States
has led the effort in the discovery of these fundamental laws. Therefore, more
research in this direction is in the national interest, and Professors C치ceres,
Distler, Fischler, Kilic, and Paban are committed to making further research
contributions in these directions. In addition, this research will involve
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers and provide scientific training
that should serve these junior scientists well throughout their careers both
within and outside academia. Finally, these professors make science outreach a
priority. They regularly deliver public lectures, organize activities to
increase science literacy, and foster the participation of underrepresented
minorities in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, many different
research areas are to be investigated as part of this research project.
Professor C치ceres will continue her work on quantum models that are holographic
duals of black holes. In particular, she will focus on observables that inform
us about the wormhole interior. Professor Distler will continue his exploration
of 4D N=2 superconformal field theories and their properties. He will expand on
his investigations of continuum QFTs exhibiting fractonic behavior and he will
study new defects in string theory. Professor Fischler will continue to work
with his students on quantum information in quantum gravity (using gauge-gravity
duality) and the use of the quantum Hall effect in the context of quantum
computation. He will continue to work on holographic spacetime and in particular
the quantum mechanics of de Sitter spacetime which he helped to pioneer twenty
years ago. This is particularly timely in light of renewed interest on the
nature of quantum de Sitter space-time. Professor Kilic will explore the
experimental signatures of new particles that couple to the Standard Model
through minimal interactions, called 'portals'. He will also apply machine-
learning techniques to extend the reach of searches at the Large Hadron Collider
to new physics scenarios that are challenging to discover. He will study models
of dark matter that can help address discrepancies in existing measurements of
cosmological parameters. Professor Paban's work will focus on new cosmic
inflation models in light of new insights from string theory and the
stabilization of internal moduli. Particular emphasis will be placed on the
production of gravitational waves and primordial black holes in these inflation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.