* 2210341
* Probing TeV Physics with neV Neutrons:  Precision Measurements of Beta Decays and Electric Dipole Moments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Chen-Yu Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,079,069.00

The research activities supported by this award are driven by the desire to
answer the fundamental question, "What are the properties of the early
universe?" It is known that hydrogen, helium, and lithium were produced shortly
after the Big Bang. However, theoretical predictions of the amount of helium
resulting from the Big Bang are highly dependent on the lifetime of the free
neutron. Recent experiments using what is called the “bottle technique” have
reached record-breaking precision. Measurements using a different technique
differ from the bottle measurements by a surprising amount. With support from
this award, this PI will lead a new measurement of the neutron’s lifetime by
measuring beam neutrons decaying in flight. Another decay experiment using
tritium provides a promising way to determine the absolute mass of the nearly-
weightless neutrinos. This project precisely measures the cyclotron motion of
the electrons emitted when the tritium undergoes beta decay. This provides
another key element of Big-Bang nucleosynthesis. Finally, to understand why the
Big Bang left the universe with the surplus of matter over antimatter that we
observe today, laboratory experiments are in progress to search for a crucial
clue, an extremely small separation of the positive and negative electric
charges within the neutron. Students with broad backgrounds will be mentored in
scientific and technical skills while participating in these research
activities. In particular, high school students from less affluent communities
surrounding Los Alamos are invited to participate in summer physics
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs, in the nuclear physics group at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, will carry out these research
activities in experimental neutron physics and fundamental symmetry tests. The
work includes: (1) Continuation of the UCNtau experiment data-taking and
analysis, and in parallel, developing the UCNtau+ upgrade to push the neutron
lifetime precision towards 0.1 s. (2) Collaboration on the beam-lifetime
experiment, by constructing the Alpha-Gamma neutron calibration device, in order
to work towards resolving the outstanding 10-second discrepancy between the
values of the neutron lifetime measured using the beam and bottle methods. (3)
Application of the magneto-gravitational trap, successfully used in the UCNtau
experiment, to trap tritium atoms in large numbers in preparation for the
measurement the absolute mass of the neutrino in the Project-8 experiment. (4)
Preparation of the neutron electric dipole moment (nEDM) experiment at LANL to
start data-taking in 2023, and continuing construction of the polarized helium-3
system for the nEDM experiment at the Oak Ridge Spallation Neutron
Source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.