* 2210734
* Nonparametric Methodology for Learning from People: Inference, Algorithms, and Optimality
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Cheng Mao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 121,246.00

Learning from people represents a new and exciting paradigm for research in
statistics and data science and is useful both in understanding behavioral
patterns (for example in marketing) and for informing interventions (for example
in education). Data from humans can also be elicited to inform various
downstream tasks, with crowdsourcing being routinely used to collect data across
applications spanning bioinformatics, epidemiology, computer vision, and
environmental modeling. A common characteristic of such data is its scale and
noisiness; having flexible and interpretable models for such data is broadly
useful in downstream decision-making. The investigators aim to develop and
thoroughly study flexible classes of models and methods for drawing inferences
from large-scale data collected from people in a variety of such
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigations will focus on
developing three key facets of such nonparametric methodology: (a)
Computationally efficient, assumption-lean methods to fit expressive models to
data; (b) Equipping models to integrate application-specific information in a
general-purpose fashion; and (c) Developing models and methods that accommodate
dynamically varying data streams. The research formulates a host of theoretical
and methodological questions whose solutions would constitute fundamental
progress in nonparametric inference, while touching upon practical and timely
issues such as fairness in ranking systems. This project will also provide
training and research opportunities for the next generation of data scientists
by encouraging them to model the entire data analysis pipeline, from data
collection to inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.