* 2210952
* SBIR Phase II:  Sensor-based bra to measure breast milk output and monitor changes in breast volume before and after breastfeeding or breast pumping
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Adriana Vazquez, LILU, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,997.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project impacts mothers and babies during the breastfeeding
period. Although breastfeeding benefits for the mother and the baby are
recognized worldwide, many mothers are unable to attain their breastfeeding
targets due to common discontinuance problems. The proposed solution may
increase breastfeeding rates by supporting mothers who are breastfeeding or
breast pumping, providing them with resources to sustain breastfeeding. Access
to valuable information on the volume of breastmilk expressed could enable
mothers to carefully monitor their milk production. At the same time, it may
allow the prediction of clogged milk ducts, avoiding serious complications such
as breast engorgement or lactational mastitis that can be avoided with early
intervention. This intervention could prevent not only early discontinuance in
breastfeeding but also promote increased health for mothers by reducing the
risks of disease. The monitor may also impact babies’ health since breastfeeding
is recommended to achieve optimal growth and development. Further, the proposed
monitor may provide the scientific community with data to enable research into
different aspects of mothers’ health, for example, determining the reasons for
the formation of mastitis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may lead to a new
paradigm in lactational health for the baby and the mother. There is an
important need to meet breastfeeding objectives by reducing discontinuances and
reducing common conditions such as lactational mastitis. The proposed solution
aims to increase breastfeeding rates by providing mothers with a comfortable and
effective method for measuring the milk volume expressed and for determining if
milk ducts are clogged. Research objectives include: (1) sourcing and testing
fabrics for the bra from multiple vendors; (2) designing and developing of the
embedded system and the bra, so that will be able to accommodate a wide range of
breast shapes and sizes; (3) designing and developing mobile applications and
algorithms, which will include data analytics and prediction; and (4) optimizing
the bra and mobile applications. The project could result in a smart, all-day
wearable, comfortable garment designed for breastfeeding mothers that is paired
with a mobile app to show analysis and results adapted to each
mother.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.