* 2210439
* Statistical Modeling for Complex Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Elizaveta Levina, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Recent advances in technology have led to an explosion of data being collected
in many areas of application. Many of these data have complex structures, in the
form of text, images, video, audio, streaming data, etc, for example. This
project focuses on one important type of complex data structure, networks, or
graphs. Such data are common in diverse engineering and scientific areas,
including biology, medicine, sociology, computer science, electrical
engineering, economics, and so on. While there has been extensive research on
networks, much of it only deals with the presence/absence of pairwise
relationships. However, real-world relationships are often more complicated. The
current research program aims to go beyond the pairwise presence/absence
relationship and develop statistical methods to characterize and model more
complex network structures. The research program will make significant
contributions in several areas, including Statistics, Biology, Computer Science,
Healthcare, Electrical Engineering, Medicine, Physics, Psychology, and
Sociology. The investigators plan to train STEM workforce members by mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students, developing a new course, and organizing
interdisciplinary workshops. The educational program also includes substantial
initiatives in maintaining a research group with a significant portion of women
and continuing to actively recruit and support a diverse group of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to develop new statistical
methodologies and associated theory that incorporate higher-order structures
into network modeling. Such data structures are becoming increasingly common in
various fields. Specifically, the investigators aim to study three different but
related problems: a) leveraging subgraphs or higher-order structures in a
network and developing new community detection methods for networks with
dependent edges; b) developing novel latent space models and theory that
accommodate the well-known balance theory, i.e., "the friend of my friend is my
friend" and "the enemy of my enemy is my friend," for signed networks; c)
developing new latent space models and theory for the less studied, though
commonly encountered, polyadic relations that involve more than two nodes
simultaneously, i.e., hypergraphs, using determinantal point
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.