* 2210399
* Redefining Genuine Multi-Party Nonlocality for Quantum Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Peter Bierhorst, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 248,842.00

Quantum nonlocality is a fascinating phenomenon. To observe it, one makes
simultaneous measurements at two or more locations, potentially separated by a
great distance, of tiny quantum particles such as photons that have been
previously entangled. These measurements reveal patterns that cannot be
explained by any possible local pre-existing properties of the particles – the
particles appear to be responding to the measurements in a random, but instantly
coordinated, manner. And while quantum nonlocality is reasonably well understood
for measurements at two separate locations of two entangled particles, it is
less well understood for three or more separated measurements of multiple
entangled particles. The work of this project is to better understand quantum
nonlocality in this multiple-particle setting – in what ways is it fundamentally
different from the two-location variant? In addition to building our
understanding of this fascinating phenomenon, this work has significance for
quantum communication and cryptography protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
operational perspectives on quantum networks have recently contributed to
compelling redefinitions of what types of nonlocal effects should be considered
genuinely multipartite nonlocal – that is, what types of effects transcend the
two-location form of nonlocality in a fundamental manner. This project aims to
precisely characterize the patterns of experimental statistics that are
consistent with each of these various new definitions of genuine multipartite
nonlocality, and to refine interpretations of the phenomena that satisfy one of
these definitions but not another. This will lead to a better understanding of
potential experiments that could exhibit the various forms of genuine
multipartite nonlocality. This new knowledge will be applied to quantum
information protocols such as the distribution of secret cryptographic key to
multiple parties, analyzing how the new definitions of genuine multi-party
nonlocality relate to the secrecy and effectiveness of such
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.