* 2210757
* Using Hothouse Climates to Generalize Understanding of Convection, Clouds, and Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Robin Wordsworth, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 396,217.00

Convection – the turbulent motion of ascending air parcels – is one of the
hardest processes to capture in global models of Earth’s atmosphere. Yet, it is
critically important to our planet’s past, present, and future climate. Because
Earth’s present-day convection occurs over a narrow range of conditions, to
reach a deep understanding of this phenomenon, there is a strong need for
additional modeling and theoretical work that probes conditions beyond our
current climate. In this project, a sophisticated model that can resolve
convection and cloud formation directly will be used to perform investigations
over a wide range of conditions. The model results will yield new insights into
climate conditions on Earth in the distant past and on other planets.
Importantly, they will also be used to “stress-test” existing theories of
convection and its influence on planetary climate. The research focuses on very
hot atmospheres (as occurred during Earth’s distant past) that are distinguished
by their high humidity. Whereas tropical air in today’s climate contains at most
a few percent of water vapor, this project will simulate atmospheres that are so
warm that water vapor becomes a major atmospheric constituent. It is currently
unknown how cloud updraft speeds, areal coverage, and large-scale circulations
such as hurricanes behave under such conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will offer a new view into the behavior of convection and climate
during exotic periods of Earth’s history, such as the aftermath of global
Snowball glaciation events. Such glimpses of “alien” versions of our own planet
are powerful tools for piquing curiosity and drawing students into geoscience.
The investigator will leverage an existing relationship with the Harvard Museum
of Natural History to communicate research findings to the public and broaden
engagement from the diverse populations that visit the
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.