* 2210797
* Crumple Dynamics and Interactions Mediating Elastic Deformations of Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* James Hanna, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2025
* USD 455,193.00

The elastic deformation of thin plate and shell structures at many length
scales, from cell membranes to clothing to aircraft panels to storage tanks, is
characterized by the localization of stretching and bending. This is often
simply called “crumpling”, and the small regions of large deformations
“crumples”. Crumples are observed to play an important role in enabling the
large-scale deformations of thin structures, often through rapid transient
dynamic behavior that is currently not well documented or understood. This award
will facilitate the study of these fundamental deformation processes through
experiments on a simple model system and two different theoretical approaches.
Insights from this work will aid in the modeling and control of complex
phenomena in multi-scale elastic systems that are prohibitively complex to
simulate in real time through the development of reduced-order models, e.g., the
aero-thermo-elastic phenomena in aerospace applications. Results will also be
applicable to other branches of structural mechanics, compliant mechanisms, soft
robotics, and some biological systems. The award will support a postdoctoral
researcher and train a group of graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
structural mechanics, with the latter involving international exchanges with
collaborators. The PI and students will also co-develop an education module for
a summer science and engineering program for young women in local middle and
high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to quantify
and model the meso-scale mechanics of localized elastic regions (crumples) in
deforming plates, focusing on the role these localized crumples play in
mediating global deformations through both quasistatic and rapid transient
dynamics. The work builds on preliminary experiments demonstrating phenomena
such as sequences of ordered patterns, nucleation of individual crumples, and
crumple-crumple or crumple-boundary interactions. Two theoretical approaches
will be employed. One will leverage ideas from structural mechanics and pattern-
forming systems, where “snaking” transitions occur between localized patterns in
continua. Another will take a novel particle-level description of crumples as
individual discrete entities that can interact with a background curvature
field, with each other, and with boundaries. These approaches will be
accompanied by quantitative experimental measurements of forces on, and
curvatures of, buckled sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.