* 2210152
* Collaborative Research: Interface enabled plasticity in high-strength Co-based intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xinghang Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2025
* USD 463,168.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of high strength and high
deformability materials is critical for next-generation structural applications
that can transform the national defense systems and industries such as
aerospace, automotive, and energy. Intermetallics, with their remarkable
properties of high mechanical strength and high melting temperatures, are
excellent candidates for these applications. However, conventional
intermetallics are very brittle at room temperature, which adversely impacts
their potential as structural materials. Although intermetallics have been the
subject of active research in recent decades, achieving room temperature
plasticity while retaining high strength has been a major challenge. Prior
approaches to improve plasticity in intermetallics have primarily focused on
improving fracture resistance by grain refinement, improving grain boundary
cohesive strength and introducing second phase particles. The investigators’
preliminary studies reveal that CoAl nanocomposites with unconventional thick
grain boundaries exhibit ultra-high strength and high deformability. However,
the fundamental mechanisms underpinning these remarkable properties remain
unclear. Through the synergistic combination of nanofabrication, in situ
nanomechanical testing and atomistic modeling, they elucidate the deformation
mechanisms in core/shell nanocomposites at an atomistic level. The close
collaboration among the investigators enable graduate and undergraduate research
students to develop a wholesome foundation in both experiments and simulations
through biweekly videoconferences, and annual visits to counterpart
institutions. Graduate students also access advanced microscopy facilities
housed within the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies managed by Los Alamos
National Lab and Sandia National Lab. The investigators recruit minority
students for the proposed project. The specimens fabricated from this project
are tested at NASA’s International Space Station.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to understand the mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline (NC)
intermetallics with a novel core/shell architecture that endows them with
simultaneous high strength and unprecedented deformability at room temperature.
The investigators explore the deformation mechanisms in core/shell composites
via integrated in situ nanoindentation and atomistic simulations to elucidate
grain boundary dominated plasticity in nanocrystalline intermetallics, quantify
the impact of thick interfaces on strengthening and deformability of CoAl
intermetallics in core/shell nanocomposites, and understand the high temperature
deformation mechanisms of core/shell nanocomposites by combining in situ
microcompression tests in SEM and molecular dynamics simulations. The research
program significantly advances the understanding of the deformation mechanisms,
design and fabrication of intermetallics with unconventional core/shell
architecture for critical structural applications. This work furnishes atomistic
insights into “thick” grain boundary as novel motifs for extraordinary
mechanical properties that open up avenues for the rational design of other
intermetallics through grain boundary engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.