* 2210013
* Collaborative Research: Advances in Quantum Control and Noise Mitigation on A Highly Accurate Testbed
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pablo Poggi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 284,063.00

Quantum technologies use the full power of quantum mechanics to process
information in ways that go beyond the capabilities of even the most powerful
classical supercomputers. It is envisioned that such machines would propel
development of both high tech materials and pharmaceuticals, and also of basic
research in areas like high energy and condensed matter physics. While general
purpose quantum computers are still years in the future, steady development in
quantum hardware have brought us to the era of Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum
(NISQ) devices. The key challenge in this era is to tame the errors and
imperfections hindering the performance of these devices to allow them to
develop the necessary complexity to achieve quantum advantage over their
classical counterparts. This project seeks to develop and test new techniques to
both control these devices and to shield them from noise, and to better
understand their fundamental limitations. Such understanding is essential to
accelerate the application of quantum technologies to problems in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a collaborative effort
with both experimental and theoretical components. Its main goal is to develop
and test new techniques for quantum control and noise mitigation in quantum
processors, with an eye to future applications in NISQ simulators. For testing
purposes, the group will employ a Small, Highly Accurate Quantum (SHAQ)
processor based on the internal spin states of individual cesium atoms. By way
of quantum optimal control, the SHAQ processor is universally programmable in a
moderately-sized but nontrivial 16-dimensional Hilbert space, allowing access to
arbitrary state preparations, unitary maps, and measurements in any basis. A
planned upgrade will increase both the accuracy and duration of quantum
simulations that can be performed to state-of-the art levels. This positions it
as an ideal real-world experimental testbed that can be compared directly
against theoretical models. Key research thrusts will include the simulation of
deep quantum circuits and Floquet systems, studies of the role played by quantum
chaos and dynamical instability in the proliferation of errors, techniques for
noise tailoring and quantum error mitigation, and studies of Floquet Time
Crystals in both theory and experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.