* 2210366
* Collaborative Research NSF-ANR: Mechanisms of Terminal Erythroid Enucleation
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Zhangli Peng, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2026
* USD 81,272.00

This award aims to describe the physical mechanisms at play in enucleation
during mammalian erythropoiesis, which is the process of generation of red blood
cells (RBCs). The objective is to elucidate the role of the mechanical
constraints in the bone marrow on the extrusion and detachment of the nucleus of
the erythroid precursor. This role is currently poorly understood, which holds
back progress in fundamental studies of erythropoiesis. This project will not
only advance our fundamental understanding of erythroid enucleation but provide
new knowledge for improving in vitro red blood cell production by engineering
mechanical environments to overcome ineffective enucleation. This project will
be the first to connect the internal and external forces that drive erythroid
enucleation, and to incorporate mechanosensing of the cell. There are several
barriers to reveal the mechanisms of intrinsic and extrinsic enucleation cues.
First, it is difficult to fabricate an in vitro device that mimics the crowded
environment of the bone marrow with extremely small inter-endothelial gaps that
allows live imaging of enucleation. Second, the computational modeling for
quantifying forces is challenging due to the strong interactions in small gaps
and the prediction of forces across molecular to cellular scales. The
interdisciplinary team of scientists in this project (consisting of three
leading groups: a biologist in erythropoiesis at Northwestern University, a
physicist in microfluidics in CNRS Marseille, France, and an engineer in
multiscale modeling at the University of Illinois at Chicago) is uniquely
positioned to overcome such barriers and elucidate the mechanisms of intrinsic
and extrinsic enucleation cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have
practical impact in the biomedical field, such as transfusion medicine in which
rare blood types often have limited supplies. The bottleneck of in vivo RBC
production is the ineffective enucleation, and the knowledge obtained from this
study will help overcome this bottleneck and could potentially revolutionize the
industry of blood supply. The project will also have educational and training
outcomes, as results and techniques obtained from this project will be
incorporated into courses the Principal Investigators teach. One PhD student and
two postdoctoral fellows will be trained through the support of this project.
This collaborative US/France project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche, where NSF funds the
US investigators and ANR funds the partner in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.