* 2210214
* Collaborative Research: Dry Rifting In the Albertine-Rhino graben (DRIAR), Uganda
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Estella Atekwana, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2024
* USD 505,804.00

The Earth’s surface is constantly moving and changing shape. In some places,
like East Africa, a continent stretches to the point of breaking, forming
continental rifts that, after a period of time, can form new oceans. Numerous
studies show that continental rifts develop along weakened zones caused by deep
intrusions of magma. Some continental rifts, however, form without evidence of
magma intrusions and are known as magma-poor or "dry" rifts. In this project, an
investigation of the East African Rift System will take place along the Northern
Western Branch located in Uganda, East Africa where magma-poor rifting is taking
place. A wide range of geophysical, geological, and geochemical observations
will be collected, and numerical modeling of the region will be performed to
advance our understanding of how these magma-poor rifts form and evolve. In
conjunction with the scientific investigation, ]Ugandan partners will be engaged
in data collection techniques. Ugandan and US graduate students will
participate, underrepresented students mentored, and several open-access data
sets and model products shall be developed. Societal implications of this study
include advances in rifting models used for hydrocarbon exploration, improved
estimates of CO2 flux into the atmosphere that occurs during continental
rifting, and new insights into seismic hazards associated with active faulting.
The scientific results of this project will be communicated, in part, through
short educational videos geared towards public audiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental rifting is an integral component of the plate
tectonic paradigm, yet speculation remains about the physical processes involved
in magma-poor/-dry rifting. The goal of this project is to apply a combination
of geophysical, geological, geochemical and geodynamic techniques to the
Northern Western Branch of the East African Rift System in Uganda to test 3
hypotheses: (1) in magma-rich rifts, strain is accommodated through lithospheric
weakening from melt, (2) in magma-poor rifts, melt is present below the surface
and weakens the lithosphere such that strain is accommodated during upper
crustal extension, and (3) in magma-poor rifts, there is no melt at depth and
strain is accommodated along pre-existing structures such as inherited
compositional, structural, and rheological lithospheric heterogeneities.
Observational methods in this project include: passive seismic to constrain
lithospheric structure and flow patterns; gravity to constrain variations in
crustal and lithospheric thickness; magnetics to constrain the thermal structure
of the upper crust; magnetotellurics to constrain lithospheric thickness and the
presence of melt; GNSS to constrain surface motions, extension rates, and help
characterize mantle flow; geologic mapping to document the geometry and
kinematics of active faults; seismic reflection analyses of intra-rift faults to
document temporal strain migration; geochemistry to quantify mantle-derived
fluids in hot springs and gases; and geodynamic modeling to develop new models
of magma-poor rifting processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.