* 2210933
* Superior Nonlinear Optical Single Crystals and An Open-Source Modeling Package for Classical and Quantum Light Generation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Venkatraman Gopalan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2025
* USD 485,000.00

Nontechnical Description. Lasers have transformed the science and technological
landscape since the first was built in 1960. Lasers enable fundamental science
from the atomic scale to astronomical and have numerous applications, such as
information storage and retrieval, medical imaging and surgery, environmental
monitoring, and aviation, to name a few. For such a broad array of uses, it is
important to span a broad electromagnetic spectrum of frequencies (colors),
ranging from x-rays and the ultraviolet, through the visible and the infrared
and beyond. However, lasers are designed to emit light only within a few narrow
windows of frequencies. So, how can such a broad tunable electromagnetic
spectrum be obtained? The answer lies in the field of nonlinear optics, where
specialized materials combine and split photons of various colors to generate
new photons with different colors, a process called nonlinear frequency
conversion or harmonic generation. We are now at the threshold of a new era of
quantum communications that employs quantum entanglement of two photons that
Einstein called “spooky action at a distance.” Such secure internet lines are
considered critical for national security, from protecting power grids,
distribution networks for water and food, and the financial system. Entangled
photons are generated by splitting a photon into two using nonlinear optical
crystals. This needs nonlinear optical crystals superior to those presently in
use. In particular, there is a lack of materials that function in the infrared
and the ultraviolet. The project will address the grand materials challenge of
finding new nonlinear optical crystals with superior properties. The PI will
also communicate the excitement and fundamentals of these amazing optical and
quantum phenomena and work to help develop a diverse, able workforce to meet
these technology challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. The
central goal of this project is to synthesize and characterize nonlinear optical
single crystals with compositions that optimize the highest second order
nonlinear optical coefficients with the largest transparency towards efficient
frequency conversion. The project has two primary thrusts. First, under the
theme of Beyond Powders towards Single Crystals, investigators will perform
theory-guided identification, synthesis, and comprehensive linear and nonlinear
optical tensors determination of the most promising nonlinear optical single
crystals suggested by theory and experimental literature on powders. The second
thrust is on Nonlinear Modeling and Light Frequency Conversion. In
characterizing such higher ranked tensor properties in nonlinear optics,
accurate modeling of the experimental data is critical; analytical modeling
tools for this are currently absent. The project is developing an open-source
code for predicting and accurately modeling the experimental nonlinear optical
response from these crystals. Nonlinear frequency conversion devices are being
explored for the most promising crystal compositions. The project is working
towards demonstrating at least a dozen new single crystals, as well developing
as an open-source modeling package. The project funds the training of two
graduate and one undergraduate student every year towards a diverse and
inclusive workforce in the area of optical materials and technologies. The
students have an opportunity to learn and develop crystal growth as well as a
full suite of nonlinear optical characterization and modeling tools. Strong
outreach and engagement with underrepresented student groups occurs through
engagement with partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.