* 2210938
* Collaborative Research/EAGER: Toward Long-Distance Ocean and Seismic Sensing on Optical Telecommunications Infrastructure
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Leo Hollberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,716.00

The PIs request EAGER funding to test the feasibility of making undersea
observations of seismic and oceanic processes across ocean basins on existing
telecommunications cables. The project will provide partial support for two
graduate students &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to compare three fiber-
optical methods, Ultra-stable Laser Interferometry (ULI), Distributed Acoustic
Sensing (DAS) and a long-range polarization-based method simultaneously on a
telecom cable on the seafloor of Puget Sound, in Saratoga Passage, between
Whidbey and Camano Island. The physics linking geophysics and ULI signals and
other new techniques, like Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) and the new long-
range polarization-based method is limited and needs to be investigated further.
There havenâ€™t been field demonstrations showing the potential capability to
resolve signals from earthquakes, tidal signals, or whale vocalizations. The
current installation gives the PIs an ideal opportunity to compare the three
fiber-optical methods simultaneously on a single cable with individual seismic
signals arriving at various angles and varying tidal currents. These
measurements would provide the first data on relative sensitivities and provide
preliminary data to support future NSF proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.