* 2210182
* Quantum Field Theory for Topological Phases of Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Shu-Heng Shao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Shu-Heng Shao at Stony
Brook University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry has proven, time and again, to
be the fundamental guiding principle in theoretical physics. Applications range
from the spacetime symmetry in Einstein's theory of special relativity to the
rotational symmetry in the quantum-mechanical description of the hydrogen atom
and to the classification of the different phases of matter. Symmetry is one of
the few universally applicable tools in analyzing quantum systems with strong
interactions, and it often leads to far-reaching dynamical consequences. In
recent years, the notion of symmetry has been generalized in several different
directions, with interdisciplinary applications in high-energy physics,
condensed-matter physics, mathematics, and quantum information theory. Professor
Shao aims to develop a modern theoretical framework to discuss these new
symmetries and uncover hidden symmetries in a diverse set of physical systems.
Research along this line advances the national interest by reinforcing
fundamental research in the United States and addressing one of the most
fundamental and basic issues in the sciences, namely the role of symmetries.
This project is also expected to have signiicant broader impacts. Professor Shao
will mentor postdoctoral researchers through collaborations on proposed research
projects. He also plans to give public lectures and organize summer schools
based on his research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Shao
will focus on the interplay between three major kinds of generalized global
symmetries: subsystem symmetries, higher-form symmetries, and non-invertible
symmetries. Subsystem and higher-form symmetries are novel symmetries that do
not act uniformly on the whole physical system, while non-invertible symmetries
are associated with symmetry transformations that cannot be undone. Professor
Shao will investigate these symmetries within the context of quantum field
theory and lattice models. Within the context of subsystem symmetries, he will
apply these symmetries to a new quantum phase of matter, the so-called "fracton"
phase, and extend the framework of quantum field theory to describe the
continuum limit of fractons. He will also study new anomalies associated with
these generalized symmetries and derive nontrivial constraints on
renormalization-group flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.