* 2210207
* Rubber aging at the microscopic scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tadanori Koga, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 399,881.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rubber tires are a key
component of the automotive supply chains and, as the only vehicle part that
touches the road, greatly contribute to vehicle safety and fuel efficiency.
According to recent reports, tires age faster in regions with high ambient
temperatures. While oxidation is also believed to play a critical role in the
aging phenomenon, it only occurs at the topmost surface of a tire that is in
contact with air. As oxidation and the hardening of a matrix rubber are not
primarily responsible for tire aging, it is therefore reasonable to focus on the
rubber-filler interface where both storage and dissipation energies of filled
rubbers are strongly localized. The key underlying component of the interfacial
phenomena is bound rubber that engages with the matrix rubber as well as
adjacent fillers. However, the multifaceted role of bound rubber in material
properties and durability remains unanswered. To address this gap, cross-linked
carbon black filled polybutadiene and silica filled polybutadiene systems will
be used as rational models. Artificially aging of model-filled rubbers in a
laboratory oven will be utilized to simulate the natural aging of the tire in
service. Thus, to understand the mechanism underlying rubber aging under the
driving conditions, the PI's group will integrate experimental and computational
multiscale, complementary measurements/analysis and derive necessary material
design insight for future transportation. Through collaborations across fields
in academia, industry, and national user facilities, this project further
fosters a wide range of broadening participation through curriculum development
and mentoring for graduate students, enhancement of research training of
undergraduate students, and K-12 outreach activities at local school science
fairs. The PI will embark on specific initiatives aimed at improving the
recruitment of underrepresented groups in collaboration with the Career Center
at the PI’s institute. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As oxidation and the hardening of a matrix rubber
are not primarily responsible for tire aging, it is therefore reasonable to
focus on the rubber-filler interface where both storage and dissipation energies
of filled rubbers are strongly localized. The key underlying component of the
interfacial phenomena is bound rubber that engages with the matrix rubber as
well as adjacent fillers. However, the multifaceted role of bound rubber in
material properties and durability remains unanswered. To address this gap,
cross-linked carbon black filled polybutadiene and silica filled polybutadiene
systems will be used as rational models. Artificially aging of model-filled
rubbers in a laboratory oven will be utilized to simulate the natural aging of
the tire in service. Neutron scattering/spectroscopy techniques with isotope-
labeling will provide insight into the structures and dynamics of bound rubber
buried in a matrix rubber. In addition, coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations will be performed to complement the experimental results and unravel
the details that are not accessible experimentally. In parallel, to mimic the
aging of a rotating tire under a driving condition, in operando X-ray photon
correlation spectroscopy measurements during oscillatory deformation will be
conducted. The experiments will provide simultaneous access to temporally- and
spatially resolved structures and dynamics of a filler network structure via
bound rubber–mediated bridges. These results will allow the establishment of the
microscopic criteria for measuring the degree of internal rubber failure in a
non-destructive manner. The integrated experimental-computational approach along
with the model rubbers will advance understanding of the structure-dynamics-
property relationship of aged rubbers and derive rich and complex physics and
material design insight on rubbers.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.