* 2210532
* Swirling Propulsion in Complex Fluids and Micro-Swimming Rheometry
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Manu Prakash, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 447,000.00

The movement of micro-organisms is often complicated by the complexity of the
fluids in which they reside. Many of the fluids (e.g., mucous) in which these
organisms “swim” contain large macromolecules such as proteins that limit
successful swimming. It is more difficult to swim through these “sticky” fluids.
It has recently been suggested theoretically that a type of microbial swimming
called “swirl” can create propulsion in complex liquids that would not be
possible in “simple,” less sticky fluids. Swirl is characterized by parts of the
body spinning around the axis of an axisymmetric body. Swirl is a key feature of
the swim stroke of many micro-organisms. This award will develop a novel micro-
robot that demonstrates the characteristics of swirl propulsion in complex
fluids and uses that propulsion to measure the properties of the surrounding
fluid. Thus, it is a dynamic sensor of complex fluid properties or a “swimming
rheometer”. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard rheometers are desktop devices where
fluid is brought to the device and the native environment of the fluid
application is reproduced in the device. The state of stress in the shear flow
of complex fluids requires the measurement of at least three material properties
as a function of the shear rate in the fluid. The goal in the present award is
that through design, miniaturization, and optimization of a newly developed
“swirling” robot, rheometry will be transformed to a remote, in situ sensing
science. Thus, one will bring the “rheometer to the fluid application” rather
than bringing a fluid sample to a fixed rheometer. A tennis ball-size prototype
has already been created and the primary concepts are successfully demonstrated.
The robot was designed and will continue to be optimized via large scale
computer simulation. The miniaturized robot will have immediate medical and
biological applications including measuring the complex rheological properties
of synovial fluid as a direct mapping to several disease conditions. Moreover,
multiple miniaturized robots will be used to examine the collective dynamics of
these micro-swirlers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.