* 2210596
* Collaborative Research: A porewater perspective on benthic sources of neodymium to the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Anthony Rathburn, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/28/2027
* USD 130,901.00

Documenting deep ocean circulation changes is important to understanding past
climate variability. Neodymium (Nd) isotopes, recorded in deep ocean sediments,
have been used to reconstruct past ocean circulation. However, several recent
studies suggest that some Nd is released into seawater from the underlying
sediment, which would complicate the ability to use Nd isotopes to accurately
track deep water in the ocean. This project will investigate Nd in seafloor
sediments and near bottom water in the Northwest Atlantic. The study region is a
location where North Atlantic Deep Water is formed. Broader impacts include
mentoring support to allow two early-career scientists to serve as co-chief
scientists for the field program. There is also support for high school students
from an institution with a high percentage of students that are underrepresented
in STEM, and undergraduates from a minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interpretive framework of Nd isotopes as a
paleo circulation proxy relies on deep ocean signals being driven by mixing
between water masses with little influence from benthic sources of Nd to the
ocean. It also requires that Nd isotopes are recorded accurately in sediments
and endmember composition is independently known through time. Recent studies
have challenged this framework, suggesting that benthic fluxes from ocean
sediments may exert a primary control on deep water isotopic composition.
However, the limited global coverage of direct benthic flux measurements (from
only 10 published locations primarily in the North Pacific) prevents a complete
understanding of the marine Nd cycle. This project will (i) quantify the fluxes
of Nd to bottom water from sediments, (ii) examine how those fluxes affect the
isotopic composition of North Atlantic Deep Water, (iii) investigate the role of
diagenetic reactions in setting pore water rare earth element geochemistry, and
(iv) determine what isotopic signals are recorded in marine archives. The field
component of this project will occupy sites along two depth transects in the
Labrador Sea, and it will involve collecting sediment and pore water from short
cores, corresponding filtered bottom water, and deep-sea particles, in order to
fully describe the system. The study location will allow for investigation of
the role that regional geology and water depth play in setting the benthic flux
of Nd to seawater. Altogether, this project will be one of the most thorough
investigations to date of the controls on benthic Nd flux, the impact of benthic
fluxes on the Nd isotopic composition of North Atlantic Deep Water, the
sedimentary environmental conditions that facilitate Nd release, and the impact
of these processes on authigenic Nd isotope records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.