* 2210833
* Interface of Statistical Learning and Optimal Decisions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Jianqing Fan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 350,837.00

Massive datasets are routinely collected in the fields of biological, natural,
and social sciences, and engineering and have had a huge impact on statistical
analysis, personalized treatments, and decision-making. The driving engines
behind these successes are the representation power of deep learning and the
dynamic policy optimization framework of Markov decision processes, in addition
to the availability of big data. However, training algorithms still take
enormous amounts of time and computing power, while statistical and algorithmic
efficiencies are also still poorly understood. The aim of this project is to
understand and improve statistical methods used in deep learning, reinforcement
learning, and big data analysis, with an emphasis on the interfaces between
statistical modeling and optimal policy learning. It aims to advance knowledge
in AI research, automatic driving and control, e-commerce, molecular mechanisms,
biological processes, genetic associations, brain functions, and economic and
financial risks. The project will integrate research and education by working
closely with undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows, and develop publicly available computer software with sound theoretical
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at developing and understanding
various new statistical methods used in deep learning, introducing statistical
modeling and learning techniques to enhance policy optimization in reinforcement
learning, and addressing several important issues in the analysis of big data.
The first aim is to provide a theoretical understanding of various techniques
used in deep learning. The investigator will study the role of over-
parametrization in nonlinear models and low-rank matrix recoveries,
understanding minimum norm interpolation and elucidating the interactions
between neural network models and the tails of the data distribution. The second
aim is to study the interface between statistical modeling and optimal decision.
The investigator plans to study contextual dynamic pricing using semiparametric
models and structured nonparametric models and to unveil the statistical theory
that underpins the success of deep reinforcement learning from an adaptive
function approximation point of view using hierarchical composition models. The
investigator will also introduce new dimensionality reduction techniques and
theories for policy learning to improve both statistical and algorithmic
efficiencies. The third aim is to address several stylized issues in big data
analytics. These include Markovian dependence, missing data, highly correlated
measurements, censored responses, and distributed data, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.