* 2210628
* Crystallography of Honey Bee Comb Construction
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Orit Peleg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2025
* USD 496,897.00

The honeybee comb is a masterpiece of distributed architecture. This wax-made
storage structure, which is essential to the survival of the colony, is
constructed in a near-optimal manner that minimizes the wax-to-storage space
ratio, due to the high energy cost associated with wax production. Honeybees
construct the comb with remarkable precision, regardless of irregular boundaries
or unevenness of the surface on which they work. Yet the mechanisms by which
honeybees adapt their construction to the constraints of the environment (e.g.,
a pre-existing cavity in a tree) are poorly understood. The goal of this project
is to shed light on the process of comb construction by framing it as a pattern
formation process, which allows us to leverage the similarities between comb
structure and the structure of non-living materials such as crystals and
graphene. This project bridges tools from multiple disciplines, bringing
insights from animal behavior and crystallography. The outcome of this research
is a novel framework for modeling the collective behavior of honeybees as well
as quantitatively describing the geometry and topology of the honeybee lattices.
This project will not only help us understand the collective behavior of bees,
but will also help leverage that understanding to create bio-inspired system
designs in the fields of swarm robotics, collective construction, and
lightweight cellular structures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
project will address three specific questions: (1) Are the irregularities in the
honeycomb structure the result of global planning that accounts for distant
frustration sources (e.g., solid boundaries of a tree cavity) or a local
reaction to the immediate surroundings of a given cell? (2) Can the honeycomb
pattern be explained as the result of an energy minimization process, and if so,
are the solutions comparable to patterns consistently found in a diverse range
of self-organized crystallographic systems under geometric frustration (e.g.,
colloidal crystals or graphene)? (3) To what extent is the optimality of the
solution to the geometric problem of comb construction modulated by large-scale
changes in the environment, such as engineered boundaries, various given cell
sizes, or curvature? The investigators in this project will use 3D-printing to
construct precisely controlled and quantified honeycomb foundations, which can
be used to introduce systematic and repeatable sources of geometric frustration
in the experiments. The final comb structures will be imaged and analyzed
(computer vision techniques, x-ray microscopy) to precisely characterize the
geometry of individual cells and the topology of the global lattice. This rich
information set will be used to develop and validate data-driven agent-based
models to explore possible underlying mechanisms of collective comb
construction. The approach followed in this project goes beyond the traditional
view of collective behavior as stigmergy -- wherein organisms respond to local
cues with little or no long-range effects -- to explore the influence of long-
range interactions that are physically mediated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.