* 2210533
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Shrock, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,090,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Maria C. Gonzalez-Garcia,
Patrick Meade, Leonardo Rastelli, Martin Rocek, Robert Shrock, George Sterman
and Alexander Zamolodchikov at Stony Brook University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics is constantly evolving as new techniques and
capabilities are developed to understand the natural world. This award supports
research in a broad but deeply related set of topics in theoretical physics.
Engagement at each of these frontiers of knowledge serves the national interest
by advancing fundamental scientific progress within the United States.
Investigations will include the analysis of high-energy collisions of elementary
particles, which probe the fundamental laws upon which the material universe is
based, and proposals for new experiments involving elementary particles and
atomic nuclei. These efforts will complement studies of the deep mysteries of
gravity, space, and time, and the possibility that all of the known forces in
nature are related, unifying gravity itself with the forces that are seen in
electrical phenomena, in radioactivity, and in nuclear physics. The theoretical
methods developed in quantum field theory have also been found to have exciting
applications to the properties of solids and to turbulence in fluids. This
research, by advancing our knowledge of the laws of nature and by contributing
to a better understanding of the physical universe, has significant broader
impacts and implications for our worldview. Indeed, many of the topics under
study by these faculty members --- including neutrinos, the Higgs boson, black
holes, and strings --- are frequently discussed beyond academia. The research to
be carried out under this award will also serve in the training of graduate
students and the mentoring of postdoctoral fellows at the highest level. The
faculty associated with this grant conduct their research with graduate
students, and share their experience and expertise with undergraduates and
community members, in and beyond the classroom. Individual members will also
continue their own outreach activities, which have included successful
traditions in high-school research mentoring and in the organization of science
playwriting competitions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the technical level, this
award will support research over a wide range of theoretical physics, largely
based on quantum field theory, phenomenological analysis of ongoing and planned
experimental data, statistical mechanics, and string theory. Recent years have
seen a strengthening engagement of theory and experiment in particle physics,
synthesizing data from the Large Hadron Collider, from neutrino observatories,
from cosmic-ray satellites, and now from gravitational-wave detectors. These new
sources of information concerning our universe enable theorists to test long-
standing ideas against evolving data, and to develop new theoretical methods to
guide experiment. Understanding the extraordinary successes of the Standard
Model of particle physics and how it is embedded in a still more fundamental
theory will require the development of new precision techniques in perturbative
and nonperturbative field theory. New approaches for the analysis of existing
data and in plannning experiments on flavor quantum numbers and neutrino masses
are under study. At the same time, novel applications of quantum field theory
and string theory, including theory duality, conformal symmetries. and
integrability properties have been developed in and beyond particle physics,
opening unexpected avenues of research into condensed-matter physics,
statistical mechanics, and pure mathematics. As active participants in these
historic developments, the senior personnel associated with this award will
continue to develop their work in quantum field theories with and without
supersymmetry, in high-energy collider phenomenology, in model building, in
quantum chromodynamics, in neutrinos, in astroparticle physics, in applications
of gauge-gravity duality, in conformal field theory, in the concept of theory
space, in extensions of the Standard Model, in electroweak symmetry breaking, in
superstrings, and in the geometry of supersymmetric gauge theories. This
research will also help train a new generation of theorists at the postdoctoral
and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.