* 2210850
* Estimation and Inference with High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 289,999.00

High-dimensional data are collected in a wide range of disciplines, from biology
and medical research, natural sciences, and engineering to social sciences,
economics, and finance. Statistical inference with such data has become
increasingly important. The objective of this research project is to develop
improved statistical methods, algorithms, and theory for estimation and
inference with high-dimensional data. The project will implement the new methods
in several applications that demonstrate their feasibility, effectiveness, and
usefulness. The project will also carry out comprehensive numerical experiments
to verify the computational efficiency of the new algorithms and to prove the
relevance of the related theory in realistic settings. The numerical work aims
to produce concrete evidence of the utility of the approach in wide contexts.
The work will foster collaborations between researchers with different
expertise, allow students and young researchers to align quickly with cutting
edge research, and encourage them to embark on a host of exciting research
topics. Special efforts will be devoted to recruiting and encouraging students
from underrepresented groups. Software and other tools will be made available to
the public, enhancing scientific and data-driven decision making in practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional data is an intense area of
research in statistics due to its central role in the development and
theoretical understanding of some of the most widely used statistical methods in
modern time. This research project intends to establish a solid foundation for
future work in the emerging topic arising from the convergence of differential-
based statistical inference methods and approximate message passing, and their
connection to empirical Bayesian methods. It aims to develop the central limit
theorem for Stein's unbiased risk estimate, new methods and theory for
regularized estimation, new methods and theory for de-biased statistical
inference including confidence intervals and regions, and empirical Bayes
methods in approximate massage passing. The project intends to produce a rich
collection of new tools for such statistical inference, study the theoretical
and empirical properties of the newly developed methods, and set the scene for
their application in important fields including sociology, economics, neural
imaging, signal processing, communications, social networks, bioinformatics, and
text analysis. The project findings are expected to have impact as well in other
fields of statistics, including causal inference, missing data, survival
analysis, compressed sensing, information retrieval, and signal processing,
significantly advancing statistics and data science research in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.