* 2210184
* Exploring ultimate mechanical characteristics of polymers, from molecular to fracture mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical failure of polymers in all
forms (including the familiar plastics) due to fracture limits the range of
applications and increases the costs of polymeric products. This project will
attempt to clarify the nature of polymer fracture in order to identify means to
increase the threshold for failure. This could lead to reduction of the annual
consumption (several hundred billion pounds) of petroleum-based plastics toward
the goal of building a more sustainable economy by lowering the pressure for
landfills. The project will explore and show the benefits of elucidating a
connection between the resistance to fracture and the material strength that can
be improved through chemical and physical means. Specifically, fracture behavior
of polymeric materials will be examined in a different than conventional way to
better illustrate the cause for fracture. The contrast between existing
knowledge and new perspectives would be incorporated in a textbook on all
aspects of polymer mechanics that the PI plans to work on. The project will also
help to fill the knowledge gap in this area by training a new generation of
scientists and engineers who can generate new solutions to existing and future
challenges facing the properties and applications of polymeric materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planned project will investigate the fracture behavior of polymeric materials
through establishment of a stress criterion based on birefringence measurements.
The overall objective is to identify more effective means to increase the
toughness of polymers. This cannot be achieved without proper explanation of why
toughness is a material parameter and what dictates its magnitude. The PI plans
to explore an intimate connection between material mechanical strength and
toughness. For polymers in all forms, i.e., plastic, elastomeric and
thermosetting, their brittle fracture behavior will be investigated from an
angle that focuses on the stress state at the crack tip. The investigations will
take into account the following effects. Enhancement of chain network through
pre-melt stretching increases ductility of glassy amorphous polymers.
Preservation of chain network during crystallization avoids brittle fracture in
glassy semicrystalline polymers (e.g., crystalline polyethylene terephthalate).
Structural changes to increase load-bearing strands per unit area result in
stronger elastomers. The proposed research will gather more evidence relevant to
a scenario where stress state at the crack tip explicitly dictates polymer
fracture instead of Griffith-Irwin type energy balance argument. The entire
project will attempt to answer why toughness is a material constant and what
factors determine its magnitude for polymers in their various forms. For
improvement of ductility and increased toughness of polymers an effective
strategy will be explored through enhancement of structure of load-bearing chain
network to increase the intrinsic mechanical strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.