* 2210255
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: JUNO3: Towards an Internet of Federated Digital Twins (IoFDT) for Society 5.0: Fundamentals and Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Omid Semiari, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 0.00

The concept of a digital twin (DT) that enables the creation of a programmable,
digital representation of physical systems (e.g., smart vehicles) will
revolutionize future industries. DTs lie at the heart of the vision of a future
smart society, dubbed Society 5.0 by Japan, in which a high integration between
cyber and physical spaces is exploited to bring forth economic and societal
advancement across industries ranging from intelligent transportation to
robotics. To realize this vision of a new DT-driven Society 5.0, this project
envisions a novel concept of an Internet of Federated Digital Twins (IoFDT) that
holistically integrates heterogeneous and physically separated DTs representing
different Society 5.0 services within a single system. The goal of the research
is therefore to create the scientific foundations of the IoFDT through a close
collaboration between a team of US and Japanese researchers with complementary
expertise in wireless networking, DTs, and artificial intelligence (AI). These
foundations include a new, fundamental framework for allowing effective design,
analysis, and optimization of an IoFDT system, in presence of heterogeneous
applications. The proposed research will have a tangible societal impact since
it contributes towards enabling diverse Society 5.0 services (from
transportation to factory automation) thus potentially improving the quality of
life. The research is coupled with collaborative US-Japan DT-centric education,
outreach, and dissemination plans that will help broaden the impact of the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To design the proposed framework, this joint US-
Japan project will merge ideas from wireless communications, machine learning,
and programmable networking to contribute several innovations: 1) A cross-layer
wireless and computing framework that introduces new methods for dynamic network
slicing for the IoFDT system, 2) Efficient methods for DT-centric proactive
resource optimization as well as collaborative computing and learning techniques
that can deal with unprecedented dynamics of the cyber (wireless) and physical
systems of an IoFDT, 3) A holistic AI framework, based on continual learning,
that can faithfully build programmable DTs from a continuous stream of data
while exploiting complex relationships and patterns across the physical systems
and their coordinated twins, and 4) Realistic implementation in a programmable
IoFDT platform that provides a meaningful proof-of-concept of an IoFDT system
deployment in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.