* 2210379
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: JUNO3: Leveraging Heterogeneous Programmable Data Planes for Security and Privacy of Cellular Networks, 5G &amp; Beyond
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 225,000.00

Securing “5G and beyond” cellular networks is critical to support the growing
traffic from mobile and IoT devices. Significant parts of the cellular network
infrastructure are being implemented on software-based environments. The shift
to a disaggregated, virtualized cellular core network may result in an increased
attack surface and greater vulnerability. Slow attacks, which attempt to avoid
notice, can be damaging as they cannot be easily detected, and generally require
the memory and computational capacity of end-host security middleboxes to detect
or prevent them. Likewise, attackers seeking to violate user-privacy by
eavesdropping on communication, cannot be easily prevented, especially at large
scale. These threats leave both cellular users and operators vulnerable to
attacks. This joint US-Japan project seeks to provide strong security monitoring
and privacy protection solutions that exploit the high speed of programmable
switches, the increased capabilities of programmable network interface cards,
and the memory/computational capacity of end-host servers. By leveraging the
strengths of each of these data plane components, the project will develop an
efficient and performant cellular network security solution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, this joint US-Japan project will
pursue technical tasks that will be collaboratively pursued by the PIs based in
the US and Japan. First, the team will design a heterogeneous data plane
framework that cohesively combines multiple data plane devices for network
function processing. The approach will use a collaborative filtering system,
where most of the traffic is processed only by high-speed programmable switches
that can easily extract aggregated, coarse-grained metrics. Suspicious traffic
will be redirected to programmable network interface cards, or the host as
necessary, for further inspection and metrics collection. Second, the project
will develop real-time monitoring of cellular traffic, leveraging the cellular
core network as a key vantage point. Monitoring at the cellular core can not
only effectively detect and thwart data plane-based attacks, but also those on
the control plane. It is in the unique position of being able to correlate
between data and control plane state to further improve upon existing approaches
to detect security attacks. Finally, the project will design privacy protection
mechanisms that ensure anonymity of users in the face of fingerprinting attacks.
The approach will leverage traffic morphing techniques that leverage the entire
range of capabilities of a multi-tier, programmable, heterogeneous data plane
framework, to enable high-speed operation. The proposed techniques will have
significant societal impact by providing strong threat prevention and privacy
preservation for cellular network users and their
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.