* 2210879
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Phylogeographic Investigation of Aedes aegypti
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Crystal Hepp, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2023
* USD 30,400.00

This project investigates the geographic range and movement of the mosquito
vector Aedes aegypti in arid desert environments. Arid environments are of
increasing attention for mosquito control as Ae. aegypti has recently and
rapidly expanded into these arid environments. Ae. aegypti mosquitoes transmit
dengue, yellow fever, Zika, and chikungunya viruses. This project sequences and
analyzes the entire mitochondrial genome using phylogenetic techniques and
couples these data with a spatially explicit analysis of phylogenetic patterns
over two seasons. This analysis contributes to an understanding of which local
conditions result in source populations and high individual counts. A more
complete understanding of the underlying geographic distribution and movement of
Ae. aegypti in arid desert environments is beneficial to vector control and
public health efforts as this mosquito continues to expand its range and
outbreaks of disease occur. This understanding supports public health
interventions to be targeted efficiently and effectively to those at greatest
risk by establishing a “range of risk” for Ae. aegypti-borne
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to utilize whole
mitochondrial genome sequencing of mosquito pools collected over two mosquito
seasons to better understand the movement of the vector within this area, as
well as any potential source locations of the mosquito population. Researchers
will work with public health officials to procure geo-located mosquito samples
from 2019 and 2020. Data will be sequenced and analyzed to produce the entire
mitochondrial genome using various phylogenetic and phylogeographic techniques.
This project develops an understanding of the geographic distribution and
movement of Ae. aegypti and identifies potential source locations for the
mosquito population in arid environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.