* 2210200
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Solving Darwins paradox: combining emerging technologies to quantify energy fluxes on coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Simon Brandl, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 252,096.00

Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems, but they are
located in nutrient-poor tropical oceans that are ill-suited to sustain their
iconic abundance. This paradox has puzzled scientists for centuries. While
several organisms have been suggested to support life on reefs, when, where, or
why they emerge as critical players for coral reefs is largely unknown. This
project examines how the characteristics of a coral reef shape its reliance on
different organisms to sustain all the large fishes typically associated with
reefs. By quantifying fine-scale features of small reef patches, such as their
temperature, wave energy, architecture, and small, hidden species assemblages,
and combining these findings with a detailed analysis of what large fishes
residing on the reef have eaten over time, this research reveals the
circumstances under which different coral reef organisms – from minute algae to
corals, plankton, sponges, microscopic invertebrates, or tiny fishes – take on
important roles in feeding larger fishes. Using aerial drone surveys to scale up
these fine-scale patterns to the area of an entire reef, the project then
provides a whole-reef estimate for the contributions of different organisms to
life on a reef. In doing so, the research offers a new opportunity for coral
reef stewardship: if the most important organisms for coral reef productivity
can be identified reliably from a few features, a much more targeted, context-
specific management framework is possible. Finally, the project yields training
opportunities for young, emerging reef scientists from coral reef nations, and a
plethora of attractive digital coral reef media to engage the general public and
increase awareness of the fragility of coral reef
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement and storage of energy underpins
the functioning of all ecosystems on Earth. The extreme diversity and
productivity of coral reefs, despite their location in oligotrophic waters, has
long generated substantial interest in the role of different organisms for coral
reef energy fluxes. Yet, to date, these findings appear to be highly context-
specific, and no general understanding exists concerning the environmental,
structural, or biological drivers that cause reliance on one or more sources or
pathways of productivity on coral reefs. As the first project to combine
underwater data loggers, structure-from-motion photogrammetry, biological
collections, underwater stereo-video, and compound-specific isotope analyses of
amino acids, this research investigates how various interdependent attributes of
small reef patches–such as wave exposure, rugosity, and cryptobenthic community
structure–affect the relative contributions of different organisms to coral reef
energy fluxes. By integrating the resulting relationships with aerial drone
surveys and an exploration procedure based on quantitative color pattern
analyses, the research then scales up the uncovered patch-dynamics to the area
of an entire reef, ultimately revealing the contributions of different sources
and pathways to reef fish biomass at the scale of the ecosystem. This reveals
the potential pathways that can sustain coral reefs and their environmental and
structural drivers. In doing so, the project offers a more general solution to a
centuries-old question, while providing a new lens through which coral reefs can
be managed in the Anthropocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.