* 2210471
* EAGER: MEMS Enabled Real Time Detection of Pathogens Viruses and Biomarkers
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gannon Jennings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,987.00

Micro-cantilever-based tools like variable Atomic Force Microscopies have been
widely and successfully used in the field of Nano Science and Technology for
decades. Based on vast available experimental results and expertise in multiple
domains, there is a significant potential to use cantilever-based systems for
detection of SARS-CoV-2 viruses binding by responding to the added mass. This
approach will enable real time monitoring and handling the COVID-19 pandemic and
will enable the observation of the infection and the transmission of the host
for first time. However, the exploitation of cantilever devices for pathogen
detection faces multiple hurdles, in addition to technical challenges, as high
selectivity to the targeted virus or biomarker is required. To become practical
these instruments need a technology for functionalization of the cantilevers
that will make them stable in air and liquids for hours. This will allow the
sensors to work in real time, thus breaking the current pathogen diagnostics
paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PIs will develop such
functionalization of existing micro-cantilevers. They will develop a method for
small pitch immobilization of antibodies selectively on the surface of the
active cantilevers. The proposed project explores function-driven design of
materials and technology to address the problem of real time detection of active
viruses like SARS-CoV-2. The integrated approach developed in this project is
versatile and transferable in developing proteins/antibody coatings for many
other applications. Moreover, the proposed project, with its integration of
material synthesis, UV exposure/patterning, characterization, and performance
evaluation in the targeted applications, will serve as an excellent educational
platform for participating graduate students to experience the full range of
challenges in the cross-linking domains of microelectronics, biochemistry and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, these goals will be achieved through
the combination of coating of fluorescent tagged antibody solutions in
combination with maskless UV photoinduced patterning for immobilization that
ensures selective binding of active viruses on cantilevers. The versatile
approach of the PIs will include application of different benzophenone class of
compound radicals generated by UV light and capable of reliably binding the
targeted spike protein’s antibody at the molecular level. Specific goals of this
project are the identification and testing of UV maskless technology for
selective immobilization of spike protein antibodies on piezoresistive MEMS
cantilevers as well as optimizing the parameters of the detection system in
order to achieve short detection time and high sensitivity. To achieve noise-
free operation, application-specific arrays of active and reference
piezoresistive cantilevers will be used. To ensure detection of SARS-CoV-2
viruses in air/aerosol by affinity reactions, small pitch patterns will be
selectively coated, exploiting maskless UV photoinduced protein immobilization
of antibodies. Specifically, the PIs will focus on the selective
functionalization of the optimized cantilevers in synergy with novel measuring
methods for detecting the mass of ultra-small
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.