* 2210277
* I-Corps:  Activated carbon pad to deliver glucosinolates and myrosinase enzymes to extend the shelf-life of strawberries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Zhengrong Gu, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to extend the shelf life of strawberries and other
fruits and vegetables. Spoilage is a large economic driver behind the high price
of fresh foods, and strawberries are one of the fresh foods with the highest
spoilage with upwards of 40% of harvested strawberries never being consumed and
discarded due to microbial spoilage. Established technologies like refrigeration
fail to directly address microbial food spoilage as chilling the produce only
delays an inevitable outcome. The proposed technology is designed to directly
address food spoilage through the elimination of microbes. This is not expected
to replace washing or cooking foods before consumption but to delay spoilage
prior to consumption. In addition to strawberry preservation, other foods or
microbial vulnerable biomaterials may be protected that are too sensitive for
conventional packaging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development an activated carbon pad that delivers glucosinolates
and myrosinase enzyme together to extend shelf-life of strawberries when exposed
to moisture. The unique properties of activated carbon allow for the
glucosinolates and myrosinase to be separated but delivered together in one
product. The activated carbon may act to sort the molecules with its different
pore sizes. The large myrosinase enzyme will stay on the outer surface and
glucosinolates will be adsorbed into the smaller micropores. When moisture is
introduced, the glucosinolates will be carried out of the pores by capillary
action and diffuse across the surface. The free glucosinolates will hydrolyze
with the myrosinase enzyme on the carbon surface, releasing a gaseous
antimicrobial compound, isothiocyanate. This creates an atmosphere that has a
bacteriostatic or bactericidal effect, depending on the reaction rate and
gaseous concentration of isothiocyanates. In addition, the proposed technology
has been shown to have a minimal impact on the taste and texture of food
preserved with gaseous isothiocyanates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.