* 2210744
* SHF: Small: Rethinking Virtualization at the Edge to Support Highly-efficient and Low-power Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kun Suo, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2025
* USD 325,050.00

Similar to cloud computing, edge computing also needs the support of
virtualization in order to facilitate the effective management and efficient
utilization. However, simply migrating traditional multi-layered virtualization
from the cloud to the edge environment cannot fully utilize the flexibility,
differentiation, and elasticity in edge platforms. First, there exists a
significant gap of hardware constraint and energy sensitivity between cloud and
edge systems. Second, too many virtualized layers introduce indirect and
unnecessary expenses, resulting in unreasonable system structure and low
efficiency. Third, the semantic gap between the edge runtime and various
virtualization layers, as well as lack of coordination, hinders the adoption of
virtualization on edge systems. This research addresses these issues and seeks
to improve the performance, predictability, and energy-efficiency of virtualized
edge systems. The research will also be tightly integrated into course teaching,
project development, and further broaden its impacts through industrial
collaboration, recruiting and mentoring minority students, and outreach
activities in local K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the reasons for the inefficiency of virtualization in edge computing
and explore the potential to unleash performance and improve energy consumption.
Specifically, the project focuses on a multi-layered collaborative approach to
virtualized edge systems and entails two research thrusts. First, it will
rethink the collaboration between the edge hardware and software layers, so that
the software-stack execution actively adapts to the edge-hardware dynamics,
including energy consumption, real-time resource utilization, hardware
heterogeneity, etc. Second, it will empower software collaboration between the
virtualized application layer and OS system layer that can truly realize the
efficiency and flexibility of virtualization on edge
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.