* 2210662
* Methodology for Qualitative Constraints in Semi-Parametric Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rohit Patra, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Qualitative constraints such as concavity (law of diminishing returns) are
ubiquitous in social sciences and economics. In order to incorporate these
important constraints into statistical modeling, users often resort to simpler
models, for example, linear regression. However, these simpler models are
inflexible and cannot fully explain complex scientific phenomena. In turn, semi-
parametric models provide necessary flexibility and interpretability. However,
in fitting these semi-parametric models, qualitative constraints are often left
unexploited. Ignoring these constraints, will not only lead to a loss in
interpretability but also forgo some accuracy in the performance of the
estimates. The broad goal of this proposal is to develop new statistical methods
that respect subject matter qualitative constraints and make such methods more
accessible to researchers via open-source software
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main aims: (1) to
develop general non-parametric regression estimators that account for available
subject matter constraints and adapt to the smoothness of the underlying truth;
(2) to explore systematic approaches for semi-parametric estimators that
incorporate naturally occurring shape constraints on the nuisance components;
and (3) to assess improved doubly robust estimators of functionals that can be
represented in terms of variationally dependent nuisance parameters, whose
relationship is shape-constrained on a subject matter basis. &lt;br/&gt;This in
return would allow for significant improvement of estimation accuracy, thereby
outperforming the existing tools that do not incorporate such information. The
results of the project will find utility in addressing the interpretability and
reproducibility concerns that have recently emerged in a broad range of domain
knowledge disciplines, from social sciences to economics to epidemiology. The
project will offer a multitude of opportunities for research training and
professional development of the next generation of statisticians and will also
engage in bolstering diversity in statistical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.