* 2210869
* Mechanism for the selection of undamaged physiological substrates by the ATP-dependent protease Lon
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Irene Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project will determine how the cellular protease Lon, which degrades
various proteins, regulates the transcription of a genetic material known as
ribonucleic acid (RNA). Since Lon-mediated protein degradation and RNA
transcription are conserved in bacteria and humans, findings generated from this
work will provide insights into the workings of a universal process that is
important for sustaining life. The PI hypothesizes that the competing
interaction between Lon and the physiological binding partner(s) for the same
cellular protein dictates this cellular protein's fate and, ultimately,
function. The project will test this hypothesis by determining how purified
Escherichia coli Lon protease (ELon) affects the assembly of the RNA
transcription complex constituting the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (ERNAP),
the lambda N protein, the NusA protein, and the nucleic acid containing the nutL
sequence. In addition, the proposed research will determine the extent to which
the assembly of the RNA transcription process protects the lambda N protein from
degradation by ELon. This project will integrate research into education. The
broader impact of this project lies in promoting science literacy to
underprivileged children in Cleveland, Ohio. Trainees participating in this
project will learn to teach and communicate scientific concepts to the general
public, which will prepare them for an education career in STEM. Undergraduate
students and post-doctoral fellows will be trained to conduct research in
organic synthesis, molecular cloning, protein purification and labeling,
electron microscopy, and enzymology. The trainees will learn to teach and
communicate scientific concepts to the general public. This kind of experience
will provide a training ground for future educators in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine if the Escherichia coli
Lon protease (Elon) participates in the regulation of RNA transcription. The
project will test the hypothesis that Lon disrupts RNA transcription by
selectively degrading the lambda N protein, which is needed for antitermination
RNA transcription. A combination of enzyme kinetics, mutagenesis, and electron
microscopy imaging approaches will be used to evaluate the impact of Escherichia
coli Lon protease (ELon) on the kinetic assembly of the RNA transcription
complex constituting the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (ERNAP), the lambda N
protein, the NusA protein, and the nucleic acid containing the nutL sequence.
The effect of RNA transcription on Lon-mediated proteolysis of the lambda N
protein will also be evaluated. Since Lon is found in most organisms,
physiologically relevant mechanistic findings on ELon could be transformed to
understand the workings Lon homologs in eukaryotes. The quantitative approach
developed for elucidating the mechanism of Lon would benefit the adaptation of
the same approach to study other ATP-dependent proteases to reveal mechanistic
differences among this family of enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.