* 2210840
* CAS-Climate/Collaborative Research: Prediction and Uncertainty Quantification of Non-Gaussian Spatial Processes with Applications to Large-scale Flooding in Urban Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Douglas Nychka, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 219,790.00

This Critical Aspects of Sustainability - Climate (CAS-Climate) project develops
an accurate and fast statistical representation (also known as emulation) of
large-scale flooding events as an alternate to running complex physical models
in every instance. This is achieved by training the statistical formulation on
representative flood simulations but adding flexibility to infer results for
situations that are not in the training set. Large floods are expected to occur
more frequently due to climate change and so motivate increased attention for
robust, efficient, and real-time flood modeling. For most river engineering
problems, including flood mitigation, there is a need for quantification of
water depth and surface elevation under different scenarios of rainfall and
storm surges. While many hydraulic models (e.g., the TELEMAC model) can
represent these features, large-scale hydraulic simulations of flooding using
high-resolution topographic and infrastructure data, are computationally
expensive to complete. Thus, despite these modeling resources, simulating
possible flood scenarios routinely or in a rapid manner is limited. A novel
aspect of this work is to focus on statistical distributions for extreme events,
which are appropriate for flooding, rather than average quantities that are less
useful for assessing risks and hazards. Also, the statistical basis of this
approach lends itself to measures of uncertainty in the predictions and so
support decision making and other practical uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
little existing methodology to emulate computer models built on spatial extreme
distributions to represent flooding in a complex domain and an important feature
of this work is matching the flooding response with the appropriate statistical
processes. This is in contrast with a machine learning, purely data-driven
approach where extreme events may not be as well represented. The modeling
framework is transformative including: a Markov random field formulation using
generalized extreme value distributions for site-specific conditional
distributions, selecting neighborhood size using a penalized likelihood method
for spatial extremes, a theoretical investigation into the validity and large
sample properties of emulators, and developing computational algorithms to
handle very large data volumes. This work will be validated through proof-of-
concept studies with TELEMAC model simulations, forced by realistic patterns of
extreme rainfall events and storm surges and located in an urban area of the US.
Open-source tools will be generated based on the results from this project and
shared with the engineering communities, especially civil infrastructure
community that frequently faces challenges in coping with spatially-dependent
data and uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.