* 2210193
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Efficient Human-in-the-Loop Redaction of Language Development Corpora
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,992.00

At great effort and expense, and with the cooperation of hundreds of parents,
teachers, and children, researchers have collected conversation transcripts to
study topics like children's language development. The data most useful for
science are longitudinal and naturalistic, such as data collected periodically
over time in children's homes. Unfortunately, the longitudinal, naturalistic
corpora most likely to advance knowledge may contain information that renders
participants identifiable. For this reason, naturalistic corpora are rarely
shared with other researchers, hindering science. Sharing requires careful
redaction--the removal of potentially identifying information. Currently,
naturalistic corpora are often too large for manual redaction, and current
automated tools both miss critical redactions and over-redact important
information. To enable such data to be shared, this project seeks to develop
novel computational methods for redaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
aim is to develop initially automated, human-in-the-loop redaction of
identifying information in unstructured text data. First, to better understand
key challenges around what aspects of transcripts make participants
identifiable, the researchers are conducting interviews with social and
behavioral science researchers and members of ethics boards. From these
insights, the researchers are developing novel models for predicting what
language may need to be redacted and they are designing novel user interactions
for leveraging human expertise in redaction decisions. The unique
characteristics of conversation transcripts require modeling novel features of
language, drawing from natural language processing, psychology, privacy
engineering, and linguistics. Because automated methods lack human insights into
conversational context for making complex redaction decisions, the researchers
are designing user interfaces that summarize how marked language, or tokens,
appear longitudinally in transcripts, enabling human coders to quickly make
redaction decisions. As a case study, the researchers are applying these
techniques to the Language Development Project, a longitudinal corpus of 100
diverse children's development of language. The project is also training
students in multidisciplinary research across the computational and social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.