* 2210312
* Nonparametric Inference for Convex Functions and Continuous Treatment Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Charles Doss, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 96,623.00

It is both advantageous and necessary in the modern data landscape to use
statistical methods that are very flexible and allow the data to "speak for
themselves," rather than having researchers make strong unjustifiable prior
assumptions about the data. Unfortunately, such flexible methods generally
require the practitioner to "tune" the methods in order to get reliable results.
This introduces an ad-hoc element to data analysis and, if incorrectly tuned,
such statistical procedures may return incorrect results. One broad theme of
this project is the development of statistical methods (relying on convexity)
that are both very flexible and also fully automated, meaning they do not depend
on user-chosen tuning parameters. Another theme is studying very flexible yet
efficient procedures for learning about causality when the treatment variable is
continuous (e.g., "what was your drug dosage," in the setting of a drug treating
an illness) rather than binary ("did you receive the drug, yes or no"); it will
use the fully automated methods from the first theme also in the second theme.
It will focus on going beyond estimation and actually performing inference,
meaning that it will quantify how reliable the estimates actually are so they
can be used for policy/decision making. In the causal setting, it will consider
varied examples such as the effect of number of nurse staffing hours on hospital
efficacy, clinical measurements such as BMI (body mass index) on health
outcomes, or time spent on education on career outcomes. The tuning parameter-
free procedures based on convexity have many uses in the study of economic data
and in optimization questions arising in operations
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on several nonstandard
statistical problems that are unified practically by their answering
sophisticated questions in modern data settings, and are unified theoretically
by their having non-standard rates of convergence and, frequently, non-normal
limit distributions. The investigator will consider the following two broad
thrusts: (a) nonparametric estimation and inference for shape-constrained convex
functions, (b) performing nonparametric tests and/or confidence intervals for a
causal continuous treatment effect curve (based on observational data) and
related parameters. It is often preferable to use flexible nonparametric methods
so that estimation and inference yield reliable results without depending on
strong assumptions. Unfortunately, most classical nonparametric methods rely
heavily on selection of (potentially many) tuning parameter(s), whose selection
can be challenging. In this project, the investigator will study so-called shape
constraints that are nonparametric and yet also allow estimation/inference
without requiring the choice of a tuning parameter. Assessing causality is one
of the most fundamental, but also challenging, tasks of scientific inquiry. With
observational data, the gold standard are so-called doubly robust estimators,
where “doubly robust” means optimally efficient. The investigator will develop
the first (pointwise) confidence intervals and hypothesis tests, as well as
intervals and tests for the argmax of a concave treatment
curve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.