* 2210551
* Searching for New Physics in the Lab and the Sky
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ken Van Tilburg, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ken Van Tilburg at New
York University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The current set of physical laws --- as
encapsulated within the Standard Models of Particle Physics and Cosmology ---
provide an exquisitely accurate and precise description of all known phenomena
in nature. However, several puzzles still remain. The most tangible shortcoming
is that the microscopic nature of dark matter, a mostly inert component
comprising most of the matter density of the Galaxy and the Universe, is
unknown, despite the troves of evidence for its existence through its
gravitational influence. In his research, Professor Van Tilburg aims to develop
observational probes of dark-matter structures smaller than ever detected
before, using methods based on the gravitational deflection of starlight caused
by small and otherwise invisible clumps of dark matter. Using X-ray satellites
and terrestrial dark matter experiments, he will also aim to detect weakly-
interacting low-mass particles, a motivated class of dark-matter candidates
which are produced in the cores of stars. Research in this area advances the
national interest by seeking to answer one of the most fundamental questions in
physics, namely that of understanding what particle(s) comprise the dark matter.
Professor Van Tilburg will also involve graduate students and a postdoc in his
research, thereby training the next generation of junior scientists in this
burgeoning new field at the intersection of particle physics and astrophysics.
He will also visit local high schools to give public lectures about particle
physics and cosmology and to educate students from underrepresented groups about
pursuing scientific career paths.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In a first research
avenue, Professor Van Tilburg and his group will conduct a suite of analyses of
time-domain, astrometric, weak gravitational lensing on public astronomical data
sets, to search for entirely non-luminous dark matter structures lighter than
100 million solar masses. In particular, he aims to develop a data analysis
pipeline to search for transient astrometric deflections in Gaia time-series
data from ultra-compact dark-matter structures as well as from astrophysical
compact remnants and black holes. He also seeks to analyze the correlated shifts
in celestial proper motions and accelerations of background sources induced via
gravitational lensing by more extended dark-matter structures. A (non-)detection
of such small-scale structures would provide crucial new constraints on the
microphysics of dark matter, as well as the primordial seeds of structure
formation on small scales. In a second research avenue, Professor Van Tilburg
will study a recently introduced phenomenon, dubbed "stellar basins", wherein
weakly-coupled particles can be emitted from the entire stellar volume onto
bound orbits whose density accumulates over time. This effect is generic for any
particle type and important if the particle has a rest-mass energy not too far
removed from the temperature in the stellar interior. Van Tilburg conjectures
that phenomena associated with stellar basins --- direct detection in the
laboratory and indirect detection in telescope observations --- will form the
leading probes of any particle in the mass range from a few eV to hundreds of
keV. The objective of this research avenue is to work out this phenomenology in
detail: calculating all production mechanisms, performing computations for the
observable signals, analyzing publicly available data, and interpreting the
results in terms of the parameter space of the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.