* 2210271
* Strings, Gravity and Strongly Coupled Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Sera Cremonini, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 415,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Sera Cremonini and Timm
Wrase at Lehigh University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key challenges
behind understanding the beginning of the universe and the behavior of gravity
at the smallest scales is that the gravitational force appears to be inherently
different from the remaining interactions in nature. While the other
interactions have descriptions that are consistent with quantum mechanics at the
smallest scales, the gravitational interaction does not have such a description.
String theory is currently the leading framework for the unification of gravity
with quantum mechanics. As part of their research, Professors Cremonini and
Wrase aim to further our understanding of string theory and address longstanding
fundamental questions about the basic interactions in nature and the
cosmological history of our universe. In recent years it has become increasingly
clear that string theory and generically any theory of gravity that is
consistent with quantum mechanics will necessarily leave imprints on physics at
much larger distances and lower energies. An important part of this research is
to carefully understand such imprints and how they might affect both the early
and current evolution of the universe, including the nature of dark energy, and
basic properties of black holes. Moreover, string theory has led to powerful
techniques that can be applied to study a wide spectrum of poorly understood
quantum phases of matter. These range from the primordial soup of quarks and
gluons a few millionths of a second after the Big Bang to materials with unusual
electronic properties such as high-temperature superconductors. Indeed, the
development of such materials will lead to new technologies which can have a
significant impact on society, and is therefore in the national interest. A key
aspect of this research will exploit these novel techniques to better understand
the basic mechanisms underlying such unconventional phases of matter, which is
crucial to really realize their technological potential. This project also has
significant broader impacts. Professors Cremonini and Wrase plan to incorporate
their research developments into their teaching and education efforts on a
regular basis. They will also involve graduate students and postdocs in their
research, thus providing training for junior scientists at a critical stage in
their careers. Finally, they plan to engage broad and diverse audiences through
frequent public lectures as well as activities aimed at K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level, the research projects
that Professors Cremonini and Wrase will investigate will involve a number of
complementary approaches to examine fundamental questions about the nature of
gravity as well as various phenomenological aspects of string theory and of
strongly interacting quantum systems. In particular, they will explore
constraints on low-energy effective field theories and black holes by refining
and extending various so-called "swampland" conjectures. This will lead to
deeper insights into string theory in general, as well as to an improved
theoretical understanding of less-understood features of our own universe, like
dark energy or neutrino masses. Professor Wrase will also investigate basic
aspects of string phenomenology, as well as the properties of non-supersymmetric
string theories and early-universe cosmology. Professor Wrase's work on models
of inflation based on alpha-attractors provides some of the most promising
targets for on-going and future experiments that measure the polarization of the
CMB and search for signals of large-field inflationary models. By contrast,
through the use of holographic techniques, Professor Cremonini's research will
shed new light on the dynamics of the strongly correlated phases of matter
relevant to a wide array of materials in nature which are notoriously
challenging to understand with conventional methods. Throughout, the focus will
be on identifying generic signatures of symmetry breaking in these
unconventional systems. Finally, as part of a new collaborative effort,
Professor Cremonini will also test some of the results and predictions of
holography for non-Fermi liquids using ultracold atoms as quantum
simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.