* 2210526
* Conference: 2022 International Conference on ESCRT Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* John McCullough, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2023
* USD 48,600.00

The meeting aims to provide a unique open, inclusive, and interactive forum for
the international and domestic research community working on a group of proteins
(ESCRT proteins) that regulate many basic functions of cell biology. The
conference will provide an effective learning environment for all participants,
especially undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows.
Participants will also have great opportunities to mix with researchers from
very different disciplines and fields of biology who are all drawn together by a
common interest in ESCRT structures and functions. NSF funds will be used to
increase the breadth of participation of young researchers. The meeting will
include oral presentations, poster sessions, and time for informal discussions.
The specific objectives of this conference are: 1) To provide an open and
inclusive forum for oral presentations from researchers at all levels of their
careers. Ample time will be devoted for discussion. 2) To provide an opportunity
for all participants, specially to those from under-represented groups in
science, to present and discuss their results in evening poster sessions. 3) To
offer ample opportunities for networking and social interactions through shared
meals and social activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Endosomal Complexes
Required for Transport (ESCRT) machinery comprises different factors (~30
proteins in humans; 45 in plants) that carry out membrane remodeling and fission
reactions throughout the cell. The past decade has seen an explosion in the
number of processes now known to be ESCRT-mediated, including endosomal protein
trafficking, cytokinetic abscission, closure of the post-mitotic nuclear
envelope, enveloped virus budding, exosome biogenesis, neuronal pruning, and
membrane repair. Furthermore, ESCRT-like systems have recently been discovered
in archaea and bacteria, making this one of the most highly conserved machines
in nature. As a result, the ESCRT biology community continues to grow. Despite
these advances, a number of fundamental questions remain unanswered, including
exactly how the ESCRT machinery constricts and mediates membrane fission, and
the biological mechanisms and consequences of many ESCRT-mediated processes. The
time is therefore again ripe to bring together the different segments of our
community to ensure that biophysicists are talking to cell biologists,
biochemists are learning from plant biologists, and so forth. Toward this end,
we propose a multidisciplinary conference that will cover all key aspects of
ESCRT biology and will include sessions on the following topics: 1) The
biophysics of ESCRT-mediated membrane fission, 2) The evolution of filament-
mediated membrane remodeling, 3) ESCRTs in cell division, 4) ESCRTs in membrane
repair, 5) ESCRTs in disease, and 6) ESCRT machinery in other systems (plants,
archaea).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.