* 2210055
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Agriculture Frontiers: Land, Labor and Sovereignty in the North
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kathryn Teigen De Master, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2025
* USD 41,276.00

This project takes a comparative case study approach to the development of
agriculture in Arctic and Subarctic communities. Through research partnerships
with First Nations and non-Indigenous, first-generation farmers, the student PI
will conduct an ethnographic study of the Northwest Territories as an emerging
agricultural frontier and as a strategy for adapting to climate change,
ameliorating supply-chain disruptions, and improving food security. This
research also explores how northern food systems have changed since the
nineteenth century, and what those changes mean for subsistence growers,
commercial farmers, backyard gardeners, and Indigenous communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic research involves focus groups,
participant observation, and life history interviews with members of three
northern communities, which differ in terms of demography, market access, land
tenure, and modes of production. This work will be contextualized using
historical sources, agricultural reports, and territorial documents. Field notes
and interview transcripts will be evaluated using qualitative software analysis.
Project findings will be validated collaboratively and will be the basis for a
dissertation and peer-reviewed journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.