* 2210452
* Programs on Critical Problems in Physics, Astrophysics and Biophysics at the Aspen Center for Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Joshua Frieman, Aspen Center For Physics
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This award funds the scientific activities at the Aspen Center for Physics
(ACP), one of the premier theoretical physics research institutions in the
world. The ACP is unique in its combination of programs of high scientific
quality coupled with an extraordinarily fertile collaborative research
environment. Each year, from late May to mid-September, the ACP attracts about
500 of the world's leading physicists to Aspen where, participating in multiple-
week workshops, working groups, or individual research projects, they interact,
discuss, collaborate, and challenge each other while sharing ideas at the
forefront of their disciplines. The ACP also organizes between five and eight
one-week Winter Conferences, bringing together as many as 100 researchers each
week to respond to rapidly breaking developments in areas of current interest in
physics and interdisciplinary research. As a result of this intense activity,
each year several hundred journal articles, book chapters and scientific
manuscripts explicitly acknowledge the ACP for the birth of new ideas, for the
formation and nurturing of collaborations, for the opportunity to concentrate on
advancing or completing work, and for essential ingredients contributed by
fellow researchers to overcome roadblocks to progress. Thus, funding for the ACP
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of fundamental science
across a variety of subdisciplines of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both
summer and winter, participating physicists also contribute to a rich and
visible science outreach program. Each winter conference features a free public
lecture, preceded by a "Physics Caf√©" in which two to three conference
participants engage with an audience of 50 to 100. Each summer, ten to twelve
free public talks are held on the ACP campus, with typical attendance close to
100. All public lectures and talks are recorded and made available on the ACP
web site. Weekly "Physics is for Kids" summer barbeques feature hands-on
activities and an interactive demonstration/talk by an ACP participant. Also in
the summer, top physics students from local high schools work at the ACP for a
week each and meet one-on-one with physicists to discuss STEM interests and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.