* 2210259
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genome-Wide Dissection of Leaf Angle Variation Across the Canopy in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Michael Scanlon, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2026
* USD 2,500,000.00

Plant architecture is the three-dimensional organization of the plant body. In
addition to branching patterns, the size, shape, and position of leaves and
flowering organs comprise the above-ground plant architecture. Leaf angle is the
angle between the leaf and the plant stem. In cultivated crops where a very
large numbers of plants are packed into the field, leaf angle is a key
determinant of the overall canopy leaf area, light capture, and yield of a given
plant population. Technological advances have made it possible to obtain
measurements from field-grown plants in a high-throughput fashion, to conduct
tissue-specific gene expression analysis, and to precisely edit genes for
functional characterization. To capitalize these exciting advances, an
interdisciplinary team was assembled to study leaf angle variation across the
canopy in maize, an excellent model crop of economic and societal importance.
The long-term goal is to enrich the fundamental understanding of the genetic
control of leaf angle variation across the canopy in maize and to provide
mechanistic insights into genetic manipulation of plant architecture for
continued crop improvement. Integration of research with education within the
project will permit cross-training of the next generation of scientists with
knowledge of developmental genetics, genomics, biotechnology, breeding, and
agricultural engineering. As an excellent entry point to connect biology and
agriculture with school gardens and children’s literature, leaf angle will be a
key component of a K-12 teacher training certificate workshop that will be
developed to help students learn about plant biology, domestication,
agriculture, and crop improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaf angle is a
strategic component of plant architecture, and an important area of plant
research that interconnects fundamental research on the mechanisms of plant
development with plant breeding efforts for sustainable agricultural production.
Long-term selection for greater agronomic yield by dense planting has generated
superior maize hybrids with upright leaf angle. However, a comprehensive
understanding of the genetic mechanisms underlying leaf angle variation is still
lacking. Due to the measurement difficulties, leaf angle is typically measured
on a single leaf per plant in large-scale genetic studies. But leaf angle
variation across the canopy is observed among different leaves of the same
plant, and diverse inbreds are polymorphic for this “within-plant, leaf angle
variation” phenotype. In this project, genome-wide identification of genes
underlying leaf angle variation across the canopy will be conducted using a high
throughput phenotyping system (PhenoBot) to quantify multiple leaf angles at
different nodes for genetic analyses. Transcriptomic analyses will be conducted
through laser-microdissection RNA sequencing to examine genes and pathways
underlying leaf angle variation across the canopy. With a list of known genes
from the literature and newly identified genes, functional validation and
characterization of these genes will be carried out by generating edited maize
plants with CRISPR-based tools. Grade-level text sets and accompanying seeds of
diverse maize inbreds will be developed for the creation of teaching gardens on
school grounds. A certificate program in the form of a workshop will be
developed to help K-12 teachers integrate the teaching garden into their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.