* 2210187
* Research in Integrable Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sergei Lukyanov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sergei Lukyanov at
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its
inception in the 1920's, Quantum Field Theory (QFT) has become an indispensable
tool in modern theoretical physics. Apart from particle physics --- the original
motivation for developing this framework --- it has found remarkable success in
describing the physics of phase transitions as well as numerous applications in
many-body systems, turbulence, cosmology, etc. As the list of topics continues
to expand, we are forced to constantly revise our fundamental understanding of
QFT and incorporate new powerful mathematical techniques that can handle
problems of increasing complexity. A perfect theoretical laboratory for doing
this has turned out to involve low-dimensional "integrable" models and conformal
field theories. These are theories that possess a large, oftentimes infinite,
set of symmetries that together allow the use of powerful exact methods for
their solution. In turn this elevated degree of control has led --- and is still
leading --- to profound insights into many important physical concepts. As a
result, the field of Integrable Quantum Field Theory (IQFT) sits at the cutting
edge of theoretical high-energy physics. The research of Professor Lukyanov is
aimed at the further development of IQFTs. A successful realization would allow
one to overcome the notorious technical difficulties that emerge when
traditional methods are applied to many of the theories that appear within the
context of mainstream theoretical high-energy physics. This research is
therefore in the national interest because it will have an important impact on
the development and understanding of fundamental science within the United
States. Professor Lukyanov also intends to involve graduate students and
postdocs in his research and disseminate the results to the broader community of
young scientists via lectures and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, this research is focused on integrable quantum spin chains and non-
linear sigma models --- exactly the types of theories that emerge within the
context of gauge/string duality. This research is organized into three projects.
The first is the study of a certain multiparametric quantum spin chain at
criticality. The key to the approach will be the so-called ODE/IQFT
correspondence, a new mathematical tool of Integrable Quantum Field Theories
("IQFT" side) which allows one to "encode" its algebraic structures into a
system of Ordinary Differential Equations ("ODE" side). This part is directly
related to the gauge/string duality. The second project is devoted to the study
of the high-energy asymptotics of scattering amplitudes in quantum
chromodynamics. The ultimate objective of the third project is to extend the
ODE/IQFT approach to integrable non-linear sigma models. The new methods
considered in this project, when fully developed, should be of broad impact. The
first and third projects could lead to entirely new directions and discoveries,
including potential applications to the description of disordered systems in
condensed-matter physics. By contrast, the second project has to do with a
realistic problem in particle physics. All three projects provide excellent
training opportunities for students in QFT and statistical mechanics, from
undergraduate-level problems to advanced training in the most abstract analytic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.