* 2210839
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Human Responses to Ecological Instability
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Edmond Boudreaux, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 112,395.00

Given its focus on extended temporal spans of human behavior, archaeology is
particularly well suited to examine long-term trends in how communities devise
both technological and social adjustments to threats to their stability, and how
those strategies may culminate in large-scale population relocations. The
research team will adopt the perspective of political ecology to compare and
contrast how societies mediate broad transformations in their climatic and
ecological surroundings through a process of locally-based decision-making. The
project will develop new methods for addressing deep time approaches to the
study of environmental change and migration. Further, it will promote
educational and training opportunities for Native American students and involve
interpretive collaboration with Native American
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators from the University of Florida
(Dr. Charles Cobb), the University of Mississippi (Dr. Edmond Boudreaux), the
University of South Dakota (Dr. Anthony Krus), and the Chickasaw Nation (Dr.
Brad Lieb) will embark upon a multi-year archaeological study of the causes
underlying an extensive population abandonment of mid-continental North America
during the fifteenth century AD. This phenomenon, covering about 50,000 square
miles, is popularly known as the "Vacant Quarter." Archaeological research
elsewhere has shown that climatic factors commonly play a central role in large-
scale regional depopulations, and recent evidence suggests that a series of
severe multi-decadal droughts struck eastern North America in the AD 1300s and
1400s. These droughts appear to have been the result of wide swings in
precipitation caused by the period of global cooling known as the Little Ice
Age. Nevertheless, there is extreme variability in the ways in which societies
adapt to environmental as well as social stresses. The project will involve a
comparative study of a number of archaeological sites in two sub-regions,
central Tennessee and northern Mississippi, in the larger abandoned region. Both
areas witnessed an apparent exodus of people about AD 1450. However, prior to
that time, they had very different histories of occupation culturally and
ecologically. The research team will combine excavations with ceramic sourcing
analyses, subsistence studies, and examinations of conflict to address
similarities and differences in population movement, foodways, and warfare in
the two study areas resulting from deterioration in their ecological and social
surroundings, and how these processes ultimately led to contemporaneous mass
migrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.