* 2210498
* New Directions in Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Neal Weiner, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Neal Weiner and Joshua
Ruderman at New York University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model (SM) of
Particle Physics has been exceptionally successful in describing observed
phenomena. However, a number of motivations exist for physics beyond the
Standard Model, not the least of which is the existence of the dark matter which
dominates the galaxies of the universe. Searches for new phenomena are now
providing copious amounts of experimental data. In recent years the Large Hadron
Collider has collected a sizable dataset derived from the scattering of
elementary particles after they are accelerated to great speeds and made to
collide. Likewise, new searches for dark matter have tested many of the
predictions of the most popular theoretical models of dark matter. So far all of
these results seem consistent with the SM, and decisive non-gravitational
evidence for dark matter has not emerged. But much more data is coming. The LHC
has just begun operating at even higher energies and anticipates collecting
twice as much data in the next few years as was collected previously. Future
axion-detection experiments will probe the possible existence of dark matter
with masses near those of the heavier elementary particles already discovered
(such as the famous Higgs boson), and diverse experiments are emerging to probe
dark matter at lighter mass scales as well. Moreover, theoretical studies now
are pointing to what the next generation of experiments should look like.
Understanding the implications of ongoing experiments and where they are lacking
will help place the US in a central position to uncover new physical laws and/or
discover new particles. As a consequence, it is in the national interest to fund
theoretical research that helps leverage our already sizable investments in
experiment. In this context, where significant data has arrived but much more is
yet to come, Professors Weiner and Ruderman will carry out a diverse research
program in theoretical particle physics, one which stretches across multiple
length scales in anticipation of multiple emerging datasets from experiments.
This research will also have significant broader impacts. The PIs will create a
Math for Physical Sciences Bootcamp lecture series for high-school students.
They will also give public lectures, and will grant Physics in Media Fellowships
to support the travel of journalism and film students to visit physics
experiments that will appear in their stories and
movies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the PIs will develop a range of
new models of dark matter and particle physics, aimed at understanding what the
search capacity for existing and planned experiments will be and to motivate new
experiments. In particular, the PIs will study models of interacting dark
radiation and their impact on measurements of the Hubble parameter. They will
develop new models where dark matter is produced by exponential growth or
oscillations. They will also develop new models of dissipative and self-
interacting dark matter, and will study their impact on structure formation.
They will develop ways to exploit astrometric lensing and axion star explosions
in order to provide novel tests of dark-matter properties. They will also
develop a systematic procedure for treating CP violation in SMEFT using
invariant objects, and will deploy this procedure to study the size of CP
violation imprinted by various UV completions. Finally, the PIs will respond to
new data as it emerges to determine their theoretical
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.