* 2210687
* Novel p-Value Based Multiple Testing Methods for Variable Selection with False Discovery Rate Control
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sanat Sarkar, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 269,695.00

Multiple testing is one of the most common statistical challenges encountered in
modern scientific investigations. This project aims at resolving some
longstanding issues with application of multiple testing methods. One of these
issues arises in the context of discovering, among a large collection of
variables, those that are important influences on an outcome of interest.
Inapplicability of standard multiple testing methods due to the unknown
interdependency of the variables is such an issue. The methods under development
aim to provide new approaches to discovering important variables no matter how
the variables depend on each other, with the guarantee that, on average, only a
small, controlled fraction of unimportant variables end up as false discoveries.
An example application is in the identification of genetic variants which, among
many thousands of them, can influence a certain disease. The new methods can aid
in identifying genes as being relatively more relevant for therapeutic
intervention. The fundamental theoretical and methodological ideas behind the
development of these methods will be extended towards resolving similar issues
with multiple testing methods in other experimental settings as well. The
research to be carried out in the project will be incorporated into courses,
benefiting the training of undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is focused on addressing
important theoretical and methodological issues related to multiple testing. For
instance, feature/variable selection under the setting of multiple linear
regression with Gaussian noise, which plays an important role in data science
and is a ubiquitous statistical framework in scientific investigations, is often
framed as a multiple testing problem. A p-value based multiple testing method,
irrespective of what error rate is being considered to control the falsely
discovered important explanatory variables, capturing the correlation matrix of
the explanatory variables in full without losing control over the error rate,
would be most ideal. Unfortunately, such methods are yet to be developed in a
non-asymptotic setting. Similarly, for the related problem of simultaneous
testing of multivariate Gaussian means with non-diagonal correlation matrix,
subject to a control of an error rate, a p-value based multiple testing method
fully capturing the correlation information without losing control over that
rate is largely absent from the literature. The challenges will be met by
research that cross-fertilizes two seminal ideas on multiple inference: 1) the
use of p-value based multiple testing methods to control false discoveries; and
2) the use of the knockoff of the design matrix for variable selection in linear
regression settings. Concretely, the project aims at developing novel p-value
based false discovery rate and other powerful error rates controlling multiple
testing methods for 1) variable selection in multiple linear regression with
Gaussian noise, both in low- and high-dimensional settings; and 2) simultaneous
testing of multivariate Gaussian means with a general non-diagonal covariance
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.