* 2210126
* Investigation of optically-driven supercondcutors using pump-probe Raman scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dmitry Reznik, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 270,241.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is characterized by a
complete loss of electrical resistance. It is a quantum state that arises out of
strong interactions of electronic charges and orbitals, magnetism, and
vibrations of atoms. The specific mechanisms in many materials are puzzling to
scientists. This project takes advantage of a recently developed experimental
technique, pump-probe Raman spectroscopy, to investigate superconductivity in
so-called transient states. These occur right after a very short laser pulse
hits the material and either kicks some electrons out of their orbits or induces
large amplitude vibrations of the atoms. The material can briefly go into a
different transient state, e.g., a superconductor will lose superconductivity,
or the opposite can happen â€“ superconductivity may arise in a material that does
not exhibit it under normal circumstances. Time-resolved Raman scattering
creates a movie of how these states develop and how they come back to the
original state. The main idea behind this project is to make such movies of
superconductors to reveal otherwise hidden quantum processes. This knowledge is
used to test ideas about mechanisms of superconductivity and helps to harness
superconductors for practical applications. The work is carried out at the
ultrafast laser spectroscopy laboratory at the University of Colorado-Boulder
built with the funds provided earlier by the National Science Foundation. The
project contributes to the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on groundbreaking measurements of superconductors shortly after absorption of an
ultrashort laser pulse. The purpose is to experimentally investigate still
enigmatic mechanisms of equilibrium superconductivity in copper oxides as well
as the general phenomenon of light-induced nonequilibrium superconductivity. In
the experiments, the investigated sample is driven out of equilibrium by a short
laser pulse, and Raman scattering from another time-delayed pulse will probe its
relaxation. These experiments track time-evolution of phonons, electronic
temperature, and the superconducting gap as the system thermalizes. This novel
approach elucidates energy flows, transient timescales, and heating in
optically-driven superconductivity recently reported in intercalated C60 and
some copper oxides. Nonlinear phononics and Josephson current-based mechanisms
suggested as explanations of this phenomenon are tested. Advances in this area
will ultimately underlie development of new materials and devices involving
optical control of superconductivity. The work is carried out at the ultrafast
laser spectroscopy laboratory at the University of Colorado-Boulder built with
the funds provided previously by National Science Foundation. The project
contributes to the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.