* 2210755
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: A New Direction of Research and Development to Fulfill the Promise of Computational Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Feng Chen, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2025
* USD 267,074.00

As the speed gap between processor and storage keeps widening, moving
computation closer to data is a promising direction for high-speed data
processing. However, multiple challenging issues, such as the limited resources
on device hardware, stringent cost and power constraints, difficulties in
software development, and the lack of systematic solutions, are unfortunately
hindering a widespread adoption of computational storage in reality. This
project addresses these critical issues by using a cohesive approach to turn
computational storage into a cooperative component in the whole system. This
project also aims to make a broader impact by training students at different
levels with research activities, enriching curriculum and classroom teaching
with new research results, and contributing to educational and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes an effort to address the
challenging research issues, aiming to provide a new direction to fulfill the
promise of computational storage. By using a holistic and system-oriented
methodology, the project investigates critical research issues across multiple
layers in the system hierarchy and develops effective solutions. Specifically,
the project studies multiple important aspects in order to systematically
integrate computational storage into existing computing ecosystems, such as
designing a service-oriented abstraction for applications, optimizing system-
level resource utilization, leveraging proximity and mitigating memory resource
contention in device hardware, adapting core data structures and algorithms of
applications to fully exploit heterogeneous computing resources, etc. A set of
representative application cases is also studied for effectively leveraging
computational storage. The success of this project will make broad and
significant contributions to enable computational storage to address critical
challenges in increasingly more data-centric
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.