* 2210735
* Models and Inferences for Heterogeneous Interaction Patterns in Social Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jun Yan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

The rapid growth of social network platforms brings opportunities as well as
challenges to identify, extract, and investigate the users’ sentiment on
subjects of scientific and public interest. This research project aims to
identify the sources of social network heterogeneity. The project will study the
likelihood of replies to a posting as well as the propagation of sentiments
through a social network. Results of the study are expected to help identify
sentiment exchange patterns through interactions between users; detect sub-
networks of posts with emotional clusters or exhibiting sentiment polarization;
and understand how contagious sentiments propagate through the network of
Twitter posts. The project will be integrated into multilevel education through
graduate student advising, modernized graduate course components, undergraduate
research on carefully devised small problems, and outreach to high school
students. Broad participation will be encouraged through partnerships with
organizations promoting STEM among under-represented groups. Results from the
project will be shared via public repositories for data/codes, software
packages, online tutorials, and social media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic
networks are formed among Twitter users by evolving tweets on a certain theme
(e.g., depression) through retweets, replies, and mentions, which are critical
in sentiment analysis. Existing dynamic network models not accounting for
heterogeneous behavioral patterns cannot provide adequate fits for large, real
networks. This project aims to tackle two sources of heterogeneity in dynamic
network modeling: reciprocity in emotion sharing and similarity clustering in
terms of behavioral features. The investigators plan to develop two novel models
that modify the preferential attachment (PA) model. The first one retains the
scale-free property and allows personalized heterogeneous tendencies to generate
reciprocal edges. The second model is a practical spatial superstar PA model
that allows a higher level of interaction among nodes of closer social ties
measured in a feature space. Their theoretical properties will be studied via
rigorous asymptotic analyses. Inferences about the model parameters when fitting
observed networks will be developed through likelihood-based, Bayesian, moment-
based, and extreme value approaches. Implementations of the models and
inferences will be made publicly available via user-friendly, open-source
software packages. All the methods under development will be validated through
simulation studies, and the validated methods will then be applied to dynamic
networks from Tweets on mental-health-related tags.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.