* 2210168
* Collaborative Research: Fast and efficient phase-change photonics using low-dimensional materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Carlos Rios Ocampo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This project aims to demonstrate an active optical device that simultaneously
exploits the unique properties of phase-change and two-dimensional materials.
Active optical devices are currently achieved with platforms that require a
constant power supply, which is energy inefficient in optical applications with
sporadic modulation, such as light-based data storage. The reversible yet stable
optical response of phase-change materials has been explored as a solution to
this problem, given that their stable states allow for zero-static power
operation. These properties and their nanofabrication versatility have resulted
in unprecedented device performances in applications ranging from imaging to on-
chip optical computing. However, such applications rely on phase-change
materials optimized for the near-infrared spectrum (where telecommunications
take place). In contrast, several other classical and quantum technologies would
benefit from modulation closer to the visible spectrum. This project aims to
fill this gap by developing novel phase-change material and their control
mechanism, microheaters, that are transparent in the visible and compatible with
any substrate. To create the microheater, this project will explore the unique
properties of two-dimensional materials such as graphene, which is transparent
and allows for fast heating and cooling speeds. This project’s fast and
efficient platform based on phase-change and two-dimensional materials will be
broadly applicable to technologies such as metasurfaces, optical filters, novel
computing architectures, and reconfigurable (quantum) photonics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the use of microheaters
composed of low-dimensional materials as a method for high-speed and efficient
control of low-loss reconfigurable phase-change photonic devices for platforms
beyond silicon. Phase-change materials, such as Ge2Sb2Te5, Sb2Se3, etc., are
particularly promising for reconfigurable optical devices owing to their fast,
dramatic, non-volatile, and reversible change in refractive index. Experimental
demonstrations of reconfigurable smart windows, metasurfaces, and photonic
devices for memory and computing have reignited interest in these alloys.
However, work exploring electrical control over optical phase-change devices has
been limited to optically opaque platforms for wavelengths &lt;1.2µm, not
compatible with photonic platforms beyond silicon, and have slow heating and
cooling rates which limit their switching speed and energy efficiency.
Therefore, to fill these critical needs, this project aims to 1) develop new
solutions for controlling phase-change materials using a substrate-agnostic
platform with ultrafast 2D microheaters, 2) improve the optical transparency,
speed, and endurance by developing new phase-change alloys and systematically
studying their failure mechanisms, and 3) demonstrate efficient and reliable
waveguide integration. The project outcomes will have immediate relevance in the
fast-growing field of nonvolatile photonics, including free-space applications
such as metasurfaces and optical filters and photonic integrated circuits for
telecom, neuromorphic computing, and quantum
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.