* 2210432
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the connections between genetic interactions, environments, and phenotypes in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Patrick Krysan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 535,000.00

Organismal complexity is due in large part to genes working not in isolation but
with each other. Knowledge of such interactions will facilitate improving plant
productivity and resilience to increasingly extreme conditions. However,
studying the impacts of gene interactions on plant traits is challenging for two
reasons. First, there can be millions of possible interactions to sieve through.
Second, both nature (i.e., genes and gene interactions) and nurture (i.e., the
environment) are important. Even when a gene interaction is identified as being
important, its relevance is frequently known only for one environment. This
project will address these challenges by investigating the question of how
nature and nurture jointly impact plant traits. Specifically, interactions
between hundreds of pairs of genes in the model plant Arabidopsis will be
examined by measuring survival traits under different temperatures. Artificial
intelligence-based approaches will be used to measure traits and to build models
that predict gene interactions under different environments. These prediction
models will also incorporate existing knowledge of interactions among similar
genes from non-plant species. The predictions will be tested experimentally and
will provide insight into how nature and nurture jointly influence plant
survival and fitness. Such insight will facilitate better predictions of gene
functions in both model and crop plants and provide candidate genes for
engineering productive and resilient plants. Findings from this project will
serve as examples illustrating to the scientific community and the public the
benefits of integrating experimental and computational approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in genetics and genomics have led to an
unprecedented understanding of how genotypes connect with phenotypes and the
roles of genetic interactions and the environment in controlling phenotype.
However, the environmental dependency of gene × gene interactions is frequently
not considered, particularly in multicellular species. The goal of this project
is to better understand the connection between genotypes and phenotype by
assessing the impact of environmental perturbation on genetic interactions and
by identifying the genetic components underlying this plasticity in the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana using protein kinase genes as examples. This will be
accomplished through phenotyping experiments coupled with computational
modeling. First, models predicting genetic interactions specific to an
environmental context will be generated through multi-omics data integration and
the use of existing genetic interaction data from Arabidopsis and other model
species (e.g., yeast and worm) and new experimental data generated from 150–200
pairs of single and double kinase mutants grown in 3–5 different environmental
contexts (i.e., temperature regimes), yielding multiple trait values, which will
be used to calculate quantitative measures of genetic interactions between gene
pairs and the environment. Next, model predictions will be validated using the
experimental data, and the results will be used to further refine the models.
The refined models will be dissected using model interpretation methods to
reveal the molecular features important for specifying context-specific genetic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.