* 2210228
* NSF-ANR: Cellular Crowding and Condensation Under Shear Flow
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Lisa Lapidus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,068,886.00

Inside biological cells there is a highly concentrated mix of biomolecules,
proteins and nucleic acids, that interact frequently. Most of these interactions
are non-specific, but they may nevertheless lead to clustering, aggregation, and
the formation of phase separated regions, all of which can have a significant
impact on biological function. In this project, hydrodynamic flow present inside
living cells is studied as a new dimension that is expected to modulate
transient molecular interactions and enhance or suppress aggregation and phase
separation as a consequence. The outcome of these efforts is a more complete,
fully dynamic view of how biomolecules interact in dense biological
environments. The project involves a close integration between biophysical
experiments and computer simulations. There are synergistic benefits from
international collaboration between US and French groups to develop
complementary computational expertise for large-scale simulations of interacting
biomolecules in the presence of external flow. The impact of the research
activities is enhanced by extensive involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in highly interdisciplinary research with a strong focus on the
continued recruitment and support of females and underrepresented minorities in
biophysical research. The development of a new physics curriculum targeted at
life science majors is another goal for making physics education more relevant
for biology topics. In another direction, a public outreach component is
developed where physical demonstrations are combined with computer simulations
to illustrate the abstract concept of diffusion via particle interactions in the
context of biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In dense cellular
environments biomolecules interact frequently via transient non-specific
interactions. Such interactions may lead to clustering, condensation, and
aggregation. Here the effect of shear flow on such processes is examined as a
new dimension towards understanding the behavior of biomolecules in realistic
biological environments. Shear flow is present in biological cells and is
expected to modulate transient interactions and condensation and potentially
facilitate aggregation. Different model systems will be investigated via
experiments and computer simulations. The model systems include concentrated
solutions of globular proteins to study non-condensing transient clustering,
peptide-RNA mixtures to study condensation, and highly dynamic intrinsically
disordered peptides to examine intra- and intermolecular diffusion in crowded
and condensing environments. Experiments involve nano-scale spectroscopy and
micron-scale microscopy techniques; computer simulations emphasize a highly
multi-scale approach in order to bridge between molecular and cellular scales.
International collaboration between US and French groups adds complementary
expertise for simulating large-scale biomolecular systems in the presence of
hydrodynamic flow. The impact of the research activities is enhanced by
extensive involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in highly
interdisciplinary research with a strong focus on the continued recruitment and
support of females and underrepresented minorities in biophysical research. The
development of a new physics curriculum targeted at life science majors is
another goal for making physics education more relevant for biology topics. In
another direction, a public outreach component is developed where physical
demonstrations are combined with computer simulations to illustrate the abstract
concept of diffusion via particle interactions in the context of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.