* 2210615
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Resolving Novel Arctic Late Season Phytoplankton Blooms
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Karen Frey, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 60,120.00

Warming temperatures and decreased sea ice cover in the Pacific and Central
Arctic have led to changes in annual growth patterns of marine algae
(phytoplankton), most notably permitting novel growth to occur during the fall
season. Phytoplankton serve as the foundation of the Arctic marine food web, and
disruptions in the timing of growth can be detrimental to current ecosystems.
Limitations of satellite remote sensing such as the inability to detect
phytoplankton bloom activity throughout the water column, under ice, and in
cloudy conditions dictate the need for shipboard based measurements to provide
more information on bloom dynamics. This project refines a novel methodology to
estimate the growing stage of phytoplankton blooms throughout the water column
using satellite imagery as a reference. Estimated summer bloom stages will be
used along with atmospheric and oceanic conditions to identify the drivers of
fall phytoplankton blooms to better estimate where they might occur. This
information will be beneficial for predicting late season biological hotspots
for conservation, scientific, and marine subsistence
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Repeat cruise measurements will be used to map
modeled bloom stages throughout the water column in the summer and fall
throughout the Pacific Arctic and northward to the ice edge. This research will
also develop two models to (1) identify immediate drivers of observed late bloom
growth and (2) identify midsummer preconditioning scenarios for fall blooms and
validate model predictions with in situ observations. This research utilizes two
NSF-funded cruises: the Distributed Biological Observatory in July 2013–2022 and
the Synoptic Arctic Survey in fall 2022. Phytoplankton chlorophyll-a and
pheophytin (degraded chlorophyll) concentrations will be collected on the 2022
cruises. NASA MODIS-Aqua satellite chlorophyll-a and in situ pheophytin
proportions will be used to develop bloom stage models that distinguish growing
versus senescent blooms. The bloom stage model will be applied to measurements
collected throughout the water column to extract more information from cruise
samples, broaden the context of observations, and understand bloom progression.
The fall bloom driver and preconditioning models will be developed using a
machine learning regression approach. Variables that will be examined include
remotely sensed and modelled datasets of high wind speed events, wind direction,
sea ice breakup and freeze-up dates, and in situ measurements of nutrients,
temperature, salinity, and stratification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.