* 2210252
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: JUNO3: SWIFT: Softwarization of Intelligence for Efficient 6G Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mostafa Fouda, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Future wireless networks are expected to operate in the 60 GHz WiGig frequency
band to support demanding applications such as virtual reality and augmented
reality. However, the wireless links at the WiGig band suffer from frequent
outages. This in turn degrades the perceived service quality for mobile users.
To enable stable and high-quality wireless connectivity in the WiGig band, this
joint US-Japan project proposes an intelligent layer that learns the conditions
of the wireless links and network traffic load and makes informed network
management decisions to mitigate network disruption. This layer will support
ultra-high data rates with low latency, thus ensuring good application
performance and user satisfaction despite the wide dynamic range present in the
environment. By enabling stable and high-quality WiGig connections, this project
will enable sixth generation (6G) applications such as haptic communication,
augmented reality, virtual reality, remote surgery, etc. Hence, this project
broadly impacts several aspects of society and enhances the economic
competitiveness of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the future, ultra-high
throughput and ultra-low delay applications are anticipated to constitute 90% of
mobile data traffic. As a result, 6G wireless networks will operate in the
uncongested high frequency bands, e.g., the 60 GHz WiGig. Due to limited
diffraction capabilities, the wireless links at the WiGig band suffer from
frequent outages. To maintain stable wireless connectivity with user mobility,
this joint US-Japam project proposes SWIFT, SoftWarization of Intelligence for
eFficient 6G mobile neTworks. SWIFT extends the software defined networking
(SDN) architecture by integrating an artificial intelligence (AI)-based layer in
the SDN control plane to enable efficient resource management decisions. The
project includes the following research thrusts: (1) Generation, validation, and
characterization of wireless channel gain and traffic load in WiGig networks
while considering dynamic scenarios; (2) Development of efficient prediction
models for wireless channel gain and traffic load in WiGig networks based on
deep machine learning techniques; (3) Development of AI-based strategy for
channel assignment in WiGig networks based on reinforcement learning tools. The
project plans a proof-of-concept implementation and performance validation of
the SWIFT framework using a state-of-the-art testbed that mimics indoor mobile
WiGig networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.