* 2210385
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a zeolite filter to dry biomass in an energy efficient, cost effective, and gentle manner
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Goggin, Startle Innovation LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,655.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to develop a novel method of drying agricultural products that is
more energy efficient than current commercial devices and preserves the
nutritional value of the dried products. This project is based upon fast
dehydration of wet biomass using desiccants comprised of particles of a certain
size and arrangement. According to preliminary trials, this method may be 10
times more energy efficient than other drying methods. This project will produce
a reusable particle filter that can be used to efficiently dehydrate food and
agricultural products. This drying method can preserve nutritional value within
the US food system while simultaneously reducing production costs, make
agricultural industries more economically viable, and be easily powered by
renewable energy sources thereby reducing fossil fuel consumption within the
food industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation of this STTR Phase
I project is the development of efficient and effective drying methods for
agricultural products. The technology is based on the incorporation of zeolite
particles onto a substrate while maintaining their porosity. In order to achieve
rapid dehydration of wet matter, the zeolite must be small in size and supported
on a substrate so that its surface retains functionality. This methodology
requires careful chemical synthesis. The key research goals are to conjugate or
physically bind zeolite particles to a porous substrate, maintain the accessible
surface area of the zeolite, and create a new material that can endure many
cycles of brief low-power microwave heating to accomplish dehydration. In this
project, several approaches will be investigated, starting with the synthesis of
porous substrates, then modifying the surface to contain a controlled number of
chemical functional groups, and then coating the substrate with zeolite using
covalent linkages. In addition to covalent monolayer linkages, the project will
also aim to optimize substrate coverage using other binding mechanisms such as
hydrogen bonding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.