* 2210309
* Spiraling Into Control: Ultra High-Impedance Superconducting Resonators for Strongly-Coupled Spin-Cavity QED
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Nichol, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 294,264.00

Quantum technology has the potential to provide resource-efficient approaches to
computing, communication, and sensing. Two leading platforms for quantum
information processing are electron-spin qubits in semiconductors and
superconducting circuits. This study aims to couple these two systems together
to create a hybrid quantum system consisting of a single electron spin in a
cavity which may have diverse applications in fields like metrology and quantum
computing. Furthermore, this project aims to broaden participation of
underrepresented minorities and improve STEM education by involving high-school
summer interns from the Rochester City School District in the proposed research
and developing course material on quantum science together with high-school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here will explore a new
approach for quantum-mechanical interaction between individual electron-spin
qubits and superconducting microwave photons, with the goal to establish strong
coupling in a spin-cavity QED system. Although coupling between spins and
superconducting microwave resonators has previously been demonstrated, the
interaction is not strong enough for robust quantum-information-processing
applications, including spin-photon state transduction and multi-qubit
operations between distant spin qubits. To overcome this challenge, the proposed
research will explore a new type of spiral microwave resonator, which is
predicted to enable much stronger spin-photon coupling strengths than previous
resonators, owing to its high impedance. This proposal aims to verify this
prediction by fabricating niobium spiral resonators and integrating them with
quantum dot spin-qubit devices. The large spin-photon coupling enabled by this
work will pave the way for the realization of long-distance interactions between
spins, spin-photon state transduction, and the creation of new hybrid quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.