* 2210979
* Collaborative Research: BirdFlow: Learning Bird Population Flows from Citizen Science Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Sheldon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2025
* USD 827,019.00

Billions of birds migrate each year in journeys that are largely hidden from
human observation, yet are &lt;br/&gt;critical to the success of bird
populations. To understand and monitor migratory species, data and
&lt;br/&gt;methods are needed that can capture the movements of bird populations
across the globe. The eBird &lt;br/&gt;citizen science project receives millions
of bird observations throughout the year and uses these data to
&lt;br/&gt;produce detailed weekly abundance maps for hundreds of migratory
species around the world. Despite &lt;br/&gt;this rich information about bird
distributions, scientists lack widespread, detailed data about the
&lt;br/&gt;migratory routes that link bird populations and their habitats
throughout the year. In the BirdFlow &lt;br/&gt;project, a team of computer
scientists and ornithologists will use citizen science data to create models
&lt;br/&gt;and algorithms to infer population movements of migratory birds. The
models will allow inferences &lt;br/&gt;currently unavailable to ecologists at
the scale of full populations and flyways, including simulated
&lt;br/&gt;migration routes and movement forecasts. The resulting data will help
address urgent needs in ecology, &lt;br/&gt;conservation, and industry,
including understanding connectivity between populations and links
&lt;br/&gt;between migration and evolution, as well as applications to disease
spread and aviation safety. &lt;br/&gt;Visualizations and educational material
will be created to inspire the public and raise awareness about
&lt;br/&gt;biodiversity and ecosystem health. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
BirdFlow project will develop models and algorithms to infer bird movements from
citizen science &lt;br/&gt;data. Data products from the eBird Status and Trends
project will provide information about the weekly &lt;br/&gt;distributions of
bird populations, and optimization problems will be formulated to infer
population &lt;br/&gt;movements that are consistent with the weekly
distributions and approximately minimize energetic &lt;br/&gt;costs. Individual
tracking data and other evidence will be used to validate and improve models.
&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the work will build on an emerging line of research that
uses probabilistic graphical models &lt;br/&gt;to learn about probability
distributions over many variables from partial information, such as noisy
&lt;br/&gt;estimates of the distributions of individual variables. Software and
data products will be created that &lt;br/&gt;will allow scientists to use pre-
fitted BirdFlow models to simulate synthetic migration routes and create
&lt;br/&gt;movement forecasts for species of interest. The project team will use
BirdFlow to conduct ecological &lt;br/&gt;research about patterns and drivers of
migration in the Western Hemisphere. Project information can &lt;br/&gt;be found
at https://birdflow-science.github.io/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.