* 2211123
* CIF: Small: Signal Recovery Beyond Minimization: A Monotone Inclusion Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Patrick Combettes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 409,636.00

The problem of extracting information from data is at the core of many tasks in
signal processing and machine learning. The importance of this problem stems
from its pervasiveness in numerous areas of science and engineering, including
medical imaging, geophysics, astronomy, forecasting, nondestructive testing,
seismology, telecommunications, social media analysis, speech analysis,
healthcare, and homeland security. This project investigates foundational
principles governing the mathematical formulation of signal recovery and machine
learning problems and develops new strategies and methodologies for data
processing that significantly improve the efficiency of existing techniques and
broadens their scope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most prevalent methodology that
has been used to formulate information-extraction tasks has been to associate a
loss function with each piece of prior knowledge and each observation, and to
minimize an aggregate of these functions. In recent years, an increasing number
of problem formulations have emerged, which cannot be naturally reduced to
tractable minimization problems and which are best captured by more general
notions of equilibria. The broad goal of this project is to lay out the
theoretical and computational foundations of a framework based on monotone-
operator theory to model and aggregate prior knowledge and observations in data
processing problems. The proposed framework encompasses the standard
minimization setting as well as various forms of equilibria. It exploits the
broad modeling capabilities of monotone operators, their rich theory, and the
powerful machinery of monotone operator splitting algorithms to provide robust
and efficient numerical solution methods. The impact of the theoretical findings
and of the new methodologies resulting from this research is illustrated through
applications to concrete signal recovery and machine-learning
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.