* 2211126
* Conference: Support for Students to Attend 2022 APS-DAMOP Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 02/28/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides support for student participation in the 2022 meeting of the
American Physical Society's Division of Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics,
to be held May 30 – June 3 in Orlando FL, pandemic conditions permitting. The
award supports travel expenses for approximately 20 graduate students. The
conference program includes many of the research topics central to theoretical
and experimental Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics and Quantum Information
Science. The support of students through this award makes a substantial
contribution to the education and training of future scientists. Students who
graduate with a background in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical physics acquire a
broad range of knowledge and skills that enable them to contribute to progress
in many areas of science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
includes a special “Graduate Student Symposium” on the day prior to the main
meeting. The symposium provides students with a pedagogical introduction to
important themes in current research. The subject for 2022 will be “Textbook AMO
platforms for Fundamental Science and Technology.” In addition to the symposium,
the conference offers an opportunity for students to present their research
results and to interact with more senior scientists from the United States and
abroad. Travel support is provided only for students enrolled in US
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.