* 2211824
* Collaborative Research: Developing Advanced Magnesium Electrolytes Toward Low Cost, High Energy Density Mg Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tianbiao Liu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2025
* USD 405,718.00

In this collaborative project, the team will research advanced magnesium
(Mg)-based electrolytes facilitating the development of novel (non-Lithium-
based) low-cost and high-performance rechargeable batteries. In response to
rapidly increasing energy storage demands of consumer electronics, electric
vehicles, and clean energy storage, there is an urgent call for advanced
rechargeable batteries with superior energy storage performance compared to
state-of-the-art Li ion batteries. Magnesium is a highly attractive anode
material due to its high charge capacity, mild reactivity, domestic
availability, and low-cost. However, the lack of high-performance Mg2+ ion
conductive electrolytes has been a primary technical hurdle for developing
practical Mg batteries. The outcomes of this project will pave the way to
develop competent and high energy density Mg batteries for applications in
portable devices, electric vehicles, and renewable energy storage, thereby
alleviating reliance on fossil fuels and their adverse environmental impacts and
enhancing the sustainable development of our society. This project integrates
outreach activities aimed at promoting research experience and scientific vision
of high school and undergraduate students, particularly emphasizing the
involvement of underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental research focuses on developing advanced Cl-free magnesium
pinacolatoborate electrolytes while establishing a fundamental understanding of
the structure-property relationship of designed Mg electrolytes. The project
will result in new in depth understanding of the interfacial and/or
intercalation chemistry of the designed Cl-free magnesium pinacolatoborate
electrolytes with Mg anode and Mg ion intercalation/insertion cathode materials
through an integrated experimental and computational approach. Since current
understanding of Mg batteries significantly lags that of Li-ion batteries, this
project will yield a substantial knowledge foundation to develop competent high
energy density Mg battery technologies for electrochemical energy storage. In
addition, the gained fundamental knowledge will also benefit the development of
other multivalent battery technologies such as calcium and aluminum
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.