* 2211256
* SGR:  Pathogenic bacteria may emerge with warming arctic tundra: A concern for human health
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Linda Nicholas-Figueroa, Ilisagvik College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions increases the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, supports research studies in areas that may be
locally relevant and encourages faculty members to look beyond the traditional
classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This two-year research
project submitted by Ilisagvik College aligns directly with these goals.
Building on a previous study to comprehensively assess bacterial species by type
and abundance present in the soil of the arctic tundra, the study engages
undergraduate and secondary school students in faculty-led research in which
soil samples will be collected, genetically sequenced, and quantified, to
identify and inventory pathogenic species of bacteria. Data generated will
contribute to crucial information for tracking the ramifications of changes in
climate as potentially pathogenic bacteria are released due to tundra thawing.
Along with the broader impacts the study supports related to public health,
additional impacts are realized through involving students in real-world
research relevant to their communities and stimulating student interest in STEM
degrees and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing research that has been
ongoing for 5+ years and involving Ilisagvik College faculty and student
researchers, this project will engage in a comprehensive assessment of microbial
species, measuring the composition and abundance of bacterial species that are
present in three layers of arctic tundra soil in Utqiaġvik, Alaska through
dependent and independent culturing, DNA extraction, DNA sequencing, and
analysis. The study focuses on looking for pathogenic species relevant to public
health including Mycobacterium simulans. Using an ice-core drill, soil samples
will be collected in January, February, March, April, September, and October
2022 – 2024 from the Barrow Environmental Observatory located in Utqiaġvik, AK.
Researchers will engage in gene sequencing and measuring the abundance of
actively transcribing bacterial species that are present in the samples. This
work holds significant intellectual value to advance arctic climate research in
its contribution to the body of data required to track and analyze the potential
ramifications of pathogens released due to tundra thaw. Additionally, by
mentoring students in conducting place-based research that affects them
directly, the project encourages students to pursue STEM educational pathways
and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.