* 2211589
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Towards Variability-Aware Software Analysis and Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robyn Lutz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 314,785.00

Much of the software upon which society depends is highly configurable, with
many optional and alternative features that can be turned on or off. Some
combinations of options “play well” together. Other combinations of options may
cause the software to crash or behave incorrectly and must be avoided. A wrong
variety of features can be dangerous in safety-critical applications, such as in
the health or aerospace domains. As software becomes more complex and offers
more features, the risk of disconnects increases between those combinations that
are disallowed per the requirements specifications and those constraints that
are actually implemented in the code. The project will enable more effective
analysis and testing of software product lines and configurable systems compared
to the state-of-the-art. It will train students in the increasingly automated
software analysis needed to verify complex, highly configurable software systems
and product lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to extend software
analysis techniques to automatically extract feature constraints from the
program’s code and check them against the feature constraints in the software
requirements. The goal is to help automatically repair any inconsistencies and
to derive tests that achieve high coverage of the variability constraints. The
project will leverage variability-aware software analysis by adapting program
analysis techniques such as symbolic execution and static analysis to be
variability-aware at the intermediate-representation level. Variability
constraints will be automatically extracted from software using variability-
aware analysis. This will enable evaluating the impact of variability on the
functional as well as non-functional properties. Additionally, extracted
variability constraints will be used to check whether the software meets
variability requirements and identify any required repairs. The project will
apply and evaluate the proposed approach to real-world systems, paying
particular attention to safety-critical constraints, and develop a set of
challenge problems that reflect difficulties that developers face in practice
for use by researchers and in coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.