* 2211890
* Metamaterial Architectures for Programmable Droplet Motion
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Sungyon Lee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 10/31/2025
* USD 499,518.00

This grant supports fundamental research for controlling the motion of liquid
droplets on solid surfaces. The problem of droplet control is relevant for
numerous industrial applications, from self-drying surfaces and heat transfer
via droplet condensation to water harvesting and biomedical analysis. Therefore,
research in this direction can lead to discoveries with vast societal impact.
Most strategies for droplet motion control involve doctoring, either chemically
or mechanically, the surface that is in direct contact with the fluid, thus
altering irreversibly its default properties. This project promotes a different
paradigm that exploits the interaction between moving droplets and vibrating
surfaces. The project idea revolves around the use of emerging notions of
engineering metamaterials to design surfaces with spatially programmable
vibrational response that allows to alter the available landscape of droplet
motion on demand. In addition, the ability to couple metamaterials with fluidic
motion will be exploited to design intuitive demonstration devices that allow
visualizing, with the naked eye, complex elastic wave phenomena, making them
ideal for scientific outreach and for teaching advanced engineering
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of the project is to
design vibrating metamaterials for programming the locomotion of liquid droplets
on solid surfaces. Specifically, this research aims to realize control
strategies that allow deep manipulation of the fluid motion when the vibrating
state is on, while preserving the default system conditions in the off
configuration. With resonant metamaterials, it is possible to modulate the
vibrational response available in different regions of a surface. Through a
proper interplay of structural design and excitation tuning, one can selectively
program the onset of droplet depinning in select regions, thus spatially
engineering the available landscape of droplet motion according to a virtually
endless array of spatial patterns. Such design flexibility can be leveraged to
program a variety of complex logic scenarios for droplet motion, such as
clustering and segregation based on droplet size. The investigation is supported
by a series of table-top experiments via laser vibrometry and high-speed
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.