* 2211905
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Beat Modern Virtualization Obfuscation at Their Own Game: A Bottom-Up Deobfuscation Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Dongpeng Xu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,991.00

Obfuscation technology has been widely adopted by writers of malicious code
(malware) to circumvent defense solutions. The goal of obfuscation is to
transform malware into an equivalent, but highly complex form that hides the
malware's structure and hinders automatic detection solutions and even manual
inspection by security analysts. Rapid analysis of obfuscated malware is vital
for a swift response to emerging threats, such as ransomware. This research
project advances human knowledge on defeating obfuscated malware. The project's
novelties are the new knowledge revealed from the state-of-the-art obfuscation,
the new techniques designed for extracting the knowledge, and the new
deobfuscation methods for understanding such type of stealthy malware. The
project's broader significance and importance are new cybersecurity learning
experiences for K-12/undergraduate/graduate students, and new technologies for
national cybersecurity against a wide range of emerging malware threats, with
high potential for transition to practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insight of
this project is to leverage the virtualization technique itself to beat modern
virtualization obfuscators. Two major features play a crucial role in the
success of virtualization obfuscation: sophistication (the obfuscated form is
very complex and different from the original program) and diversification
(multiple obfuscated forms of the same program strikingly vary). These features
heavily impede existing deobfuscation techniques that rely on recognizing
special virtual machine patterns or treating the whole virtualization as a black
box. This project invents and implements a series of novel methods to: (1)
comprehensively probe the sophisticated structures inside virtual machines, such
as interpretation architecture, virtual instructions, and handler encryption,
(2) reveal the core techniques to combine, mutate, and randomize diverse virtual
machines, and (3) build a new, interpretable virtual machine specifically for
deobfuscation, which can be stitched into a simple, executable program as the
deobfuscation result. The new techniques developed from this project effectively
free security professionals from the painful, tedious deobfuscation steps
incurred in malware analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.