* 2211082
* GOALI: Magnetoelectric Nanoparticles As Multi-Field Controlled Devices for Activation of Brain Circuitry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ping Liang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Part 1: Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The grant’s main objective is to
conduct a basic experimental study to understand the feasibility of using a new
class of intelligent materials known as magnetoelectric nanoparticles (MENPs) to
create a revolutionary technology for high precision wireless deep brain
stimulation. Owing to their quantum-mechanical properties, particularly the
magnetoelectric effect, MENPs can serve as nanoscale multimodal hubs capable of
combining strengths of different fields, while mitigating their weaknesses, to
achieve wireless deep brain stimulation with a sub-mm spatial resolution in real
time. To date, such capability has not been made possible by any other
stimulation technology. Furthermore, by unlocking such unprecedented technology
capabilities, MENPs promise to make significant impacts on two large application
areas. First, they will allow to treat neurological disorders and diseases,
e.g., Parkinson’s, Autism, Alzheimer’s, Major Depression, and others, as well as
deadly brain tumors such as glioblastomas at the molecular level, wirelessly and
with control levels never available before. Second, by paving a way to wireless
brain-machine interface with a record high spatiotemporal resolution, MENPs will
enable a wireless connection between the human and artificial intelligence (AI)
with record-high spatial and temporal resolutions, thus allowing to create a
powerful tool to understand the computing architecture of the human brain and
reciprocally, create leapfrog advances in the state of AI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Unlike
any other nanoparticles known to date, MENPs display a non-zero magnetoelectric
effect and thus offer a multimodal functionality to electrically, and
wirelessly, stimulate neural activity of selected local regions across the
entire brain with the spatial resolution in the sub-millimeter size range in
real time. The functionality is multimodal because the magnetoelectric effect
allows to simultaneously use a combination of remotely controlled magnetic
fields, focused ultrasound waves or near-infrared light to generate a
spatiotemporal pattern of the local electric field to achieve the required high
precision stimulation. Owing to the hybrid approach (magnetics-ultrasound or
magnetics-near-infrared) this multimodal application allows to enhance strengths
of any of these field modes alone while mitigating their disadvantages.
Integration of magnetic fields with the ultrasound and near-infrared modes will
be comparatively studied to understand the pros and cons of these two hybrid
approaches. In both cases, the magnetic field will be used to deliver most of
the energy required to stimulate neurons, while the ultrasound wave or near-
infrared light will be used as the second low-energy field mode to define the
selected local stimulation region. The experiments using core-shell MENPs made
of lattice-matched magnetostrictive core, e.g., CoFe2O4 (cobalt ferrite) and
piezoelectric shell, e.g., BaTiO3 (barium titanite) will include two parts: (1)
nanoprobe measurements to quantify the multimodal energy addition effects and
tailor the key core-shell MENPs’ properties and (2) in vitro studies using
hippocampus neuronal cell cultures to understand the interaction of the
multimodal effects due to activation by multiple effects on neuronal firing
(measured via Ca++ imaging). In addition, we will study the effects of different
MENPs’ compositions and surface functionalization on the wirelessly controlled
firing capabilities. The two hybrid modes, (i) magnetics-ultrasound and (ii)
magnetics-near-infrared, respectively, will be comparatively studied from the
perspectives of the required energy, the spatial resolution, the depth of
penetration, and the penetration through the skull and the brain tissue. To
achieve the aforementioned goals, the GOALI team is made of four experienced
researchers with cross-disciplinary backgrounds including (i) a nanotechnology
expert who co-pioneered MENPs for medical applications, (ii) a neuroscientist,
(iii) a photonics innovator, and (iv) an industry co-investigator who is an
accomplished signal processing expert and a co-pioneer (with the principal
investigator) of MENPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.