* 2211077
* Assessing the Expectations Gap: Impact on Critical Infrastructure Service Providers and  Consumers Preparedness, and Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Branden Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 554,617.00

While community lifeline service providers and local emergency managers must
maintain coordinated response and recovery plans, their timelines may not match
expectations of local consumers of lifeline services. Indeed, it is quite likely
consumers have unrealistic expectations about lifeline restoration, which could
explain current inadequate levels of disaster preparedness. This hypothesized
expectation gap has received little attention because engineering research
typically addresses providers’ capacities, whereas disaster research addresses
household and business preparedness. Successful completion of this project will
provide government agencies, lifeline providers, and consumers with strong
evidence to address the expectations gap and, in turn, promote appropriate
preparedness actions that will increase community resilience. This project will
produce significant societal benefits to consumers and lifeline providers in the
broader Cascadia region, and other areas exposed to major earthquakes by
facilitating an informed information exchange among stakeholders. We focus on
energy, water, wastewater, and communication, whose restoration is critical for
limiting cascading damages, and for rapid recovery of community
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project will address this issue by assessing
consumers’ (households, business owners/managers, nonprofit managers)
expectations about lifeline system performance, and comparing them to lifeline
provider capacity in a post-hazard event scenario (following a Cascadia
subduction zone earthquake of 9.0 magnitude or greater) in two
communities—Kirkland and Shoreline, WA (likely to experience most shaking in
this scenario). The research goal of this project is to identify and quantify
determinants of the gap between societal expectations of critical lifeline
systems performance in a hazard event and the planned resilience (avoiding
failures/ timeline for service restoration) of these systems. We will address
the following research questions: 1) What do consumers think is the likely level
of critical lifeline disruption from an earthquake and the timeline for
restoration? 2) What are consumers’ current levels of preparedness for lifeline
interruption? 3) What do lifeline providers and an independent engineering
expert think are providers’ capabilities to maintain and restore lifeline
services? 4) How do consumers’ expectations compare with providers’ capabilities
(expectations gap)? 5) How will this study’s feedback about the expectations gap
affect consumers’ and providers’ lifeline resilience expectations, as well as
their mitigation and preparedness intentions? Our research methodology ensures
that minority residents and business will directly benefit from this research
through feedback information sharing in second round of data collection.
Outcomes of this research will enhance consumers’ preparedness and lifeline
providers’ recovery capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.