* 2211599
* CPS: Medium: Safety Assured, Performance Driven Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,195,425.00

Capabilities of autonomous vehicles has surged in the last ten years, propelled
by the promise that, in a very near future, commercial self-driving cars will be
safe and perform well. Academia is spurring ground-breaking research (e.g., deep
learning) and industry is validating software and hardware extensively with
millions of miles being driven on the roads and in simulation. Yet, by all
accounts - we are still years away from full deployment. One of the primary
limitations is the presence of events outside `typical' scenarios. These events
range from environmental anomalies (e.g., a swerving car), sensor mistakes
(e.g., missed detection of a truck) to security challenges (e.g., remote
attacks, spoofing of sensors). These events, while typically rare, reduce
reliability of self-driving cars to a level that is unacceptable to the
consumer. This research program will develop new algorithms, hardware and
validated CPS architecture concepts for autonomous systems operating for long
periods of time, such as self-driving cars and flying delivery robots. The work
will also be applicable to any autonomous system operating in dynamic
environments, such as robots operating in public areas and the home.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a holistic CPS
architecture for safety assurance and continual performance improvement for
autonomous systems operating over long periods of time via probabilistic
algorithms, safety guarantees and a secure and agile platform. The technical
approach develops three sub-architectures for autonomous CPS systems. A Safety
Assured architecture provides probabilistic collision guarantees on secure
hardware. A Performance Driven architecture provides robust perception and
planning in general conditions, with adaptable algorithms and hardware via
dynamic resource allocation. And a Self-Improving architecture works in the
background to reason about rare events outside typical scenarios and improve
perception and planning algorithms via model learning and software updates.
Importantly, by directly working with the inherent coupling between the hardware
platform and algorithms, a safety assured CPS architecture will be developed to
provide collision avoidance guarantees due to rare events. In addition, adaptive
resource allocation on a hardware/software platform along with novel agile
algorithms which are adaptable will allow the system to further refine and
update inference about the scene and plan options, as well as improve over time.
Two experimental testbeds will be used to validate the research. The first is a
robot driving in a controlled lab environment in a small-scale city. The second
testbed utilizes regularly logged sensor data from a self-driving car to
evaluate perception-based mistakes, environmental anomalies, and continual
improvement over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.