* 2211761
* RUI: The Origins of Statistical Variation of Strength in Micropatterned Adhesive Contacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jamie Booth, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 302,096.00

This grant investigates the relationship between the properties of roughness on
real-world surfaces and the resulting performance of novel controllable and
reusable adhesive surfaces. Based upon patterning surfaces with arrays of
microscale structures, taking inspiration from the toepads of insects and
lizards, these adhesives can transition between strong attachment and easy
detachment over many repeat cycles. This may enable new capabilities in gripping
of delicate objects in extreme environments (e.g. in vacuum and underwater) or
in the creation of multifunctional interfaces (e.g. in biomedical diagnostics
and therapeutics). Differences in interfacial defects at each micropatterned
sub-contact results in variation in local adhesive performance, with the
statistical properties influencing the global strength and stability of the
adhesive patch. This work will establish relationships which enable prediction
of the emerging statistical behavior and resulting adhesive performance, based
upon characteristic properties of the contacting surfaces. This grant will also
strengthen research-based educational activities for the Mechanical Engineering
student body at California State University Northridge, of whom 65.6 percent are
from traditionally underserved minorities. The reach will be extended through a
course-based undergraduate project, allowing a large volume of students to
contribute meaningful data toward achieving the research objectives.
Additionally, participating students will serve as undergraduate mentors and run
high school outreach workshops themed around the
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several key gaps in understanding will be addressed
in this study. The adhesive strength of sub-contacts has only been characterized
for idealized defects, and a comprehensive range of defect size, shape, and
position will be considered. Cohesive zone finite element simulations of
microstructural detachment will provide the strength as defect properties are
varied. Defect formation on rough surfaces is not understood, and must be
examined to relate the surface characteristics to the statistical distribution
of adhesive strength. Molecular dynamics simulations will yield contact maps as
spectral properties of the roughness and the elastic properties of the bodies
are varied. Experimental characterization of micropatterned adhesives will be
performed on surfaces with manufactured defects and random roughness to validate
relationships obtained through modeling and simulation. Lastly, understanding of
the influence of statistical variation in sub-contact adhesive strength on
performance at length and time scales approximating temporary bonding
applications must be expanded. A semi-analytical mechanical model of adhesive
patch behavior will integrate this local variation and examine the combined
effects of substrate curvature, loading rate, and patch size on the global
adhesive performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.