* 2211835
* Travel: CoNECD 2022 BPE CAREER Award Panel
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2023
* USD 21,294.00

The Faculty Early CAREER Development Program (CAREER) is an NSF-wide program
recognized as one of the most prestigious awards that support the research
efforts of early career faculty. It recognizes the importance of early academic
career development and emphasizes the importance of the link between research
and education. It is fairly recent that CAREER awards have been made in the area
of broadening participation in engineering, with many of the awardees being
involved in engineering education research. It is imperative that the results of
research in this area be broadly shared with both practitioners and other
researchers in order to reap the full benefits of the research outcomes.
Conferences are a much quicker and more frequent venue, often showcasing not
just completed efforts but also works in progress. The benefit to the researcher
is the opportunity to network and obtain valuable feedback on their work, while
the practitioner gains knowledge of evidenced based practices that they can
utilize in their current work. The CoNECD Conference will host a panel of CAREER
awardees in the area of broadening participation. This presents an opportunity
for four early career faculty to showcase their work to an audience of
researchers and practitioners. The panel host is a CAREER award recipient and an
assistant professor of engineering education at Virginia Tech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted by
these NSF CAREER awardees is vital for those concerned with the lack of
diversity in engineering and computing fields. To reach its full potential, it
is necessary for research results to be shared with practitioners who can then
tailor their programmatic efforts using evidence-based outcomes that are
grounded in current literature. As opposed to relying on anecdotal evidence of
activities that have been successful, practitioners can utilize the CAREER
research results to better inform their efforts. The panel will aid in the
dissemination of NSF funded research directly to the community that needs
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The CoNECD Conference is the
only conference that focuses on broadening participation of all groups
underrepresented in engineering. CoNECD provides a forum for exploring current
research and practices to enhance diversity and inclusion of all
underrepresented populations in the engineering and computing professions
including gender identity and expression, race and ethnicity, disability,
veterans, LGBTQ+, 1st generation and socio-economic status. This proposal will
enable sharing of current research in broadening participation with those who
are charged with achieving this goal. It is expected that this will enable the
practitioners to create evidence-based activities that will increase the numbers
of underrepresented and underserved individuals who engage in engineering and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.