* 2211972
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Polynomial Optimization: Algorithms, Certificates and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Venkatesan Guruswami, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 269,793.00

Computational problems arising in diverse fields of sciences and engineering can
be modeled as optimizing an appropriate objective function subject to a set of
constraints. A case of wide interest that captures a surprising array of
problems is when the objective function is a polynomial of low-degree. A rich
body of theoretical and applied work has led to a fairly extensive understanding
of algorithms and hardness for optimizing linear and quadratic functions on
domains such as the unit sphere or the hypercube in high dimensions. The
situation for polynomials of degree greater than two is, however, not yet well
understood. The goal of this project is to advance the frontiers of optimizing
higher-degree polynomials in terms of algorithms to estimate and proofs to
approximately bound their optima, and then leverage this enhanced understanding
in diverse applications. The motivation is both the intrinsic importance of
polynomial optimization, as well as several extraneous contexts (constraint
satisfaction, graph theory, high-dimensional geometry, proof complexity, and
pseudo-randomness, to name a few) where polynomial/tensor optimization arises
naturally and could hold the key to further progress. An an example direction,
of high importance in modern learning and inference applications, is the
generalization of the frequently used principal-component analysis of matrix-
valued data to higher-order tensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents
three carefully crafted and intertwined directions to significantly advance the
understanding of polynomial optimization. This includes a fresh approach to
finding new rounding algorithms that will lead to approximation algorithms with
improved guarantees for maximizing cubic and higher-degree polynomials, which in
turn is expected to lead to progress beyond longstanding barriers for discrete
problems such as Maximum Cut or Small Set Expansion on graphs. The project also
involves new approaches towards hardness results for approximate polynomial
optimization; currently only very weak bounds are known, and there is a huge gap
between the known algorithmic and hardness results. Third, with impetus provided
by some recent work by the investigators on refuting constraint-satisfaction
problems, the project will embark on a study of polynomial optimization through
the lens of certificates on their optima, extending beyond the state of the art
linear-algebraic and spectral certificates. Such certificates could have
significant ramifications in pseudo-randomness, producing "certified random
objects" that are functionally as good as the gold standard (but often highly
elusive) explicit constructions. The research and outreach activities of the
project will build bridges to allied research communities in algebraic geometry,
statistics, operations research, signal processing, and machine learning. The
project investigators will train and mentor several graduate students, and also
provide engaging research experiences to undergraduates. The research findings
will inform graduate level courses on approximate optimization by unifying
several problems under the umbrella of polynomial
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.