* 2211326
* EAGER: Quantum Information in Complex Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Greg Scholes, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

With support from Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Gregory Scholes of Princeton
University is advancing methods to create and quantify quantum entanglement in
molecular systems. From our own experience, we know that measurements made on
two independent particles, like the flipping of two coins, are uncorrelated.
That is, whether the second coin lands heads (or tails) has no relationship to
how the first coin landed. However, this is not necessarily the case when the
particles behave quantum mechanically. In quantum mechanics, two particles can
be entangled resulting in correlated observations. It would be as if every time
the first coin landed heads, the second coin would also land heads. And if the
first coin were tails, the second would be too, even if the two coins were
separated by a great distance. Working with his students, Professor Scholes is
developing ways to quantify and demonstrate entanglement in molecular systems,
which remains a significant experimental challenge. Their discoveries could have
broad implications for quantum information science and engineering (QISE), and
lead to new ways to create quantum-based technologies for computing, sensing,
and communications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop a
general formalism based on quantum Fisher information (QFI) for quantifying
quantum correlations (e.g., entanglement) and apply this formalism to
experimental observations made on molecular chromophores and chromophore
assemblies. As an initial demonstration of the method, Professor Scholes and his
students will attempt to use their approach to quantify quantum correlations by
measuring the degree of QFI in the transient spectra of model molecular dimers
and of the light harvesting complex (LH2) from purple bacteria. In addition,
with the concept of classical phase synchronization used as inspiration, the
team is also seeking to demonstrate that quantum effects might be discovered as
a stable phase on large scales. The insights gained from this work could guide
others seeking to quantify quantum correlations in complex molecular systems and
assemblies, enabling new avenues of research. This project also will contribute
to the development of a national quantum-enabled workforce by providing advanced
training in QISE research for the students and postdoctoral scholars
participating in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.