* 2211597
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: Systematic De Novo Identification of Macromolecular Complexes in Cryo-Electron Tomography Images
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Min Xu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 448,000.00

Macromolecular structures inside a cell play key functional roles in various
biochemical pathways and cellular processes that govern life. Identifying
structures of novel macromolecules in a cell is fundamental for our
understanding of how biomolecules work together to sustain life and how diseases
occur. Cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) is a revolutionary imaging method that
enables the systematic identification and discovery of unknown structures in
their native cellular context with near-atomic resolution. However, this
remarkable potential of cryo-ET is still unused due to the limitations of
current computational methods. The existing computational methods can only
recover known structures or require extensive manual efforts to identify unknown
structures. To fill the gap, this project is aimed at developing a computational
pipeline that can automatically identify novel and unknown biomolecular
structures from cryo-ET data by developing and integrating a series of state-of-
the-art computational methods. The open-source software and the algorithms to be
developed in this project will have a wide range of applications in life
science. The developed computational algorithms will be beneficial broadly in
other related areas, such as medical image analysis and general computer vision.
The project will train postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and undergraduate
students of different backgrounds through interdisciplinary coursework and
direct involvement with the project at Carnegie Mellon University and Purdue
University. The knowledge disseminated from the project will be presented to
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students and teachers through national
and international online computational biology workshops and
hackathons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryo-ET has a unique strength in visualizing
structures and spatial localizations of macromolecular complexes in single
cells. This project will develop three key techniques for de novo structural
identification of macromolecules captured by Cryo-ET: 1) A novel fast and
exhaustive search-based subtomogram alignment approach for improved de novo
structural discovery of macromolecular complexes. 2) Novel approaches for fast
shape search for discovered macromolecular complexes against a structural
database. 3) Then, the developed approaches will be integrated into a
computational pipeline that enables automatic large-scale identification of
macromolecular complexes in Cryo-ET images. The pipeline and the software to be
developed in this project will be integrated into the public database and the
open-source platform AITom, so that they are ready to be used by the structural
and cell biology community. Overall, this project will bring Cryo-ET to the next
level which allows systematic macromolecule shape determination and
identification through database searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.