* 2211510
* CNS Core: Small: Low-Power Wide-Area Networks for Industrial Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Abusayeed Saifullah, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2022
* USD 470,457.00

The evolution of Internet of Things (IoT) is transforming the field of
industrial automation including process control and smart manufacturing into an
important class of Industrial IoT (IIoT). Today, wireless solutions for
industrial automation are based on short-range wireless technologies (e.g.,
WirelessHART, ISA100). To cover a large area with numerous devices, they form
multi-hop mesh networks at the expense of energy, cost, and complexity, posing a
big challenge to support the scale and wide-area of today’s IIoT. For example,
the East Texas oil-field extends over 74x8 square kilometers requiring tens of
thousands of sensors for automated management. Also, in process industries, many
silos, tanks, and plants are often positioned far from the center, at
inconvenient locations in difficult terrain or offshore. Pipelines can be
hundreds of miles long and pass through difficult terrains, making it difficult
to monitor gas and chemical leaks in real-time. This project proposes to adopt
the Low-Power Wide-Area Network (LPWAN) technologies for industrial automation.
Due to long-range, LPWANs can be adopted without complex configuration and at a
fraction of costs for wide-area IIoT applications, compared to multi-hop
solutions. This project will develop theoretical foundations and systems for
enabling industrial automation using LPWANs. Its important findings will be
shared with the standards bodies and industries. The developed technologies will
be made open-source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
particularly consider LoRa, a leading LPWAN technology. Adopting LoRa for
industrial automation poses some evolutionary challenges. The fundamental
building blocks of any industrial automation system are feedback control loops
that largely rely on real-time communication. Due to severe energy-constraints,
LoRa uses a simple media access control protocol that is unsuited for real-time
communication. It needs to adopt low duty-cycling in several regions (e.g.,
Europe). In addition, to optimize performance, industrial automation needs a
codesign of real-time scheduling and control. Such a codesign becomes specially
challenging in LoRa because it is large-scale and has energy-limitations. This
project will address these challenges and make the following contributions: (1)
an autonomous real-time scheduling technique and analysis using the demand bound
function theory for LoRa; (2) a scalable scheduling-control codesign that
jointly and dynamically determines control input and sampling rates; (3) a
highly energy-efficient codesign by maximizing the sleeping times of the devices
through a combination of self-triggered and even-triggered control adopting
state-aware communication; and (4) an evaluation of the results through
experiments using industrial process control use-cases on a physical
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.