* 2211359
* Collaborative Research: HCC: MEDIUM: Understanding the Present and Designing the Future of Risk Prediction IT in Fire Departments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Germán Mejía Ramírez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2025
* USD 507,943.00

This research will develop and design new data-driven risk prediction principles
and management (DDRPM) tools that anticipate and manage a variety of community
risks, which fire departments are increasingly required to respond to, including
medical, fire, and safety emergencies. Today, much of their work focuses on
community risk reduction (CRR), a paradigm that seeks to mitigate risks before
they lead to emergencies in the first place. The CRR paradigm will leverage new
data-driven risk prediction and management (DDRPM) tools to predict and respond
to a variety of community risks. Yet, designing DDRPM tools to realize this
vision requires deep understanding of current work practices, and the potential
future impacts of such tools on labor (e.g., increased data work), workers
(e.g., decreased autonomy), and communities (e.g., intensified surveillance of
marginalized populations). Understanding the intersection of sociotechnical work
practices for handling risks and the design of data-driven computational tools
requires fundamental human-centered computing research. The fire service is key
to the health, safety, and security of individuals, communities, and society;
thus, this research is primed to provide lasting, practical benefits. This
project will directly benefit the study sites and the populations they serve
since insights drawn from ethnographic research will be disseminated to study
sites and participants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has multiple goals:
(1) comprehensive empirical exploration of community-oriented risk work
performed by fire personnel and their associated data work, (2) development of a
human-centered design process for the future of DDRPM tools, (3) co-designing
speculative DDRPM tools with fire departments, and (4) developing a
sociotechnical theory of risk work. It will achieve these goals in three phases.
First, it will document current practices of community-focused risk work and
community data resources using in-depth ethnographic research in three fire
departments. The ethnographic data will be leveraged as part of a novel human-
centered design process that combines ethnography, inquiry through design,
participatory design, and speculative design. Second, the team of researchers
will co-design speculative prototypes for DDRPM in partnership with the study
participants. This methodological approach will fill a crucial gap in research
and design of sustainable data-driven tools for risk handling by enabling
consideration of impacts of design of DDRPM tools on future work practices in
the fire service and on communities. Third, the team will evaluate the resulting
speculative prototypes to understand how they shift visions of technologically-
supported community risk work for the fire service. Both the design process and
the co-designed prototypes will be disseminated to the fire service professional
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.