* 2211319
* Understanding the bottom-up, scalable synthesis of anatase nanofilament-based two-dimensional titanium carbo-oxide flakes and their optoelectronic properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Michel Barsoum, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 440,858.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: Nanomaterials, which are a thousand times smaller than
the diameter of a hair, possess properties that are different and unique
compared to those of the same materials when they are larger. Typically, it is
quite difficult to prepare one dimensional (1D) and two dimensional (2D)
nanomaterials. This often requires toxic chemicals, is expensive and/or it takes
a long time to produce a larger amount of them. Recently, researchers at Drexel
University in Philadelphia have reported a simple approach to synthesize 1D and
2D ceramic nanomaterials at kilogram-scale at near ambient conditions, meaning
room temperature and pressure, from inexpensive, environmentally benign
precursors. With this project, supported by the Ceramics program in NSF’s
Division of Materials Research, the researchers now want to find out how exactly
these nanomaterials form, what chemical reactions are involved, how they can
control their chemistry and structure, and answer many other questions.
Additionally, they study the optical and electrical properties of these new
nanomaterials to understand whether they are suitable for specific technological
applications. First experiments indicate that these ceramic nanomaterials could
be used as Li battery electrodes that, in principle, could result in batteries
that can store much more energy that today’s Li-batteries. Other potential
applications could include water remediation and biomedical applications, water
splitting using sunlight and catalysis among others. Professors Barsoum and Hu
also use this project to provide training and research opportunities for
graduate students pursuing PhDs and undergraduate involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: Recently, researchers at
Drexel University discovered a one-pot, near ambient, bottom-up approach, to
convert 10+ binary and ternary titanium carbides, nitrides, borides, phosphides
and silicides into C-containing, anatase-based 1D nanofilaments, NFs, - ≈ 6x10
Å2 in cross-section, some of which are microns long - by simply immersing their
powders in a tetraalkylammonium, TAA, hydroxides (e.g. TMAOH) aqueous solutions
in the 25 to 85 °C temperature range under ambient pressures for tens of hours.
Filtration of the resulting colloidal suspension self-assembles the 1D NFs into
2D flakes. This project, supported by the Ceramics program in NSF’s Division of
Materials Research, enables the researchers to investigate the reaction
mechanism(s) leading to the formation of the 1D nanofilaments and their
subsequent self-assembly into 2D flakes. They examine the microstructural
evolution of the nanofilaments as a function of time and temperature and study
what effect these parameters have on the material’s optoelectronic properties.
Understanding the reaction mechanism should lead to understanding how to control
the Ti:C:O ratios in the nanofilaments. Flakes are characterized using high
resolution transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
nuclear magnetic resonance, scanning electron microscopy, atomic force
microscopy, and ultra-violet and visible light spectroscopy. Solid state NMR of
13C, 1H and 1D are employed to locate carbon in the structure and the sources
and locations of hydroxide anions, respectively. Optoelectronic properties –
conductivity, band gaps and optical properties are characterized. The
experimental work is complemented by DFT calculations. Synthesizing 1D
C-containing, anatase-based NFs that self-assemble into 2D flakes, at near
ambient conditions, from non-layered, inexpensive, green and abundant precursors
(e.g., TiC) is paradigm shifting and predicted to open new and exciting avenues
for research and applications in multiple areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.