* 2211062
* Capturing the impact of real, complex biomass char particle morphology during gasification
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Simcha Singer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2025
* USD 275,112.00

Concerns about climate change and energy security have spurred interest in
utilizing biomass to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels. Biomass
gasification represents a sustainable, flexible, and potentially carbon-neutral
technology to generate electricity and to produce liquid fuels and chemicals.
The complex geometry of the small, porous biomass char particles formed during
gasification has a strong impact on the gasification rate, which in turn affects
gasifier outputs like conversion and efficiency. By studying gasification of a
range of biomass char particles from several feedstocks imaged at high-
resolution and in three dimensions this project will generate fundamental
knowledge and modeling capabilities for the impact of realistic particle
geometries on gasification. This will advance the field beyond current
understanding based on idealized particle structures and will benefit society by
helping to advance clean bioenergy technologies that reduce pollution, mitigate
environmental damage, and increase efficiency. The project will support
education by training undergraduate and graduate students in experimental and
modeling techniques, and by incorporating modeling tools and data into a joint
undergraduate and graduate course to enhance student learning and engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to understand the impacts of
real biomass char morphology during gasification, and to use that knowledge to
create a workflow for predictive, computationally efficient, particle-scale
modeling in reactor-scale computational fluid dynamics codes. The approach is to
perform direct three-dimensional pore-resolving simulations for many hundreds of
individual biomass char particles from several feedstocks that will be imaged
with high-resolution X-ray microcomputed tomography, to understand the coupling
of diffusion, reaction, and morphology at the particle-scale. Gasification
behavior is hypothesized to differ from current understanding based on coarse-
grained models with homogeneous, unresolved porosity because real biomass char
contains complex, large-scale, and often anisotropic pores. The insights and
rich data sets will be leveraged to improve particle-scale models used in
reactor-scale codes by creating and disseminating an automated workflow to
quantify and model the range of morphologies present in real biomass char
particle distributions. The workflow will consist of an image analysis routine
to quantify the three-dimensional morphology of hundreds of particles
simultaneously and will then use machine learning to classify particles
according to their expected gasification behavior. To complete the workflow,
efficient, physics-based gasification models appropriate for incorporation in
reactor-scale codes will be created and parameterized, coupling particle- and
reactor-scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.