* 2211346
* Model Development for Soft Tissue Biomechanics by Full-Field Characterization and Variational System Identification
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Ellen Arruda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2025
* USD 651,930.00

Each year hundreds of thousands of people suffer soft tissue injuries that
require surgical reconstruction. Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) damage/rupture
is the most common injury in athletic individuals. Notably, injury rates are
higher in women with a relative risk factor of 4-6 compared to men, and this
rises to 10 for women in military training. For grafts of replacement or
engineered tissue to be effective and not harmful to the patient in a few years,
it is important to be able to precisely characterize their mechanical
properties, as well as to develop computational models of their mechanical
performance. This project will address the challenge of characterization via
novel experimental techniques that can map out the deformation at every point in
specimens of ligaments and tendons of the knee. The problem of developing
accurate models will be addressed by furthering recent advances in machine
learning that can use the three-dimensional data to identify the most
appropriate model. This project will provide fundamental knowledge that will
enable advances in orthopedic surgery for repair and replacement of ligaments
and tendons of the knee and other joints. Experimental and machine learning
methods used in this project will be translated into educational modules aimed
at high school students and designed to attract these students to study
engineering and computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new, fully three-
dimensional approach to soft material characterization and constitutive modeling
is studied in this project. The experimental approach involves in situ
mechanical loading in a magnetic field, yielding the finite deformation tensor
field throughout the volume of the specimen. This has been coupled with our
recent computational advances in inverse modeling to infer the soft tissue
mechanics constitutive model that best represents full-field deformation data,
from a spectrum of admissible candidate models, with parsimonious
representation, accurate coefficients, and uncertainty quantification. This
novel combination of approaches overcomes the challenges of identifying material
properties of soft tissue in traditional experiments that rely on the assumption
of uniform, largely one-dimensional, deformation over regularly shaped test
specimens. In this work, characterization of irregular shapes and boundaries is
possible with a reduced number of deformation states due to the available full,
three-dimensional, finite strain tensor field. Inference techniques assemble the
optimal constitutive representation from a library of operators without
restriction to only determining the coefficients of a pre-selected model. The
full-field approach makes it possible to characterize soft tissues of the knee
and infer the physically best-suited and parsimonious mathematical models of
their mechanical responses with confidence bounds and uncertainty
quantification. Those models are incorporated into computational models of the
knee that can simulate injury-inducing loading accurately and with the full
strain and stress fields in these tissues during injury-inducing
deformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.