* 2211423
* CCF: Medium: Learning From Classical and Quantum Data: a Fourier Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,199,996.00

Quantum computing presents exciting new opportunities for a wide variety of
applications, including machine learning, simulation, and optimization. Quantum
computers are particularly attractive for machine learning because of their
ability to efficiently encode complex learning models. However, there are
fundamental differences between classical and quantum computers that render the
learning process challenging. Quantum systems represent and process information
using qubits, a quantum mechanical analog of bits, which encode combinations of
basic states through superposition. Quantum systems can use powerful features
such as entanglement but must obey quantum mechanical postulates such as the no-
cloning and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. Moreover, existing quantum
computers with a relatively small number of qubits are inherently limited in
their ability to process high-dimensional data, and effective techniques are
therefore needed to identify the features in the input data which are important
to the learning tasks. The significantly increased expressive power of quantum
learning models also requires highly efficient and scalable training procedures.
Furthermore, the stochastic nature of measurements in quantum circuits makes the
training process inherently probabilistic. Providing solutions to these issues
is essential for the implementation of effective and efficient Quantum Machine
Learning (QML), and is the focus of the project. The education program
associated with this project comprises research experiences for undergraduate
students, teacher-training programs, instructional material, summer schools and
workshops, and a large number of online tools and resources. Broadening
participation in computing (BPC) plans include the preparation of accessible
educational material targeting high-school students, workshops, and summer
research opportunities for students from underrepresented groups, recruiting
pipelines from minority serving institutions, and mentoring programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses critical challenges aimed at
enabling QML on Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices, and considers
the following problems: (i) Current NISQ circuits are limited in their qubit
input capacity. The input feature selection is approached through Quantum
Fourier Analysis (QFA) with the goal of identifying a small sample of input
qubits that can yield high accuracy in QML tasks; (ii) The no-cloning and
measurement postulates of quantum circuits make it infeasible to compute
accurate deterministic estimates of circuit outputs. The problem of sample/data-
efficient accurate training of QML models is then addressed with the help of a
novel randomized gradient descent approach; (iii) QML models, such as Quantum
Neural Networks (QNNs), have high model complexity, since the dimensionality of
the underlying Hilbert space grows exponentially with the number of qubits, and
this leads to an exponentially large number of parameters in the learning
models. The training of such models is therefore prohibitively expensive in
terms of the required number of samples/iteration. The project relies on QFA to
develop narrow-band quantum perceptrons to build QNNs that can be efficiently
and accurately trained; and (iv) The results of the project will be validated on
real-world problems in quantum state discrimination. Overall the project
investigates implications of advances in QML for conventional machine learning
models with the goal of enhancing the efficiency and generalizability of
classical training processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.