* 2211043
* Collaborative Research: Origins of Food Production in the Northern Neotropical Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Richard George, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 147,602.00

The origin of food production was an important catalyst for the emergence of
complex societies, institutional inequality, and social organization in the
northern neotropics. Yet, to date, there is little understanding of when key
crops (i.e., maize, manioc) were first consumed by humans, how intensively they
were used through time, and how wild seed and root crops were integrated into a
regional diet. Recent advances suggest that agriculture was well established by
the middle Holocene in greater Amazonia, but we lack comparable data in the
northern neotropics, even though we know there was significant migration and
interaction between these regions. The project will document the processing and
consumption of plant foods throughout the Holocene and produce new
microbotanical libraries of modern plants from the region for comparative
research. Many of the key crops studied are today globally important commodities
and central features of diets across neotropical contexts making the study of
their origins a matter of global importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will carry out microbotanical analysis of starch grains and phytoliths obtained
from grinding stones and dental calculus from archaeological contexts dating
between 12,500 and 1,000 cal BP. To obtain these samples project members will
conduct excavations at two remote rockshelter sites in a broadleaf neotropical
forest where excellent preservation of organic materials has been previously
demonstrated. Chronological control will be maintained with radiocarbon dates on
charcoal and bone. Microbotanical data will be used to identify processing and
consumption of domesticated and wild plant foods and to determine when specific
cultigens such as maize and manioc were incorporated into the human diet. These
data will also be used to study the changing importance of these domesticates
relative to other wild taxa. Data will be shared with descendent communities
though formal consultations and translations of published articles into local
languages. This project will also promote the training of women and
underrepresented students in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.