* 2211002
* Unified Multi-phase Numerical Framework for Understanding Co-Seismic Slope Failures in Complex Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alba Yerro Colom, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 310,085.00

This research project will focus on advancing the fundamental understanding of
the mechanics of slope failures triggered by earthquakes and will help to
predict, reduce, and mitigate their destructive consequences. Earthquake-
triggered slope failures cause significant economic and life losses in
seismically active regions. However, state-of-the-art procedures that address
triggering and runout of co-seismic slope failures are highly idealized and do
not incorporate the complexities of soil behavior subjected to cyclic loading.
This research will develop a validated numerical framework to analyze the
overall failure process, from the ground shaking and failure initiation to the
post-failure processes. The numerical tool will accommodate large deformations
and hydro-mechanical coupling and will be compatible with existing continuum-
based constitutive models for the simulation of liquefaction triggering and
cyclic mobility. The developed numerical tool and a tutorial manual will be
shared through an open-source platform. The research will also be complemented
by outreach activities, including lectures for graduate students and training
sessions for practitioners. The outcomes of this research can be provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the risk associated with earthquake
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to better capture and
understand the connection between ground motion characteristics, pore pressure
evolution and final mobility of slope failures. Thus, the research objectives of
this project include: (i) to establish and validate a generalized numerical
framework capable of simulating earthquake loading, site response, and large
deformations of complex sites, all within a unified computational framework;
(ii) to quantify pore water pressure evolution during the entire instability
process; and (iii) to correlate the intensity of the ground motions with the
failure initiation, post-failure behavior, and hydro-mechanical response. To
accomplish these objectives, the existing Material Point Method framework will
be further developed to accurately simulate ground shaking, site response, and
large deformations. State-of-practice constitutive models accounting for
material damping and cyclic mobility will be considered in the same framework,
and their performance will be evaluated. The developments will be validated
using existing data from centrifuge testing and field case studies. This project
will allow the PI to inform, advance, and transform the way co-seismic slope
stability analyses are approached, especially for complex geometries and when
critical infrastructure is at risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.