* 2211841
* FET: Medium: A Quantum Computing Based Approach to Undirected Generative Machine Learning Models
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Joseph Picone, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 620,943.00

Many crucial artificial intelligence applications in health sciences do not have
sufficient practical data. Even when one collects incredible amounts of data,
the data has significant gaps because of the unique circumstances (health
conditions) of each patient. Training sizeable artificial intelligence systems
on such data often results in an output that is either unacceptable for making
decisive medical pronouncements or the systems do not perform any better than
conventional methodologies. As such, the project's goal is to develop artificial
intelligence, particularly machine learning algorithms that train rapidly,
minimize errors, and do not require significant human expertise. The project's
novelty is utilizing emerging quantum computing (QC) algorithms that offer the
potential for rapid training of models and the ability to find better solutions
quickly. In this project, QC will be applied to machine learning to demonstrate
the efficacy of QC-based methods in two challenging applications: (a) seizure
detection on encephalography signals and (b) automatic interpretation of digital
pathology images. Positively impacting the two high-level applications will
allow automated systems to approach domain expert (human) performance and
increase the impact of this technology in the medical field, which will impact
countless humans worldwide. Access to the highest levels of QC research will
create career development opportunities, encouraging high schoolers to pursue
computer and information science and engineering careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, adiabatic quantum annealing (QA) will be
used to solve two significant computational challenges: (a) finding a global
minimum and (b) sampling from complex probability distributions. It will be
demonstrated that training that utilizes QA-supported sampling can find better
parameters than conventional parameter optimization approaches, and it also
overcomes the deficiencies of current machine learning algorithms in challenging
applications, such as seizure detection on encephalography signals and automatic
interpretation of digital pathology images. Through these developments, it is
also expected of this project to demonstrate that a wide range of configuration
spaces (undirected probabilistic graphical models trained with a variety of
application-relevant data) that have the property of "difficult to find local
valleys in the probability distribution" to be easily sampled with QA. These
findings will be applied to deep generative models for superior classification
and pattern reconstruction accuracy. The ability of QA to reach difficult to
sample regions of the configuration space will benefit many machine learning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Foundations
of Emerging Technologies (FET) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.