* 2211833
* Tracing the origin and diversification of a morphological trait through transcriptional regulators and their target genes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Thomas Williams, University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 986,507.00

Two goals of scientific inquiry are to understand how traits develop and evolve.
These goals have proven difficult to reach for animal species with vast genomes
and ones that undergo complex developmental processes. This project will use the
pattern of male melanic abdomen pigmentation that develops for the fruit fly
species D. melanogaster as a model for a trait’s development, and related
species with differing pigmentation as models to understand how male
pigmentation originated and diversified. In order to determine which gene’s use
or genes’ uses have changed in route to this pigmentation diversity, the network
of genes responsible for melanogaster pigmentation will be studied in species
with the ancestral (D. willistoni) and modified (D. auraria) pattern of male
pigmentation. For genes with differing uses, approaches will be utilized to find
and characterize the parts of genes responsible for their variation. The
importance of these modified gene parts will be tested by engineering
melanogaster sequences into the genomes of these two less well-studied species.
Collectively, this project will push the limits of genetic investigation in
model and emerging-model species, resulting in one of the most insightful
genetic characterizations of an evolving animal trait. This project will result
in numerous broader impacts, such as the refinement of bioinformatic and online
resources for genetics research, training of diverse personnel in genetics and
related disciplines, and hastening scientific progress by the creation,
organization, and hosting of a virtual meeting for scientists with a shared
interest on the genetics of development and evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal morphology develops through the operation of Gene
Regulatory Networks (GRNs) that involve a plethora of trans-regulators,
transcription factors and signaling pathways, which control the spatial,
temporal, and even sex-specific patterns of trait-building realizator gene
expression. These patterns of gene expression emerge from GRN transcription
factors interacting with binding sites in the cis-regulatory elements (CREs) of
their direct target genes. Since many trans-regulators and realizator genes are
older than the traits they regulate, trait evolution occurs through changes in
the uses of these ancestral genes. This project’s overarching goal is to
understand how a trait emerged and was modified by changes to a GRN’s trans-
regulators and realizator genes. The evolution of a GRN for a rapidly evolving
trait present in an experimentally tractable animal model species, and closely-
related emerging model species will be examined. The proposed studies will focus
on how the male-specific pattern of abdominal pigmentation emerged in the fruit
fly lineage of D. melanogaster and how it was modified in the montium lineage.
In the first Aim, the breadth of trans-regulators in the D. melanogaster GRN
will be mapped, and determine which of these genes have conserved or evolved
expressions in species with the ancestral and modified trait phenotypes. The
second aim will determine how trans-regulator and realizator gene expressions
evolved through CRE evolution. The third aim will directly test the phenotypic
consequences of GRN modifications through genetic engineering performed in
emerging model species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.