* 2211469
* Management, Operations and Maintenance of the International Gemini Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Patrick McCarthy, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martin Still
* 09/30/2027
* USD 57,605,562.00

NSF’s National Optical-Infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory (NSF’s NOIRLab) is
the U.S. national center for ground-based nighttime optical astronomy. NOIRLab
includes the International Gemini Observatory, the Kitt Peak National
Observatory, the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, operations of Vera C.
Rubin Observatory, and the Community Science and Data Center (CSDC). This award
supports management, operations and maintenance of these facilities for five
years, 2023-2027. The award supports preparations for the launch of Rubin
Observatory and the first three years of Rubin’s ten-year Legacy Survey in Space
and Time (LSST). Gemini is operated by NSF in collaboration with its
international partners in Canada, Brazil, Argentina, the Republic of Korea, and
Chile. Rubin is operated jointly with the Department of Energy. NOIRLab will
also continue and further develop an ambitious program of communication,
education, and outreach activities. NOIRLab communicates the wonders of
astronomy through its facilities, technology and people. NOIRLab engages with
the public locally through a range of face-to-face activities in Hawai’i, Chile
and Arizona, and on a national and indeed international level through on-line
publications, educational resources, and citizen-science projects. Through its
telescopes, instruments and software services, NOIRLab supports over 400
graduate thesis projects and of order 550 non-thesis graduate students each
year. On a yearly basis, NOIRLab facilities generate data for more than 700
scientific papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOIRLab's vision is to be the preeminent
laboratory for research in modern ground-based optical-infrared (OIR) astronomy,
supporting a diverse community of scientists spread across all 50 states through
the entire research life cycle. NSF’s goal is to create in NOIRLab a national
resource that will lead the world in data-intensive astronomy, drive exploration
of the new frontiers in time-domain astronomy and multi-messenger astrophysics,
maximize science return from Rubin Observatory, and provide a foundation for all
U.S. scientists to make full use of potential future Extremely Large Telescopes
in the 2030s and beyond. For the science community NOIRLab provides access to
state-of-the-art instrumentation on large (8-meter mirror diameter) and medium-
sized or “mid-scale” (approximately 4-meter diameter) OIR telescopes to enable
research in all areas of astronomy. NOIRLab also provide a national focus for
the development of research and educational partnerships with universities,
other NSF-funded research disciplines, other funding agencies, and international
communities. Over the next five years NOIRLab will continue to operate and
develop the 4-meter Blanco and SOuthern Astrophysical Research (SOAR) telescopes
in Chile and the twin 8-meter Gemini telescopes in Hawai’i and Chile. NOIRLab
will support pre-operations of Rubin leading to commissioning in 2024 and the
launch of LSST shortly thereafter. Rubin will undoubtedly revolutionize modern
astronomy through its extensive survey of the southern skies but also by
releasing millions of time domain alerts every night. Rubin, working in concert
with the other NOIRLab telescopes and with software and archival support from
CSDC, will have a significant impact on all of the priority science areas
identified in the recent National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and
Medicine (NASEM) decadal survey in Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pathways to
Discovery in Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics for the 2020s
(Astro2020).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.