* 2211966
* An integrated experimental and computational model of brain microvascular endothelial cell glucose metabolism and transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alisa Morss Clyne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 595,104.00

Alzheimer’s disease may be partially caused by changes in brain blood vessels.
People who have both low and high blood cholesterol are at increased risk of
developing Alzheimer’s disease. However, it is not clear how blood cholesterol
affects brain blood vessels. Early studies suggest that low cholesterol causes
cells in brain blood vessels to use more sugar, which means that they pass less
sugar on to the brain. Since low sugar in the brain is also a sign of
Alzheimer’s disease, it is possible that changes in brain blood vessels due to
low cholesterol may contribute to Alzheimer's disease by lowering brain sugar
levels. In this research, the investigators will conduct experiments and analyze
their results using computer models to learn how cholesterol changes the way
that brain blood vessels pass sugar into the brain. The investigators will also
engage undergraduate students to do research in their laboratories, and the
investigators will teach local high school students about brain blood vessels,
cholesterol, and Alzheimer’s disease. This project will create new methods to
study Alzheimer’s disease and could lead to new drugs to treat early Alzheimer’s
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glucose metabolism is reduced in the brains of
patients with Alzheimer’s disease, perhaps due to reduced glucose transport by
brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMEC). Endothelial cells such as BMEC
become dysfunctional in conditions of altered blood metabolites, like
cholesterol. The risk of Alzheimer’s disease increases with high cholesterol in
mid-life yet also increases with low cholesterol later in life. It is therefore
imperative to understand how both high and low cholesterol impact BMEC glucose
transport. The investigator's experimental and computational analyses show that
decreased membrane cholesterol causes BMEC to reduce glucose transport, increase
glycolytic metabolism, upregulate cholesterol synthesis, and decrease
mitochondrial metabolism. These data suggest that cholesterol-depleted BMEC
shift their systemic metabolism. Therefore, the goal of this project is to
investigate how decreased membrane cholesterol affects BMEC glucose metabolism
and transport using integrated experimental and computational models. When
completed, these studies will provide new experimental and computational models
for studying integrated BMEC glucose metabolism and transport, as well as
elucidate the mechanistic link between cholesterol and glucose transport to
provide new insight into cholesterol and cholesterol-lowering therapies in
neurodegenerative disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.