* 2211067
* CAS-Climate: Identifying and Characterizing the Structures and Physical Properties of Sodiated Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Amy Prieto, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 340,294.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-ion rechargeable batteries have been
integrated into our everyday lives in mobile electronics, and are being
incorporated in a significant way in various modes of transportation. There is
increasing demand to extend new energy storage technologies toward emerging
applications such as batteries for the energy produced by devices like solar
cells or windmills. However, there is no one perfect battery for every
application! With the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, Dr. Amy Prieto of Colorado State
University and her students are focused on developing better materials for
sodium ion batteries, because sodium is much more naturally abundant than
lithium. Another key aspect of this project is the training that students
receive in electrochemistry and energy storage research. This addresses the
desperate need in the United States for a workforce trained in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A common approach to Na-ion
battery research is to simply screen the top candidates from Li-ion battery
technologies for use in Na-ion systems. Often, this strategy is fundamentally
flawed as Li and Na exhibit surprisingly different chemistries. The chemistries
developed for cathodes and anodes for Na-ion batteries are not nearly as well
developed or understood as those of Li, and some of the best anode materials for
storing Li do not store Na. As a result, alloying anode materials, including
antimony-based (Sb-based) alloys, have been of great interest due to their
relatively high gravimetric and volumetric capacities and their ability to
operate at potentials similar to Na/Na+, resulting in high overall energy
densities. However, the structures produced during Na insertion into Sb do not
appear to follow the thermodynamically predicted intermediates based on phase
diagrams, and instead often proceed via amorphous intermediates. With the
support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, Dr. Amy Prieto of Colorado State University and her students
study these insertion processes and the NaxSby compounds formed by
electrochemically sodiating/desodiating metal antimonides (MSb), which present a
very rich compositional and structural landscape that is yet to be fundamentally
understood. They develop and test a toolbox of characterization techniques to
study these phases and apply these findings to other alloy-based electrodes.
Underlying their research efforts is the hypothesis that if one can identify and
characterize the intermediate solid-state structures that are accessed as these
anodes are sodiated and desodiated, a deep understanding of the thermodynamics
and kinetics of this system along with new materials for clean energy
applications will emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.