* 2211539
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: CEAPA: A Systematic Approach to Minimize Compression Error Propagation in HPC Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,10/31/2022
* Dingwen Tao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 10/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Todayâ€™s high-performance computing (HPC) applications produce vast volumes of
data for post-analysis, presenting a major storage and I/O burden for HPC
systems. To significantly reduce this burden, researchers have explored to use
lossy compression techniques. While lossy compression can effectively reduce the
size of data, it also introduces errors to the compressed data that often lead
to incorrect computation results. As a result, scientists hesitate to use lossy
compression in their scientific research. Thus, there is a critical need to
develop an effective method to identify compression strategies which minimize
error impact for a diversity of programs. This project aims to develop a
systematic approach that helps scientists automatically select a lossy
compression algorithm with the lowest error impact based their HPC programs and
target compression ratios. It also integrates educational and outreach
activities including student training and development of new curriculum on
trustworthy data reduction and dependable HPC systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Modeling compression error propagation in HPC programs is challenging
because existing lossy compressors are developed with distinct principles that
generate largely different compression errors on diverse HPC data. This project
includes four key thrusts: (1) developing an accurate and efficient fault
injection infrastructure that integrates with the fault models of commonly used
lossy compression algorithms; (2) designing a fine-grained approach to
characterize error propagation in HPC programs through program analysis and
deposition based on the data dependencies and life cycle of compressed data; (3)
developing a predictive model using machine learning techniques to select a
compression strategy that minimizes the error impact on a given program and
compression ratio; and (4) integrating the technique with domain-specific error
impact metrics in real-world HPC applications and demonstrates the effectiveness
of the technique by selecting compression strategies that give low error impact
for the same ratios. Not only this project has an enormous positive impact on
HPC cyberinfrastructure, but it also helps redefine the optimization of lossy
compression techniques with emphasis on both efficiency and error
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.