* 2211278
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Characterizing Research Software from NSF Awards
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Karthik Ram, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,979.00

Software underlies many of the national economic advances of the last 60 years,
from better weather models that enable more productivity to better-designed
products that lower material usage and costs. Most of these advances originated
in research software, initially via algorithms and licensing, and more recently
via open-source code. Despite these numerous successes, much of the software
produced in science and engineering research is not sustainable - it is not
shared, maintained, or developed in ways that enable meaningful reuse. This lack
of sustainable development hampers both research and economic progress. Using a
combination of self-reported and administrative data this project is
systematically investigating the development and maintenance of software
produced in research projects funded by the National Science Foundation. The
data collected for this study is being used to develop a set of models for
research software sustainability planning. These models support scientists and
engineers planning for software sustainability; help research funding agencies
be better prepared to evaluate research software in grant applications, and
enable institutions that support software development and maintenance to be
equipped to support impactful research that in turn, produces impactful research
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: 1) to understand
what factors influence software sustainability by gathering data from grant-
funded research projects; 2) to describe current models of sustainability
planning and suggest potential new models that could increase the likelihood of
achieving long-term software sustainability; and 3) to develop emergent methods
to evaluate research software sustainability. Data collection to meet these
goals includes a survey and interviews with researchers that have produced
software as part of an NSF-funded award. This project also uses emerging methods
in analyzing research software code repositories in order to understand what
activities in software development correlate with sustainability. This research
has three intended impacts: 1) to provide a proof of concept for large-scale
analysis of research software sustainability using a mixed-methods approach; 2)
to modify existing standardized metrics of software health so that they can be
used to evaluate the sustainability of research software; and 3) to create an
initial set of sustainability models that researchers can use to better plan
research software projects, funders can use to make better award decisions, and
institutions can use to better allocate internal
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.