* 2211327
* Topological quantum transport properties in spin-valley locked Dirac semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Zhiqiang Mao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 292,954.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Developing materials with novel properties
is essential for sustaining the nation’s leadership in emerging quantum
technologies. Some of those novel properties include “nonlinear Hall effect” and
“valley Hall effect” which are attractive for applications such as quantum
devices and next-generation wireless networks. This project involves producing
these materials and investigating these properties as well as their ability to
function at room temperature. The project provides rich opportunities for
training students and preparing them as future workforce in high-tech
industries. Undergraduate students, including those from the underrepresented
minority groups, will be recruited and trained to grow the materials and perform
measurements to discover their properties. Local high school students will also
be engaged through their participation in the “Make it Matter Camp” outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The valley degree of
freedom in the electronic structure of a material has been proposed as a new
form of information carrier. When the valley degree of freedom is combined with
broken inversion symmetry and strong spin-orbital coupling, it can create a
unique electronic state characterized by spin-valley locking, resulting in
exotic quantum transport phenomena such as the valley and nonlinear Hall
effects. These new concepts lay a foundation for new device applications such as
valleytronics and terahertz detectors. This project aims to demonstrate room-
temperature bulk nonlinear-Hall and valley-Hall effects in spin-valley-locked
Dirac semimetal BaMnSb2 and several other materials. The principal investigator
of this project pursues these goals through bulk single crystal growth,
microscale Hall device fabrications, nonlinear transport measurements, and
optical imaging. The valley Hall effect was observed only in two-dimensional
materials but never reported for any bulk materials. Although the nonlinear Hall
effect was previously demonstrated in several 2D/3D materials, it is a primarily
low-temperature phenomenon. The room-temperature bulk nonlinear Hall effect is
yet to be realized. This research project will generate rich opportunities for
teaching, training, and learning. Several undergraduate students, including
underrepresented minority students, are trained to grow the single crystals used
in this project and perform transport measurements in each project
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.