* 2211307
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Tropical Cyclone Energetics and Intensification in Environmental Vertical Wind Shear
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ping Zhu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 366,835.00

Environmental vertical wind shear has long been recognized as a major inhibiting
factor for tropical cyclone (TC) intensification since it acts to tilt the
vortex. The wind shear also facilitates the dry-air intrusion into the TC core
region to reduce the buoyancy of convective updrafts. Yet, TCs do develop or
even undergo rapid intensification (RI) in light to moderate shear conditions.
An accurate prediction of both timing and rate of TC intensification in such
conditions, in particular RI, poses a great challenge in numerical forecasts of
TCs. Understanding the physical processes that overcome the shear induced
negative effects on TC intensification is, thus, important for the potential
improvement of TC intensity forecasts. Research to date showed that several
processes, such as the reduction in ventilation and boundary-layer recovery due
to the enhancement of surface enthalpy fluxes, could overcome the negative
impacts imposed by the shear, leading to the intensification of a TC vortex.
However, details in TC energetics and dynamical route to TC intensification
associated with these processes remain poorly understood. The overall goal of
this project is to advance the understanding of mechanisms underlying the TC
intensity change after the genesis stage in a sheared environment. The
identified key physical processes that differentiate the TC intensification
rates in different shear and thermodynamic environments will provide useful
guidance for operational forecast of TC intensity change including both RI and
slow intensification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the research objectives,
this project aims to provide new insights into the key thermodynamic changes and
their dynamic responses that govern TC intensification in a sheared environment
using idealized Hurricane Weather Research and Forecast (HWRF) sensitivity
numerical experiments and the data generated by the HWRF Ensemble Data
Assimilation System (HEDAS) that possesses the ability to assimilate storm-
relative observations with different time and spatial resolutions in the
numerical system. Comprehensive analyses on the HEDAS dataset and HWRF idealized
simulations are carried out. Research activities include (a) analyses of TC
energetics during post-genesis stages within the moist static energy (MSE)
framework; (b) Exploration of the linkage between TC energetics and vortex spin-
up dynamics using a novel diagnostic tool that can yield an improved
understanding of the TC intensification driven by various dynamic and
thermodynamic forcing in an unbalance framework; and (c) Investigation of key
issues regarding the role of the reduction of mid- and low-level ventilation and
boundary-layer recovery in TC intensification in a sheared environment using
parcel trajectory analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.