* 2211066
* Integrating Undergraduate Learning in Engineering and Business to Improve Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Faisal Aqlan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 11/30/2023
* USD 246,418.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
manufacturing education. Manufacturing contributes enormously to the U.S. and
world economy, including through creation of high paying jobs. This project
intends to improve manufacturing education by helping undergraduate students
develop a system view of manufacturing. Successful delivery of a new product to
market involves a series of steps that include design, construction,
implementation, and management. Although companies understand this big picture,
engineering and business graduates often fail to realize the connection between
these key steps. This lack of understanding stems in part from the failure of
undergraduate engineering and business education programs to connect these steps
in their curricula. To address this gap, this project will develop learning
modules for different stages of product development that will emphasize the
inter-dependencies between the stages of the product life cycle. Each learning
module will include design, process, system, and business components and feature
modeling, simulation-based learning, virtual reality, and hands-on experiences.
These modules will be integrated into engineering (industrial, mechanical, and
electrical) and business (management information science) courses. It is
expected that this approach will enable students to better understand product
manufacturing as an interdependent system, as well as improve problem-solving
and decision-making skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three specific
aims: 1) Design a set of cohesive learning modules that introduce key
manufacturing stages, from product design to information systems; 2) Cultivate
students’ system thinking skills as they simulate the complete product cycle,
and critique and reflect on product design to remove downstream constraints; and
3) Use simulation and modeling activities to help students recognize and engage
in interdisciplinary collaboration that leads to development of professional
skills. Product design will focus on graphical, analytical. and computer
modeling of a new product (a bicycle), taking into consideration aesthetics,
ergonomics, dynamics, and mechanical properties. Based on their product design,
students will select manufacturing materials and processes to successfully
produce the components that make up the product. They will then model a
manufacturing system comprised of the required technology and labor. Finally,
they will use information systems, including a modern Enterprise Resource
Planning system, to demonstrate how to manage and execute an integrated process
to procure materials, manufacture components, and deliver the product to the end
consumer. Following pilot testing and iterative refinement, the modules will be
integrated into an interdisciplinary curriculum in project life cycle
management. A quasi-experimental design will be used to investigate the impact
of the new curriculum on the decision-making processes of students from diverse
educational backgrounds. This project has the potential to educate future
engineers who can apply advanced modeling methods and working with supporting
information systems and technology, thus contributing to the quality of the
nation’s STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.