* 2211872
* Non-equilibrium Phase Discovery in Finite-sized Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2025
* USD 451,624.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new materials with
improved properties is a driver for technological advancement. An area
potentially abundant with such improvements are systems that under normal
conditions, cannot be formed stably. In this context, "normal conditions” and
“stably” mean thermodynamic equilibrium, which is a scientific way of saying
something will not change over time because it is in thermal, mechanical,
chemical and radiative balance. By avoiding equilibrium, new configurations of
materials can be accessed, and these new configurations may having new and
better properties. In this project, equilibrium will be avoided by creating
systems of material that are so small, they exist at a size invisible to the
human eye. By condensing solid particles directly from a gas phase, with
dimensions of a few nanometers, (1 x 10^-9 m) and maintaining isolation between
the nanoparticles, elements which normally don’t go together, can be forced into
mixing, thereby producing dramatic effects on the physical properties of these
material systems. In this way, new magnetic materials can be discovered and
developed, with potentially profound impacts on energy conversion to improve
motors, generators, data storage, and even biomedical devices. Furthermore, a
better understanding of materials behavior and structure formation in very, very
small systems will result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also focused on
training the next generation of scientist. This project will support a graduate
student who will learn advanced materials fabrication, characterization, and
modeling techniques, while working with international partners. The project also
provides support for an undergraduate community college student transferring to
a four-year science or engineering (i.e., STEM) degree program, with the goal to
ease the transition to the university environment. Finally, this project will
partner with an existing Research Experience for Teachers Program, providing
educational opportunities in nanotechnology for community college or high school
science teachers as well as their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the field of non-
equilibrium materials, by avoiding bulk equilibrium by creating isolated,
finite-sized systems. This will be accomplished by using inert gas condensation
to create nanoparticles on the order of nanometers, which will be isolated from
one another. Focusing on normally immiscible systems, novel solid solution
alloys and new ordered structures (i.e., intermetallic compounds) are expected
to form. In addition, by controlling the size of the nanoparticles, the size-
dependent phase formation can be explored, adding another axis to the
temperature-composition phase diagram. Inert gas condensation is an ideal method
of forming a wide variety of nanomaterials over large composition space, with
excellent control over their size. In particular, at small nanoparticle sizes,
complete or extended solid solution formation occurs, with strong effects on the
magnetic behavior. Here, the focus will be on Fe and Co alloyed with 4d and 5d
transition metals such as W and Mo, where extensive solid solution formation can
have profound effects on the magnetic behavior, as well as Cu, Ag, and Au, with
which they are immiscible but may have the propensity to form non-equilibrium
intermetallic compounds. These investigations will be done in collaboration with
computational studies by researchers at the University of Genoa, Italy. The
knowledge gained from this project will expand the understanding of alloy and
structure formation at the nanoscale, as well as develop new materials for
energy conversion systems, data storage, and biomedical applications.
Ultimately, this project provides a pathway to explore a world of undiscovered
structures hidden by bulk equilibria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
provides support for a graduate student and an undergraduate community college
student transferring to a four-year science or engineering (i.e., STEM) degree
program, with the goal to ease the transition to the university. Finally, this
project will partner with an existing Research Experience for Teacher program,
providing nanotechnology educational opportunities for community college or high
school science teachers and subsequently their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.