* 2211627
* NSF GEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: A general model for bubble nucleation and growth in volcanic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 333,856.00

This project will be jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nucleation
and growth of bubbles drives explosive volcanic eruptions. As such, quantitative
modelling of these processes is essential if we are to predict eruptive style,
as well as the nature of eruptive products. This project will produce a useful
tool for the volcanological research community and enable our collective science
to better understand and ultimately predict the nature, explosivity, and
potential hazard of explosive eruptions. This most serious volcanic hazard
arises from large ash eruptions. Ash poses local hazards to the region
surrounding volcanoes, such as Mt. St. Helens, in 1980, and also threatens a
much broader area with ash fallout that can contaminate surface water and
agricultural soils, lead to respiratory stress, and in the case of very large
eruptions, can temporarily alter global climate. As such, these eruptions
threaten national and global security, and understanding them more fully is a
science priority. Toward the goal of such understanding, this project aims to
get to the heart of volcanoes- the nucleation of bubble that form, grow and
drive explosive eruptions. The project includes international and domestic
collaborations with cross-university mentoring of students and postdocs,
including K-12 outreach and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create and validate a unified
numerical model for the nucleation and growth of bubbles in magma, across the
range of compositions most commonly associated with explosive eruptions. At
present, rigorous quantitative understanding of the physical controls on the
nucleation and growth of bubbles is impeded by two knowledge gaps relating to
nucleation processes and complex, evolving bubble growth. The project will
combine novel experiments with theoretical modeling to overcome these knowledge
gaps by 1) Conducting targeted experiments to constrain a novel, theoretically-
grounded formulation that captures both homogeneous and heterogeneous
nucleation; 2) Creating a numerical model of bubble growth that captures the
ensemble behavior of cohorts of interacting bubbles, in which the distribution
of nucleation sites may evolve in time and space; 3) Combining the nucleation
formulation and bubble growth model to create a unified model. That ensemble
bubble growth model will use the nucleation formulation to stochastically and
iteratively assign nucleation events within a 3D volume of melt, and track the
growth of the resulting bubbles using cohorts of shell models. This combined
numerical model will allow users to determine the evolution of magma properties
for natural eruption pathways, and set the stage for inverting from eruptive
products to infer in-conduit eruptive conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.