* 2211691
* Fate of Freshwater and Heat in Baffin Bay: Basin-scale Circulation and Shelf/slope Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 706,057.00

Due to the warming climate the Arctic pack-ice is melting at a fast rate, and
some models predict that, in just a few decades, the Arctic will be ice-free
during the summer months. At the same time, the Greenland ice sheet is
undergoing accelerated ice loss, which is largely due to warm ocean waters from
the south melting the undersides of the glaciers surrounding the coast. Two
important questions associated with this are: (1) What is the ultimate fate of
the increased meltwater? and (2) How are the warm waters able to get so close to
the coast of Greenland? In fall of 2021, a detailed shipboard survey of the
circulation and water characteristics in Baffin Bay (on the western side of
Greenland) was carried out on the US Coast Guard Cutter Healy. In this project
we will analyze the data collected on the Healy to address the two questions
above. We will combine our shipboard information with data collected by a small,
self-propelled underwater vehicle that was able to sample closer to the coast
than the Healy could. We will also use recent and past data collected by other
ships and will use output from a very detailed numerical model to complement our
observations. The project will advance our understanding of how the circulation
and wind forcing help dictate where the surface meltwater goes and how the
subsurface warm waters are steered shoreward. The project will fund a young
researcher to work with the principal investigators. We will share our results
with indigenous communities on Baffin Island and organize a scientific workshop
at the Greenland Institute of Natural Resources.&lt;br/&gt;During the past few
decades, the amount of freshwater in the Arctic Ocean has been increasing
substantially and the mass loss from the Greenland ice sheet has been
accelerating. Much of the freshwater exiting Fram Strait (between Greenland and
Svalbard), and most of the meltwater from Greenland, ends up in the boundary
current encircling Greenland. Furthermore, beneath the surface layer in the
current resides the warm and salty subtropical-origin water that has been
implicated in causing basal melt in Greenlandâ€™s glaciers. In autumn 2021 the
USCGC Healy carried out an extensive hydrographic/velocity survey of Baffin Bay.
This project will use these data to address the fate of heat and freshwater in
the bay. In addition to the Healy data, we will use contemporaneous glider data
and shipboard data from the CCS Amundsen, as well as historical hydrographic
data and output from a very high-resolution numerical model. The project will
fundamentally advance our understanding of (1) the evolution of the boundary
current system as it encircles Baffin Bay; (2) the mechanisms by which heat is
transferred from the west Greenland boundary current to glacial fjords via deep
troughs in the continental shelf; (3) the partitioning of freshwater between
Arctic-origin and Greenland meltwaters and how these two components are
distributed in the bay; and (4) the general circulation and hydrography of
Baffin Bay, including its seasonality. Researchers from six foreign institutions
are involved in the project. A postdoctoral investigator will work with the team
of investigators. For outreach we will engage community members and stakeholders
during a trip to Baffin Island, and we will organize a scientific workshop at
the Greenland Institute of Natural Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.