* 2211631
* Sustaining: A Bridge to Sustainability for the CIPRES Science Gateway
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Wayne Pfeiffer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,112,716.00

This award to the University of California - San Diego will sustain the online
presence of the Cyberinfrastructure for Phylogenetic Research (CIPRES) Science
Gateway, an internet site that allows scientists from around the world to make
discoveries more easily through access to community software for analyzing
complex phylogenetic questions run on large NSF-funded compute clusters.
Currently at least 12,000 scientists run tens of thousands of jobs each year
using the CIPRES Gateway; these jobs are an essential part of making new
scientific discoveries about the natural world and the origin of life on Earth.
In the past year at least 1,800 scientific studies were published using results
made possible by CIPRES. All of these studies would have been more difficult or
even impossible without the access to resources that CIPRES provides. CIPRES
makes it possible for researchers who do not have access to large local/campus
computing resources to ask large questions and conduct difficult investigations.
It also makes it possible for more than 100 instructors each year to train the
next generation of phylogenetics researchers, using the finest tools available
in the world. The impact of CIPRES on basic biological research is significant.
Assuming current trends continue, CIPRES will support 6,000+ studies during the
award period. The access provided by CIPRES allowed scientists to quickly
investigate the origin and distribution of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, emphasizing the
value of a resource like CIPRES when scientists need to respond rapidly to an
unforeseen, time-sensitive research problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this
award, the researchers will focus on changing the CIPRES Science Gateway from an
NSF-funded resource to a user-funded resource. The goal of the project is to
develop tools and strategies that make it possible to sustain the CIPRES Science
Gateway indefinitely via revenues generated from the projectâ€™s users and
sponsors. At present thousands of users access and run jobs at CIPRES each year
as part of their scientific investigations into the evolution of life on Earth.
Given that the resource has enduring value to its community, the researchers
will develop revenue streams that will allow maintenance and preservation of the
resource in perpetuity without additional funding from NSF or other federal
agencies. The proposed activities include software maintenance and systems
administration tasks that preserve the operational integrity of job submissions,
results storage, and results retrieval via a web-based graphical user interface
that supports submissions by individual users, and via a RESTful application
programming interface that supports submissions by other science gateways and
desktop applications that require phylogenetic analyses. Additional activities
will include routine updating, benchmarking, and release of current and new
community codes; usage monitoring to ensure efficient and prudent use of NSF
resources by the user community; user support; adjustments and bug fixes based
on feedback from users; and reporting progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.