* 2211908
* OAC Core: Geometry-aware and Deep Learning-based Cyberinfrastructure for Scalable Modeling of Solids and Fluids
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Aparna Chandramowlishwaran, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Many phenomena in solid and fluid mechanics are modeled via complex partial
differential equations (PDEs). Since solving these PDEs via traditional
numerical methods is prohibitively expensive, emulators such as deep neural
networks (DNNs) are increasingly employed to approximate PDE solutions. While
significant effort has been expended in this direction, existing technologies
provide expensive solutions that are not transferable across different
applications or scalable to complex PDEs. This project aims to address these
limitations using a divide and conquer approach. In the framework that will be
developed for the project, the project will first build a library of DNNs that
solve single-physics PDE systems over small domains called genomes. Then, to
solve multi-physics PDEs over large unseen domains, the project will develop an
adaptive method that couples the DNNs and assembles their genome-wise
predictions such that the governing equations are satisfied in the entire
domain. The project expects that the pre-trained DNNs and coupling mechanism
will greatly benefit scholars without access to the hardware or knowledge that
are needed for scientific machine learning. The transferability of the framework
has the potential to reduce the carbon footprint of the high computing costs
that are associated with existing technologies that use DNNs to solve PDEs,
providing great benefits to both scientific research and to society as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build LEarned Genomic Operators
(LEGOs) that use Bayesian reinforcement learning (BRL) for generalization, i.e.,
for (1) emulating multi-physics systems, and/or (2) achieving spatiotemporal
transferability and scalability. The contributions of this work are expected to
enable on-the-fly approximation of the behavior of solids and fluids via pre-
trained DNNs, thus eliminating long training times while increasing accuracy and
scalability. The LEGO framework is hypothesis-driven and leverages the
mathematics of domain decomposition methods that uniquely exploit parallel and
heterogeneous machines. The framework solves a PDE system in a large domain with
arbitrary initial and boundary conditions by first decomposing the domain into
small subdomains called genomes. Then, the solution in each genome is
approximated via pre-trained LEGOs such that the assembly of the genome-wise
predictions approximates the solution in the large domain. In essence, the LEGOs
model different physical phenomena (e.g., material deformation or fluid flow) in
genomes while the BRL agent couples the LEGOs to model multi-physics phenomena
and/or spatiotemporally extends the predictions of LEGOs while preserving
solution consistency across the genomes. To achieve real-time and robust
performance with high transferability and scalability, the framework (1) uses
mixed-precision computing and hardware accelerators, (2) incorporates geometry-
aware learning algorithms, and (3) mathematically estimates the propagated
errors during solution assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.