* 2211153
* Secondary Marine Aerosol precursors and Links to aerosol growth at ice-melT onset in the Arctic (SMALTA)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeffrey Pierce, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2025
* USD 756,008.00

The goal of this project is to advance knowledge about the formation of
secondary marine aerosol in the atmosphere. Compared to primary marine aerosol,
secondary aerosol explains a larger fraction of variability in marine cloud
condensation nuclei and cloud droplet number concentrations. This work is
expected to improve the predictive understanding of ocean - atmosphere
interactions that control aerosol number and properties over remote oceans and
will improve the mechanistic understanding of the formation of marine cloud
condensation nuclei. The results will provide needed information for improved
model representation of aerosol impacts on marine cloud properties and Earth’s
changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of volatile organic
compounds will be made during the Atmospheric Rivers and the Onset of Sea Ice
Melt (ARTofMELT) project aboard IB Oden, in May – June 2023. New measurements of
oxygenated volatile organic compounds will allow a determination of whether
oxygenated monoterpenes, linear carbonyls and phenolic compounds are important
contributors to gas-phase marine reactive organic carbon in a polar marine
region. In addition, new measurements of reduced sulfur compounds will allow a
determination about whether methanethiol makes an important contribution to the
natural sulfur budget during the Atlantic Arctic spring bloom. Finally, gas-
aerosol closure simulations will quantify the role of these under-explored
precursors of secondary marine aerosol in controlling aerosol properties. The
observations and modeling of this project have relevance to marine regions
beyond the Arctic, where (1) models of aerosol properties have relied on
assumptions about the nature and identity of secondary marine aerosol
precursors, and (2) efforts to reach closure between measured and predicted
oxidant reactivity have indicated a missing source of reactive organic
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three graduate students will participate in the
internationally collaborative research. A collaboration with the Natural
Sciences Education and Outreach Center at Colorado State University will involve
the design of hands-on and student-driven classroom activities that focus on
greenhouse gases and their impacts on both local agricultural systems, and
remote ocean and polar ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.