* 2211095
* Conference: 2022 Princeton Summer School on Combustion and the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Michael Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/28/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of this award is to provide support for student attendance at the
annual Princeton Summer School on Combustion, held at Princeton University. The
summer school offers one- week, intense, advanced graduate-level foundational
courses in combustion theory, combustion chemistry, experiment, computation, and
various technological issues related to propulsion, energy, fuels, and the
environment. It aims to empower the participants with a comprehensive,
interdisciplinary knowledge base needed to make transformative discoveries in
combustion energy science. The academic program typically consists of four to
five 15-hour courses delivered over a five-day period. Since its 2010 inaugural
session, over 2000 participants have attended, with lectures delivered by world-
renowned experts in combustion with concurrent reputations as being inspiring
lecturers. All lectures are videotaped and freely available to the public via
YouTube. The proposed program for the 2022 session will be held on June 19 to
25, with an expanded scope on the environment as reflected by re-naming the
program as the Princeton Summer School on Combustion and the Environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of the Princeton Summer School is to advance
the science and technology of combustion. The Summer School is an effective
vehicle to combine the fairly disparate branches of combustion theory,
chemistry, experiment, computation, and applications. Students and researchers
are asked to dig deep into the fundamental concepts of combustion science while
given the opportunity to network with other researchers in the field. The Summer
School plays a significant role in preparing the next generation of scientists
and technologists in this field to address the immensely challenging problems of
energy sustainability and climate change. The concept and structure of this
summer school also offers a model for adoption by other interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary programs for talent development in the broad arena of science
and technology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.