* 2211018
* SHF: Medium: Exploring an Edge Platform Design Trajectory for Next Generation XR Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 402,328.00

Extended Reality (XR) encompassing virtual reality (VR), where a computer-
generated environment can be explored and interacted with by users, at one end
of the spectrum and augmented reality (AR), where parts of users' physical world
are enhanced with computer-generated data, at the other end of the spectrum, is
an emerging technology with transformational potential in many domains of
national importance including science, healthcare, education, entertainment, and
commerce. While various flavors of XR products (tethered, standalone,
screenless) are commercially available today, they only offer point solutions
for very specific applications varying in cost, performance and power envelope.
Furthermore, as many XR applications will run in an edge-computing scenario,
their design demands not only power and energy considerations, but also the
adaptability and field-customization to efficiently support any future
applications. As a result, there is a critical need to develop frameworks that
enable designers to generate, test, evaluate and customize a large spectrum of
next-generation XR devices with accompanying software support. Such frameworks
can expedite time-to-discovery for AR/VR-based applications and redefine the
future of computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to design an agile
and cost-effective hardware and software platform, AVATAR, that can be
progressively adapted and customized to the performance, quality-of-service
(QoS), and energy-efficiency needs of a diverse set of XR applications. AVATAR
consists of four inter-twined thrusts. First, a detailed profiling of four types
of XR applications on three different edge platforms is conducted to understand
the latency, power and utilization of different stages in an XR pipeline for
identifying the bottleneck stages/kernels. Second, it undertakes a coordinated
design of the compiler and runtime system for controlling tunable knobs such as
code partitioning and dynamic reconfiguration. Next, hardware design
alternatives embracing device heterogeneity such as general-purpose CPU cores,
graphic processing units (GPUs), and field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) for
the targeted kernels/pipeline stages of an XR application along with scope for
reconfigurability are explored for desired performance-power tradeoffs. In
addition, the scope for exploiting Wi-Fi/5G communication to facilitate
efficient computation partitioning between an edge device and cloud is
investigated. Finally, a comprehensive evaluation framework to evaluate the
efficacy of the proposed solutions for different XR applications is being
developed. On the educational front, AVATAR includes a new special-topics course
and involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in this emerging research
field, where students get exposure to cross-cutting topics in computer
architecture, compilers, runtime systems and networking, as well as new classes
of XR applications. It also includes several Broadening Participation in
Computing (BPC) activities such as a summer camp targeting girls and
collaboration with the Education Department at Penn State to expose K-12
students to many areas of computer science and engineering, with the primary
focus being on XR applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.