* 2211646
* NSF-BSF: Global Correlation in complex structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2025
* USD 503,332.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Material disorder is pervasive in
natural and fabricated materials. It is therefore important to understand the
impact of disorder on the flow of different types of waves in diverse fields of
endeavor including electronics, telecommunications, environmental sensing, bio-
medical imaging, and resource exploration. The research team seeks to discover
common principles governing the flow of waves in disordered materials based on
wave scattering in the entirety of a material. This research program explores
how to create a state in which transmission vanishes and transmission becomes
extremely sensitive to changes in a material. The research team also explores
extreme scattering of microwave radiation in samples with metallic elements,
which may open up new approaches to the extreme trapping of waves. The
feasibility of harnessing the transmission of microwave radiation in scattering
media for information processing are explored in experiments and theoretical
analysis. The diverse research projects provide high school, undergraduate and
graduate students the opportunity to engage with theory, simulations,
statistical analysis, and experiments of the flow of waves as part of an
international team tackling problems of intense fundamental and applied
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team carries out linked experimental, computational and theoretical
studies of fundamental aspects of global correlation of waves in disordered
systems with potential applications in excitation engineering, optical
computation, imaging, and sensing. Many of the most intriguing, challenging, and
potentially useful aspects of waves in complex systems arise from global
correlation of the field. Such correlation governs the statistics of the
transmission matrix which links the incident and outgoing fields. The research
team explores the singularities of the transmission matrix, which are the
resonances of the medium and the transmission zeros. This research (1) studies
the evolution of transmission zeros in the complex frequency plane as samples
are changed, (2) explores the correlation of the axial velocity of transmission
eigenchannels across random samples and its impact upon the energy excited
within random systems, (3) investigates the characteristics and source of the
vanishing of the density of states within certain random systems, (4) explores
the nature of propagation in systems with metallic elements, (5) investigates
dimensionality reduction in random mappings via the transmission matrix of
scattering samples, and, (6) explores random projections of microwave radiation
propagating through scattering media in the context of transmission
eigenchannels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.