* 2211509
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: The Privacy Backplane - A Full Stack Approach to Individualized Privacy Controls Throughout the Internet-of-Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 291,100.00

The goal of this project is to develop technologies that put individuals in
control of their privacy policies and data in a sensor-rich world, but enable
applications that consume these data to operate within these constraints. In
particular, this project focuses on future environments, such as retail
contexts, healthcare facilities, and even public spaces, where the data
collection and privacy interests of different actors clearly need to be
resolved. This project will study and develop the concepts and infrastructure
necessary to support enforcement of user requirements for privacy and data
access within large-scale sensing environments in a secure and trusted way that
ensures policy and functionality requirements are achieved. The foundation of
the project will be an architecture for a “Privacy Backplane,” a trusted
distributed system designed to enforce user-defined privacy policies that allow
users to dictate how data collected about them are used, while simultaneously
executing the elements of applications that need access to these data. This
project will instill privacy protection throughout every component of a physical
environment from sensors themselves, through the (wireless) network and edge,
all the way to data storage and processing systems in the cloud. The project
explicitly considers the efficiency implications of privacy policy enforcement
for low-power Internet-of-Things devices. Finally, this project will leverage
recent advances in secure hardware architectures to implement a trustworthy
system efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The right to privacy and control over
one’s personal information is a core issue of our time and developing effective
mechanisms to protect personal privacy is now a priority in many societies; it
has been identified as a strategic priority by the U.S. government. As ever
cheaper sensors deliver rapidly increasing surveillance capabilities, many
organizations, companies, and governmental institutions are deploying advanced
surveillance and monitoring environments with few constraints. At the same time,
distributed physical sensor infrastructures enable important new applications
that may bring individual and social benefits. However, the constant collection
of personal data by largely anonymous companies and governmental entities has
caused a significant amount of concern among the general populace. This project
seeks to develop a path towards leveling the playing field that will allow users
to exert more direct control over who may collect, access, and store data on
them, as well as the ways these data are used. Additionally, the project will
seek to increase the level of transparency for data collection and
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.