* 2211633
* LEAPS-MPS: Mathematical Modeling of Targeted Drug Delivery: Unifying Lighthill and Taylor Theories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Herve Nganguia, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 242,132.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The advent of Targeted Drug Delivery has led to
significant progress in nano-medicine and patients' care. In this clinical
process, a carrier transports and releases drugs at a specific site, thus
minimizing negative side effects on healthy cells and tissues. To optimize
delivery, the carrier is often directed using various methods, including
technologies that mimic the propulsion of microorganisms. This interdisciplinary
project will lay the foundations for an integrated Targeted Drug Delivery
framework. It combines biology, computational sciences, mathematics, and physics
to develop strategies and conditions for optimizing the carrier's path and
release. The research results will provide insights into the ways carriers can
be controlled to safely administer drugs. The project will also support and help
to train students in all STEM fields. The PI will use problems from this
research to develop project-based courses that provide Towson University
students with hands-on experience in research. Underrepresented students will
actively be recruited and encouraged to take leading roles in the project. These
students will benefit from year-round exposure to advanced mathematical methods
and interactions with other researchers, helping them to grow more confident in
their science identity. As a result, this project will directly contribute to
increasing the representation of underrepresented students in graduate schools
and other STEM careers. The project will also impact Towson University by
providing more opportunities in applied research for motivated students. These
opportunities will further raise Towson University's profile in the Baltimore
region and turn it into an attractive destination for cutting-edge
transformative research in the mathematical and physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project fits into a complex, multipart, and
multiscale dynamic system that will capture the fundamentals of Targeted Drug
Delivery. The goal is to develop a new mathematical/computational framework for
the swimming of microorganisms enclosed in a soft particle in dc electric field
using partial differential equations, fluid dynamics, and numerical methods
including neural networks. As a first step, an idealized representation of a
propelling ciliated microorganism enclosed in a surfactant-covered drop in a dc
electric field will be used to describe the directed motion of a drug carrier in
an electrified medium. Analytical and numerical tools will help to probe and
solve the partial differential equations that govern the problem, including
spheroidal harmonics, asymptotic analyses, and machine learning. Specifically,
for conditions beyond the analytical models' range of validity, solutions will
be approximated numerically using physics-informed neural networks. The models
and techniques developed herein have intrinsic mathematical merit, arising from
contemporary interdisciplinary applications such as microrobots propulsion and
microfluidics. They also embody a broad scope of research activities including
swimming dynamics of biological organisms and electrohydrodynamics of soft
particles. Once completed, this project will also result in a unified and
efficient convergent theory for hyperparameters of physics-informed neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.