* 2211574
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: App-driven Web Browsing: Novel Risks, Vulnerabilities, and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Jason Polakis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The modern web ecosystem is comprised of a multitude of non-browser applications
that, while having the same ability to process and render web content, are
developed with different technologies and exhibit different capabilities. In
this new browsing paradigm, app developers are responsible for configuring and
implementing security features that are already standardized in traditional
browsers. The option to deviate from well-known defaults has the potential of
opening their software to misconfigurations and ultimately exposing users to
significant security risks. This project focuses on providing a holistic and in-
depth analysis of the features, functionality, and capabilities of modern non-
browser apps that allow web browsing. The project’s novel contributions include
the design and development of diverse techniques and systems for uncovering the
inherent security flaws in the different technologies that power these apps. The
project's broader significance and importance lie in the critical positioning of
these web and mobile apps within the greater web ecosystem, and the necessity of
more robust flaw detection and prevention capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores, measures, and addresses the
security flaws that are inherent to the technologies used for developing apps
that enable web browsing. This requires implementing novel static and dynamic
code and app analysis techniques for detecting security issues that enable a
wide range of attacks, from incorrect origin-isolation enforcement to remote
code injection and execution. Moreover, the project includes the development of
observatories to understand whether these browsing apps are becoming more secure
over time and identify new vulnerabilities, in a data-driven fashion. The
outcomes of this research strengthen the research community's understanding of
the risks of app-driven browsing and provide solutions that improve the security
hygiene of the app ecosystem, while being widely disseminated through academic
publications, curriculum integration, industry conferences, and media
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.