* 2211882
* CNS: Medium: Ground up Adaptive Learning System for Heterogeneous Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhihao Jia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 790,631.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming ubiquitous, with applications running
on smartphones, IoT devices, self-driving cars, and the cloud. These
applications are supported by different types of computer hardware, including
hardware specially designed to accelerate AI applications. To operate as
intended, these applications require a training process, which is usually
performed using a shared infrastructure containing a variety of hardware.
Training and deploying AI applications in diverse, real-world computing
environments takes significant human effort. This project aims to realize
adaptive AI computations, which enable AI programs to move across different
hardware types and react quickly to resource and task changes in shared
computing infrastructures – and to do so automatically. The project will build
an end-to-end solution that (1) coordinates when and where to run AI programs
for a given set of need; (2) automatically partitions, distributes, and
configures AI tasks across different hardware resources; and (3) builds AI
programs that can seamlessly migrate across hardware
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern society relies on AI systems and
applications. Considering adaptivity and accessibility as first-order objectives
when building AI systems can have far-reaching impacts on how people develop and
deploy AI applications. For example, with the help of this project, developers
will be able to run AI applications on their platform of choice without being
locked into a single platform or vendor. This project will also enable
coordination among multiple AI applications on shared resources to reduce the
overall cost of running AI applications. These improvements will make AI systems
more affordable and accessible to small organizations and individual
practitioners. Finally, this project will also increase the resource and energy
efficiency of AI applications and will directly contribute to reducing the
burden that data centers place on energy infrastructure and, thereby, the
environment. The project also includes activities to engage undergraduate
researchers and to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.