* 2211429
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Towards More Human-like AI Models of Source Code
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Yu Huang, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 323,712.00

The research objective of this project is to design novel artificial
intelligence-based models of software that learn from and are informed by human
behavior. The frontier of many areas of Software Engineering (SE) research
involves applications of AI-based models to SE tasks. Many tasks in SE research
rely on the same basic underpinning technologies, often a neural representation
of source code that is trained to find features in code, which are then used for
various tasks e.g., to predict words for a document or areas of code likely to
contain a bug. While the first applications of recurrent neural network-based
encoder-decoder models were a paradigm shift over the manually-crafted
heuristics and rules that the neural models replaced, subsequent changes have
yielded less improvement despite increased
sophistication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this project is to achieve a
breakthrough in more human-like neural models of source code. Its aim is to
advance a broad spectrum of SE research tasks that rely on neural models, by
improving the neural models of code that underpin many downstream tasks. The
research plan is three-fold: First, the project will characterize human behavior
during different SE tasks via eye-tracking and IDE-based experiments. Second,
the project will design models that predict or even mimic human behavior. Third,
the project will use those models to augment and improve neural representations
of source code, and evaluate these new representations in a variety of SE
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.