* 2211146
* CPS: Small: Formally Correct Deep Perception For Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 499,998.00

Light Detection and Ranging (LiDARs) and cameras are an indispensable part of
the sensor suite used in autonomous cyber-physical systems such as self-driving
cars and unmanned aerial vehicles. The data generated by these sensors is often
processed by a deep neural network that transforms it into state estimates used
in control loops. Although one can analyze the impact that erroneous state
estimates have on control loops, less is known about how to characterize the
errors produced by deep neural networks. The objective of this project is to
develop analysis and design techniques that provide formally guaranteed bounds
on how large these errors can be. Formally establishing error bounds will enable
the verification of existing systems as well as the design of new autonomous
systems for which formal guarantees of safety and performance can be
given.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenge of using deep
neural networks in the perception pipeline of autonomous cyber-physical systems
by following two different approaches, termed correctness-by-training and
correctness-by-supervision. The first approach, correctness-by-training, is
based on the use of monotone neural networks for which deterministic
generalization bounds can be established. The challenge of using monotone neural
networks is that their training is more challenging and several novel training
techniques will be investigated. The second approach, correctness-by-
supervision, consists of attaching a supervisor to the neural network that
overrides the network output so as to enforce guaranteed error bounds. A
supervisor will be developed in the context of localization using LiDAR
measurements using novel point-set registration techniques based on moments.
Both approaches aim to provide guaranteed error bounds on the state estimates
computed by deep neural networks. The ultimate contribution is to use these
error bounds in the formal analysis of safety and performance of control loops
using deep neural networks in the perception pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.