* 2211786
* Travel: Student Support for the 38th International Conference on Logic Programming in 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Yuliya Lierler, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Consortium (DC) and All School on Logic Programming (FSLP) at the
International Conference on Logic Programming (ICLP) that will be held in August
2022 in Haifa, Israel. ICLP is the leading international conference for
researchers in logic programming, an important subfield of artificial
intelligence. This activity will bring together a broad community of researchers
in this important field and supports junior researchers at this critical early-
career stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DC creates the opportunity to bring in
participants who might not have attended an AI conference due to lack of
resources. This is especially true for those at smaller institutions and those
which have less developed AI programs. Engaging such participants has the
potential to draw more talent into AI research, improve research ideas in their
formative stage, and engender collaborations across the breadth of disciplines.
This event provides students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on
their work at a critical time in their research and enables them to explore
their career objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.