* 2211640
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Parallel and Real-Time Multicore Scheduling for an Efficiently-Used Cache (PARSEC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Corey Tessler, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 309,989.00

Safety-critical systems that have strict “real-time” requirements are becoming
increasingly ubiquitous and complex. Epitomizing this recent trend toward
sophisticated real-time systems are autonomous vehicles, which must perform
image recognition, machine learning, routing, and planning tasks, simultaneously
and with minimal delay. Furthermore, these real-time computational tasks must
execute upon shared hardware (e.g., processors, memory, storage) due to the
severe constraints on the size, weight, and power of the entire system; however,
the sharing of computer resources creates tremendous contention and competition
between tasks. This project addresses a fundamental challenge of how multiple
real-time, safety-critical tasks can effectively share the underlying memory
architecture and still meet timing constraints. In particular, this project will
develop a novel system design and analysis framework called PARSEC (Parallel and
Real-Time Multicore Scheduling for an Efficiently-Used Cache). PARSEC
contributes to the state-of-the-art with (a) new multicore scheduling algorithms
that explicitly manage how contending tasks share memory resources; (b) new
formal analysis techniques that verify that a system’s timing constraints are
satisfied with existing memory resources; and (c) a set of open-source automated
tools that will enable system designers to utilize the framework on commercial
off-the-shelf processing architectures. PARSEC will be implemented and evaluated
upon the popular RISC V architecture to facilitate wide dissemination to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in safer, more efficient
designs of time-sensitive systems, including autonomous vehicles and robotics.
Furthermore, the resulting research and system design techniques in this project
can be applied to any real-time, safety-critical systems executing concurrent
computational tasks upon a shared processor and memory. The reduction in
contention in the memory hierarchy obtained from project artifacts will
potentially lessen demands on power and fuel in safety-critical systems,
decreasing their carbon footprint. The project will benefit the educational
missions of University of Nevada Las Vegas and Wayne State University by
providing a unique training, education, and experiential learning opportunity
for undergraduate and graduate students via course projects related to safety-
critical system design. To aid other researchers, this project will also
disseminate research results through publications, public talks, tutorials,
project websites, and online videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.