* 2211315
* CNS Core: Medium: A Systems and User-based  Approach to Floating Point Correctness and Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Peter Dinda, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 548,151.00

Computer arithmetic approximates the forms of arithmetic that humans use. This
approximation can lead to errors for at least two reasons: computer arithmetic
is inherently limited in the range and precision of numbers it can handle, and
some familiar rules of “human arithmetic” may not apply, leading software
developers to introduce bugs that lead to errors. In addition, computer
arithmetic implementations, both in hardware and software, are quickly becoming
more complex, potentially making developers more conservative out of fear of
introducing new kinds of bugs by using them. This project will approach these
problems from two new perspectives. From the user perspective, the project will
study scientific and other software developers to better gauge their
understanding of floating point arithmetic, the most common form of computer
arithmetic in scientific applications, and to develop insights on how to better
train developers. From the systems perspective, the project will study how to
virtualize floating point arithmetic with high performance, making it easier to
plug in alternative computer arithmetic systems with different properties, and
tools for detecting problems with particular arithmetic systems. The project
will also study important scientific applications using the tools it develops,
as well as those developed by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science and
engineering applications are increasingly critical to the economic, military,
and environmental health of the nation. It is essential that such applications
produce trustworthy results, regardless of the complexity of computer arithmetic
and its implementations. Because computer arithmetic, and, more specifically,
the IEEE standard for floating point arithmetic on which the project focuses, is
a common denominator for most such applications, the project has the potential
to improve such applications. Additionally, the project has the potential to
better understand software developers, particularly scientific software
developers, and thus develop better ways to train them with regard to floating
point arithmetic. A collaboration with two national labs forms part of the
project, and this will allow access both to scientific developers and to
scientific applications that will serve to ground the project and hopefully also
provide direct benefit beyond the expected research contributions. The project
will also develop a training methodology for scientific developers, and an
appropriate lab for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.