* 2211811
* Improving STEM Education at HSI Community Colleges by Introducing High Impact Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Ken Sweat, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,789.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this conference aims to identify the unique
challenges that administrators, staff, faculty and students in the US Southwest
urban and rural HSI community colleges face when introducing high-impact
educational practices such as Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
(CUREs) in STEM curricula. While the impact of CUREs on student success
parameters has been widely demonstrated in research intensive 4-year
institutions, little is known of the benefits of CUREs in community colleges and
other 2-year educational institutions, specifically those with significant
percentages of underserved students, such as HSI community colleges. This
conference will provide a platform to discuss lessons learned, to evaluate
strategies for improvement, and to identify and provide effective tools to
2-year HSI institutions that are considering the introduction of CUREs in their
programs while documenting the needs, barriers, successes, and benefits
associated with CURE implementation in STEM HSI community college courses.
Conference outcomes will include: equity-minded models for CURE design,
implementation, and assessment in line with the needs of HSIs; partnership and
collaborative strategies among 4-year colleges and urban and rural 2-year
colleges for industry engagement in CURE design and execution; improved
understanding of high impact practices in STEM teaching and learning; improved
understanding of what constitutes cultural relevance in HSIs; and best practices
for improving the success rate of HSIs in obtaining external funding to support
high impact educational interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference aims
to lay a foundation for understanding methodology, benefits and challenges of
CURE implementation in HSI CCs, and for establishing strategies of efficient
collaboration between 4-year universities, rural and urban community colleges,
industry, and community organizations in order to improve the quality of
education of underserved student populations. The conference will build on NSF-
funded University of Arizona HSI Conference: Transforming STEM Education in
Hispanic Serving Institutions - Regional Insights from the Southwest (NSF DUE
1748526) and Central Arizona College HSI Conference: Transforming STEM Education
at Rural Hispanic-Serving Institutions Across the Nation (NSF DUE 1940949) and
will increase knowledge and understanding of the specific challenges and
opportunities that introducing high impact educational strategies such as CUREs
represent for STEM undergraduate education at 2-year HSIs and how to better
serve the needs of students. The conference will generate a report with
conference outcomes, recommendations, and resources. Conference results will be
disseminated to governmental agencies and higher education organizations via
appropriate educational research journals, presentations at regional and
national conferences, and institutional social media outlets. Conference
findings will inform funding priorities for high impact educational
interventions in HSIs, and provide effective models for student engagement and
collaboration with industry and other community organizations, ultimately
impacting career preparedness of students attending HSIs. The HSI Program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.