* 2211718
* AF: Small: Advances in Private Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Ashok Cutkosky, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Modern Artificial intelligence (AI) systems are typically built with the use of
large datasets that may be generated by individuals contributing data over the
internet, such as through product ratings, comments, or other online
interactions. As a result, it is critical that such AI systems are able to
preserve the privacy of the individuals whose data is used: it should not be
possible for an outside observer to learn anything about any individual person
through the use of the AI system. This project will investigate the fundamental
limits of the trade-off^s between privacy and performance to build AI systems
that are as performant as possible without compromising privacy. The project's
results will not only improve the security of people who already benefit from
products that learn from their data but will also reduce bias in AI by enabling
more sensitive or vulnerable individuals to participate
safely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a technical level, this project will develop new
differentially private stochastic optimization algorithms. In recent years,
there has been a surge of interest in private optimization, but the theory for
private non-convex optimization (which is required for training neural networks)
is surprisingly underdeveloped. For this setting, the typical approach is to
treat a standard non-private algorithm as a black box, providing it with inputs
that have already been processed by adding noise to obscure individual
contributions so that the output must also necessarily preserve privacy. This
project will open up this black box to produce new algorithms that improve
privacy guarantees while maintaining good convergence results both in theory and
in practice. One of the initial technical approaches will be to develop a
connection between momentum, a ubiquitous technique in modern optimization
algorithms, with privacy. This approach does not require structural assumptions
on&lt;br/&gt;the loss surface (e.g., convexity, smoothness) to ensure privacy
but has the potential to significantly decrease the amount of noise injected
into the algorithm, resulting in improved performance with the same level of
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.