* 2211606
* Low-Dimensional Si-Sn and Si-Ge-Sn Nanoalloys as High-Efficiency, Direct-gap Nanostructures for Visible to Infrared Optoelectronics.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Umit Ozgur, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,912.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Developing high-efficiency light emitters
from earth abundant elements is imperative to replace rare and expensive
materials currently used in optical and electronic technologies. The prospective
low-cost and non-toxic candidates such as silicon, however, show extremely low
electricity to light conversion efficiency in their conventional arrangement.
This project integrates the unique quantum effects in nanoscale silicon and tin
alloying to produce silicon-tin and silicon-germanium-tin nanoparticles with
size and composition tunable superior light absorption and emission properties
for visible to infrared applications. The research team combines the material
synthesis efforts with computational calculations and advanced optical and
structural characterizations to garner a comprehensive understanding of the
physical and optical properties and stability of nanoscale alloys. The
collaborative nature of this research provides multidisciplinary training and
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, to develop skills in materials
design and synthesis, computational chemistry, nanoscience, and advanced optical
spectroscopy. The summer outreach to Richmond Public Schools exposes K-12
students to cutting-edge materials research projects and develops age-
appropriate materials science curricular modules, impacting hundreds of
underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;Group IV semiconductor alloys that show high efficiency direct-gap
emission have gained exceptional interest for realizing Si-based optoelectronic
technologies. However, the narrow energy gaps and the extremely low solubility
of Sn in Si and Ge hindered their fabrication and widespread application in
visible to infrared optoelectronic studies. This project exploits the concerted
influences of quantum confinement effects, Sn nano-alloying, and solution-phase
synthesis to produce metastable Si-Sn and Si-Ge-Sn alloys and quantum dots (QDs)
with size and composition tunable direct energy gaps and superior absorption and
emission properties across visible to infrared spectrum. A series of
monodisperse alloys having various sizes and compositions are produced by
innovative colloidal chemistry methods. The influences of Sn alloying and
quantum confinement on optical properties are thoroughly and systematically
probed via steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence and pump/probe
transient absorption spectroscopy, guided by first-principles electronic
structure and thermodynamic stability calculations. Experiments are designed to
probe confinement- and composition-induced direct-gaps of silicon, dark vs.
bright excitonic states and their dependence on nanocrystal size and
composition, and carrier relaxation mechanisms involving QD core, surface, and
their hybrid states to optimize the radiative efficiency. These later efforts
along with solution processing and high thermal and optical stability of
nanocrystal alloys enable the future design of high-efficiency, silicon-based
optoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.