* 2211818
* Conference: National Postdoctoral Association Pre-Conference Session to Promote IMPACT Fellowship Success
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Thomas Kimbis, National Postdoctoral Association
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,590.00

National conditions among postdocs across various institutions vary greatly,
with many individuals from underrepresented backgrounds lacking access to career
enhancing resources available to others. At some under-resourced institutions,
there is not only a lack of support and programming for postdocs, there is no
office assigned to handle postdoc affairs or the structured career and
professional support for postdocs is limited. Even at higher-resourced
institutions, training environments and research labs can be isolating for
individuals from marginalized backgrounds. To address these issues head-on, the
National Postdoctoral Association (NPA) launched the IMPACT Fellowship Program
in 2021 as a cohort-based professional development opportunity with community
and relationship building at its core. It provides postdoctoral participants
from underrepresented communities with access to personal and career resources
via cohorts of peers and mentors helping Fellows strategically build upon
existing skills, recognize opportunities, and advance in their careers. The NPA
IMPACT Program curriculum emphasizes relational learning and self-efficacy, is
designed nimbly to maximize Fellows’ sense of belonging and connection to a
broader community and provide education and career pathways to postdoctoral
scholars to help broaden participation in STEM and related research. The program
benefits society broadly by helping create a successful, empowered first class
of IMPACT Fellows from disadvantaged backgrounds, increasing their chance of
achieving leadership positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will empower
IMPACT Program Fellows, as well as selected NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowships in Biology (PRFB) Fellows, through an enriching final session of the
program that will be held as a pre-conference event at the NPA’s annual
conference. Fellows will meet one another as well as their mentors in person for
the first time and engage in activities that promote and extend the duration of
the learning objectives of the full Fellowship. Empowered by extensive advanced
preparation, the day-long session will focus on exploring the critical area of
personal values and their relation to Fellows scientific research and career
choices centered on a pair of workshops run by experts in inclusion and value
identification for scientific advancement. The NPA will facilitate the session
by using a four-component strategy to achieve this result: 1) peer discussion
and learning; 2) speaker-led workshops; 3) live course evaluation; and 4)
networking opportunities. Fellows will also be able to explore the educational
opportunities at the NPA Annual Conference, occurring during the two days
directly following this session. This IMPACT session will provide tools to
Fellows to use the knowledge and resources they gain to implement activities or
initiatives at their institutions and to contribute back to their communities,
further scaling the overall impact. The session will be evaluated using
established effectiveness tools and criteria to inform program improvements for
the next IMPACT course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.