* 2211943
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Big Data on the Dairy Farm: Relational Transformations across Agricultural Occupations and Organizations with the Rise of Digital Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pamela Hinds, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2025
* USD 305,228.00

This research will investigate how emerging technologies are transforming
occupations and organizations, exploring the significant example of digital
agriculture in dairy farming. The findings of this study will inform research on
technology use and the changing nature of work. While research has shown that
new digital technologies are best understood in social contexts, we know little
about how changing relationships between people, sensors, data, animals, data
science models and other important participants evolve. By studying those
involved in digital agriculture dairy farming, supported by an understanding of
how, when, and why they interact, this research will contribute to the
discussion on how to apply data-driven technologies productively. The findings
will also develop new theory about the relationship between big data and
resource management by documenting their impacts on occupations and
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research highlights how data science
models contribute to such evolving relations and how relational transformations,
in turn, shape the models. This project's theoretical framework is built upon
key contributions of the scholarship exploring technology, data, and organizing
before proposing a relational framework for studying digital agriculture. The
work employs a comparative mixed-method study with three main project goals: (1)
to explore evolving relations in digital agriculture and the occupational and
organizational consequences of them, (2) to generalize the findings and derive
theoretical insights for other contexts where the rise of data-driven
technologies may prompt similar relational transformations, and (3) to assess
how insights about evolving relations might aid in design and deployment of the
data science models and with them sensors, data streams, and the like. Mentoring
of graduate and undergraduate students will serve as an example of how to
integrate data science and social science inquiries in research projects while
providing students with essential fieldwork, analytical, and publishing
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.