* 2211916
* Collaborative Research: Deformations of Geometric Structures in Current Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Tristan Collins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2024
* USD 15,250.00

This project will conduct a two week long conference on the topic of
"Deformations of Geometric Structures in Current Mathematics", to be hosted at
Columbia University from May 3-6, 2022 and the Center of Mathematical Sciences
and Applications (CMSA) at Harvard University from May 9-12, 2022. This event
will bring together early career researchers and world renowned mathematicians
from a variety of fields, including complex analysis, symplectic geometry,
differential geometry and partial differential equations. This event will
provide a great opportunity for young mathematicians, and mathematicians from
under-represented groups to attend the conference and build relationships and
collaborations with leaders in a variety of mathematical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deformations of geometric structures has been an
exceptionally active theme in current developments in mathematics, with an infux
of ideas from many independent sources, including algebraic geometry, symplectic
geometry, partial differential equations, and string theory. The ideas have lead
to significant advances in enumerative geometry, Gromov-Witten Theory,
symplectic geometry, as well as moduli problems and the discovery of new
geometric and topological invariants. The conference will host a wide array of
talks from experts in a variety of fields where these ideas have been
infuential. Deformations of geometric structures were pioneered by the late
Professor Masatake Kuranishi of Columbia University, with his landmark works on
locally complete deformations and the many novel techniques which he introduced.
The conference website can be found at https://cmsa.fas.harvard.edu/kuranish-
conference/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.