* 2211353
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Vectorized Instruction Space (VIS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Soner Onder, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2026
* USD 331,704.00

This project aims to significantly increase the performance of application
programs ranging from those running on mobile devices to those utilized by ever-
growing data centers. The project's impacts are potentially enabling better
performing systems at all scales, hence directly and positively impacting
society. The efficiency of most applications is still primarily affected by how
fast branch instructions can be processed, which in turn decides how many
machine instructions can be executed by a processor per clock cycle. Advancing
the state of the art in this problem domain requires a paradigm shift and a
completely novel approach to system design. The project's novelty lies in that
it proposes to investigate a mechanism that has significantly better potential
than what incremental improvements based on available techniques can provide.
The team will develop the foundations of such an approach. Developed toolsets
and the design infrastructure will be open source and will have an impact on
both education and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's novel approach
can be summarized as applying the principle of vectorization to the instruction
space, referred to as Vectorized Instruction Space (VIS). VIS relies on an
executable dynamic single-assignment form implemented at the machine-instruction
level. Vectorization of the instruction space converts control dependences to
data dependences using a process that has significantly less overhead than
traditional predication, and it naturally combines controlled multi-path
execution with speculation. With this new paradigm, it will be possible to
eliminate a significant fraction of difficult-to-predict branch instructions,
and efficiently unroll loops with unknown iteration counts. The project involves
the development of the foundations of the paradigm both at the microarchitecture
and the compiler level, targeting both superscalar and VLIW
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.