* 2211060
* Collaborative Research: Harnessing synergism between biosurfactants and enzymes to enable efficient valorization of cellulose: towards a sustainable materials bioeconomy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bryan Berger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Cellulose is an abundant, renewable, and environmentally-sustainable resource
that can be used to produce nanocellulose and value-added fuels and chemicals.
As such, cellulose is an ideal feedstock for building a circular bioeconomy. To
realize this potential, however, scalable and sustainable methods are needed to
efficiently convert cellulose into nanocellulose. Current chemical and
mechanical nanocellulose production processes are efficient but unsustainable,
as they require high energy and water inputs, use toxic and corrosive solvents,
and generate large amounts of greenhouse gas emissions and high-volume waste
streams. Enzymatic processes enable sustainable nanocellulose production but
suffer from low yields. Petroleum-derived surfactants are often added to enhance
enzymatic bioconversion of cellulose, but selecting an ideal surfactant is not
straightforward and incorporates non-renewable resources into the process.
Saprophytic fungi decompose cellulosic biomass by secreting an enzyme-laden
mixture that includes cellulases as well as naturally-occurring biosurfactants
called hydrophobins. Hydrophobins have been implicated in enhancing enzymatic
cellulose decomposition and, thus, offer a potential green alternative to
petrochemical surfactants. However, the role hydrophobins play in enhancing
cellulase activity on cellulose remains unclear. The goal of this project is to
develop a scalable, environmentally-sustainable process for nanocellulose
production by leveraging the surface activity of hydrophobins to improve
cellulose deconstruction and modification. This research will result in new
tools to improve enzymatic cellulose conversion, thereby enabling the cellulose-
based circular bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the
need for scalable and sustainable processes to convert cellulosic biomass into
nanocellulose and value-added fuels and chemicals. The investigation focuses on
improving the rate and extent of enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose by
incorporating hydrophobin biosurfactants, which appear to synergistically
enhance cellulase performance. The project aims to elucidate the mechanisms of
biosurfactant-enhanced enzyme-cellulose interfacial interactions such that the
kinetics of cellulose hydrolysis and functionalized nanocellulose production can
be controlled. The project has three specific aims. Aim 1 will examine how
hydrophobins interact with cellulose to affect surface and material properties
and determine how hydrophobins facilitate enzymatic interactions and turnover
with cellulose. Aim 2 will build an understanding of how the evolutionary
diversity of hydrophobins leads to differences in cellulose and enzyme
adsorption. This knowledge will be used to engineer novel hydrophobins with
improved interfacial interactions that increase nanocellulose production. Aim 3
will evaluate the integration of enzymes, hydrophobins, and cellulose to
engineer ideal conditions for consolidated bioprocessing, considering both in
vitro and cell-based systems using Trichoderma reesei as a host. Ultimately,
this work will lead to new knowledge of how biological systems modify interfaces
during cellulose deconstruction, which is key to developing enzymatic approaches
for efficient nanocellulose production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.