* 2211793
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Engineering DNA and RNA computation through simulation, sequence design, and experimental verification
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* David Doty, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 349,861.00

Designed nucleic acid sequences (DNA or RNA) can self-assemble into nanoscale
structures and devices with promising applications in diagnostics, therapeutics,
and nanoscale manufacturing. Strand displacement, where an invader single strand
displaces an incumbent strand bound to a complementary substrate, is a key
process in dynamic DNA nanotechnology. While DNA strand displacement circuits
have proven to be capable of complex computation, they do not interface as
naturally to biological systems (e.g., CRISPR) as RNA. Meanwhile, RNA circuits
have not achieved the same level of success. This research aims to develop a
richer understanding and precise control of hybrid DNA:RNA displacement that may
lead to entirely new levels of sophistication in molecular circuits capable of
inter-operation with biological systems. A flexible, user-friendly sequence
design tool will significantly reduce the barrier to implementation for non-
experts. Education and outreach activities will broaden participation in
computing and cross-train students in multiple disciplines by reaching across
subject boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will collect
experimental data to parameterize new coarse-grained models of DNA-RNA hybrid
systems, including Markov chain models capable of rapid in-silico simulation to
determine kinetic reaction rates. These hybrid models will also parameterize
mismatch creation and repair during displacement making possible the design of
strand displacement reactions with precise kinetic control using both DNA and
RNA, and thus allowing a natural interface of complex computational cascades
with biological signals. A general-purpose DNA and RNA sequence design tool will
be developed that focuses on four tasks: algorithmic/efficiency improvements,
development of new models to enhance the behaviors expressible as constraints,
integration with existing tools, and the design and experimental demonstration
of a hybrid DNA:RNA displacement system that implements a self-stabilizing
clock, capable of producing RNA strands at a fixed
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.