* 2211439
* Feminist Geography Conference: Pushing Scientific Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Jennifer Fluri, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 10/31/2023
* USD 49,842.00

The Feminist Geography Conference: Pushing Scientific Boundaries seeks to engage
scholars from Geography and related disciplines in a series of paper and panel
sessions, and workshops to meet multiple objectives. First, the conference
provides mentorship and networking opportunities for Black Indigenous and People
of Color (BIPOC) and international scholars in the subdiscipline of human
geography. Second, the conference furthers geographic science through robust
exchanges among scholars, along with presentations and workshops that highlight
key contributions to geography and discuss different methodological practices.
These objectives are integrated into several conference format innovations that
generate new kinds of collaborations and participation. These innovations
include holding a hybrid-virtual conference in multiple sites, hosting a flipped
conference model with archives, hosting virtual keynote panel discussions, and
developing value-added in-person conference activities. These formats enhance
accessibility for early-career researchers, graduate students, international
scientists, and members of historically excluded groups in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society benefits from the inclusion of
multiple, even conflicting, perspectives. The knowledge generated from different
perspectives has the capacity to enhance geographic science, which in turn
enhances and improves research and outreach work with the public. The conference
provides a vital space for mentoring and networking across national boundaries
and allow international students and scholars the opportunity to benefit from a
professional space that has been inaccessible due to financial or travel
restrictions, building capacity for geographic research through the support and
retention of graduate students and early-career scholars from underrepresented
backgrounds. The sharing of pedagogical innovation expands beyond the conference
to classrooms throughout the United States and internationally. Additionally,
the products from this conference will remain widely available through the
conference's website and dissemination on social media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.