* 2211888
* CNS Core: Medium:Model-driven Resource Management for Avoiding Performance Pitfalls in Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2026
* USD 581,353.00

A variety of new distributed applications are emerging that have strict low-
latency requirements, including real-time machine learning-based inference,
Internet-of-Things services, mobile augmented reality, and cloud gaming. To
support these applications, cloud providers are building out large-scale
distributed edge infrastructures that can provide computing and storage
resources in close proximity to end users. Yet, despite the significant network
latency advantage of edge servers, edge computing remains vulnerable to numerous
performance pitfalls that can lead to reduced performance. This counter-
intuitive behavior primarily occurs when edge resource constraints or workload
bursts cause high queuing delays and response times that significantly increase
latency. To address this problem, this project will develop rigorous analytical
models of edge and cloud performance to gain a fundamental understanding of when
and why edge performance problems occur in practice. The project will then apply
these models to design novel, but practical, resource management policies that
can enable edge computing to provide low latency for a wide range of real-world
applications. These policies include i) edge elasticity and bursting that
adaptively scale edge resources within and across edge and cloud sites under
workload spikes; ii) performance isolation for edge accelerators that flexibly
multiplexes accelerators across applications to increase their utilization; and
iii) dynamic resource provisioning and allocation for serverless edge computing
that determines the resources needed by serverless containers to satisfy tail
latency requirements. Collectively, these models and policies will enable edge
computing to fulfill its potential to support new classes of low-latency
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential for significant
practical impact by enabling commercial cloud providers to offer low-latency
edge cloud services, which is important in supporting numerous emerging
applications with strict low-latency requirements. The project will conduct
outreach by incorporating relevant research topics within summer programs for
local middle and high school students. The project will also inject elements of
edge computing and cloud computing into current graduate and advanced
undergraduate classes at the PIs' institution. The project will emphasize
recruiting a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students through
participation in REU programs and institutional diversity efforts. Finally, the
software artifacts and datasets from the project will be made available to the
research community as open source via the UMass Trace
Repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.