* 2211141
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Sharing the World with Autonomous Systems: What Goes Wrong and How to Fix It
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Tichakorn Wongpiromsarn, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 599,854.00

As autonomous systems start to operate in open, uncontrolled environments
alongside humans, safety becomes a major concern. In applications in which
human-operated systems and autonomous systems are in close interaction, the
heterogeneity causes different agents to exhibit different behaviors under the
same situation due to the differences in how they see the world and make
decisions. For example, autonomous vehicles tend to be more conservative than
average human drivers, leading to instances of confusion and frustration of
human drivers when encountering an autonomous vehicle. As a result,
understanding the effects of inconsistencies among interacting agents on the
overall system is critical for the adoption and acceptance of autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop novel algorithms that
will quantitatively and succinctly characterize the sources and effects of
inconsistencies in perception and decision-making among the interacting agents.
Based on this characterization, the project will develop efficient synthesis
algorithms for autonomous systems to actively identify the inconsistencies and
influence the behaviors of the other agents to improve the safety of the overall
system. A key innovation lies in a rigorous approach integrating probabilistic
formal methods, games on graphs, joint perception and planning, and convex
optimization. While the resulting algorithms will be applicable to a wide range
of cyber-physical systems, demonstrations will leverage an experimental platform
in which autonomous vehicles interact with each other as well as human-
controlled vehicles in mockup urban environments. The project will likewise
promote outreach to industry, regulatory agencies, and the broader cyber-
physical system (CPS) community through technical short courses. All educational
material, demonstrations and software generated by the project will be shared
publicly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.