* 2211721
* Integrating phenology and demography to understand the consequences of phenological shifts for plant population dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Amy Iler, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2026
* USD 639,059.00

The Earth’s changing climate is disrupting many aspects of the natural world.
Timing of flowering and when birds lay eggs have shifted, and this can disrupt
other natural processes. Little is known about whether these changes in
reproductive timing affect the ability of populations to persist, grow, or
vanish into extinction. A large gap in scientific understanding exists because
few studies have directly linked changes in plant timing to consequences for
plant populations. This research will address this scientific gap by using a
field experiment where plants are forced to leaf out and flower earlier, and
compared to unmanipulated ‘control’ plants, followed by simulations of how the
populations will fare in these different scenarios. This project provides many
training and career opportunities, including research positions, science
communication workshops for college students, K–12 public school teacher
training workshops, and K–12 curriculum that will be made publicly available to
teachers. This project provides societal benefits because it assesses the risk
of a changing climate to plant populations and therefore to all of the benefits
that plants provide: clean air, food, recreation, ecosystem services like
pollination and pest control, and benefits for human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will link climate change-induced shifts in
plant phenology – the timing of life-cycle events ¬– to plant population
dynamics. It has been widely hypothesized that shifts in phenology will affect
population persistence because phenology influences the survival and
reproduction of organisms, and survival and reproduction in turn determine
population growth. To address this hypothesis, the researchers will conduct an
experimental demography project in which the phenology of four plant species
will be advanced via experimental manipulation of the timing of spring snowmelt
in a subalpine ecosystem. Advanced phenology will then be associated with
changes in vital rates: survival, vegetative growth, reproduction, and
recruitment. Specifically, earlier leaf expansion is expected to affect survival
and vegetative growth, earlier flowering is expected to affect reproduction, and
earlier germination is expected to affect recruitment. The demographic data will
parameterize integral projection models (IPMs) for each species, and Life Table
Response Experiments will determine which vital rate, if any, these advanced
reproductive events affects population growth rates. The researchers will
additionally use Structural Equation Modeling to investigate the abiotic and
biotic factors through which advanced life-cycle events affect vital rates:
longer drought periods, longer growing seasons, and herbivory under earlier
leaf-out or germination and interactions with pollinators under earlier
flowering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.