* 2211214
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Privacy by Memory Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Jianqing Liu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Differential privacy (DP) has been widely accepted as the de facto technique for
protecting data privacy. Despite the decade-long research efforts on DP, there
still exists a critical research problem that has been largely overlooked, that
is all existing DP studies are grounded on the hypothesis that software can
easily and faithfully sample and add noises from a probability distribution.
However, this hypothesis is being constantly challenged by recent findings about
its privacy violation and by the growing demand of privacy protection in low-end
devices that may lack high-level software libraries. Hence, this project's
innovative research angle is to realize DP mechanisms directly on embedded
memories, which are ubiquitous in modern electronic devices. On the technical
front, the developed innovation has the following merits. (1) It frees host
devices from dedicated software and accomplishes the vision of "privacy by
design"; (2) It concurrently improves manifold system performance such as power
efficiency, privacy, and chip overhead; (3) The developed technique is
primitive, generic, and scalable to every electronic
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also create profound impact on
our society, economy, and workforce development. Specifically, the developed
technique will be transformative to numerous sensitive applications (e.g.,
surveillance and sensing) and critical infrastructures (e.g., Internet of Things
devices). It will potentially increase the U.S. chip vendors' revenue and
competitiveness by adding privacy-preserving functionality to their chips,
protect taxpayers' and enterprises' sensitive data, safeguard national security,
and help the U.S. out-compete global competitors in cybersecurity. Moreover,
this project will help PIs to update existing curricula, engage students – with
priority to female or/and first-generation college students – for research
training, and promote community outreach through existing successful programs
such as the NSF-funded RET site in Mobile, Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.