* 2211434
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Uncovering latent vascular function in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Samuel Leiboff, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,060,492.00

Because of its utility as a source of food, animal feed, fuel, and other
bioproducts, maize (Zea mays subsp. mays) production is valued at over $83
billion annually in the US. The increased frequency of extreme weather events
like drought and flooding threaten American businesses and communities that
depend on maize production. Researchers from Oregon State University (PI
Leiboff) and the University of California, Berkeley (Co-PI Chuck) are working
together to understand the mechanisms that regulate the maize vascular system to
prepare our nation’s most important crop for climate change. In a recent
breakthrough, Co-PI Chuck showed that amongst the complex network of seemingly
identical veins within a maize plant, there are specialized veins with unique
functions in surviving drought and accommodating plant microbes. By applying
cutting edge techniques in single cell genomics, mutant mapping, and machine
learning, PI Leiboff and Co-PI Chuck will uncover the secret genetics that
define these specialized veins and provide tools for the rapid improvement of
the maize vascular system by precision breeding. The PIs will use techniques
developed by this research to provide rural and urban high school teachers with
low-cost smartphone microscope kits that will improve high school student
engagement with the life sciences. Data from this research will be used to
produce a free educational resource, “Teaching with Single Cell Genomics”
providing university educators with lesson plans, animations, multimedia
presentations, and a supplemental textbook to ensure that our next generation of
undergraduates in biology receive training in this revolutionary new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic production of the dense network of
veins is critical for efficient photosynthesis in C4 grasses. Grasses produce
this network through reiterative developmental programs that maintain
physiological functions as tissues grow or encounter new environments. Although
the products of these programs are similar in structure, these repeated events
provide a unique opportunity for specialization amongst tissues generated at
different times and locations. This research explores the biological question of
how similar tissues within an organism can be constructed for different
purposes. Maize is an ideal experimental system for studying dynamic vascular
events because of its high vein density and predictable developmental sequence
of initiating leaf vein subtypes. The PIs will test the hypothesis that
spatiotemporal gene regulation leads to unique development and physiology
amongst veins in the same plant. This research will leverage state-of-the-art
advances in single cell transcriptomics to track and identify key fate-
determining factors in developing leaf vein subtypes amongst all developing leaf
cells. Next, researchers will collaboratively apply genomics to accelerate the
mapping and functional characterization of maize specialized vascular mutants.
By constructing a neural network machine learning model, this work will predict
vascular phenotypes from tens of thousands of cleared leaf images to perform a
GWAS of a 942-inbred mapping panel, dissecting the genetic architecture of
specialized vascular development and spatiotemporal gene expression changes
between alleles. Data derived from these aims will inform the precision breeding
of specialized vascular traits for the continued improvement of maize to meet
global demand for food, feed, and fuel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.