* 2211990
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: TeTON: A Testbed and a Toolkit for Expediting Investigation of and Accelerating Advancements in All-Optical Neural Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rongqing Hui, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 154,928.00

In a brain, billions of neurons continuously collect electrical signals from one
another and through natural non-linear combination of these signals human beings
are able to process information (visual, audio, tactile, etc.), learn how to
recognize patterns, and make quick decisions. These interconnected neurons form
what is commonly known as a neural network. This project aims to develop an all-
optical (artificial) neural network (AONN) testbed and related software toolkit
for expediting and accelerating advancements in optical artificial intelligence,
including a programmable multi-layer AONN hardware with automatic machine
learning capability and an open-source software package for public education.
The AONN testbed builds upon free-space Fourier optics and ultra-low light level
nonlinear optics, which can efficiently recreate with photons functionalities
similar to those that are performed in the human brain. Making use of the
electromagnetic wave nature of light the resulting AONN is expected to run much
faster and consume significantly less energy when compared to the more
conventional software and custom electronic-based artificial neural networks
that have been applied to realize artificial intelligence (AI) so
far.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovering how to best and most effectively implement
AONN solutions is going to change the way in which AI is achieved. An artificial
brain that can think at the speed-of-light can pave the way to the realization
of a number of new and currently unthinkable real-time applications, like for
example inspecting the quality of a large number of manufactured objects and
providing virtually instantaneous feedback to the production plant in the event
that swift production adjustments are required. Being able to quickly recognize
patterns and their anomalies using AONN will find many other applications in the
fields of medicine, education, manufacturing, transportation, agriculture,
natural science, etc. The following example may illustrate the potential
advantages of implementing and using AONN. Each video frame generated by a
camera observing an athlete or a patient going though rehabilitation while
performing specific tasks could be individually analyzed by AONN in less than
one millisecond. Improper or suboptimal body motions would be readily detected
by AONN, hence providing instantaneous feedback to the athlete or patient who in
turn could continuously correct their posture to achieve improved outcomes. This
project supports career development of the undergraduate and graduate students,
who work together on this cross-disciplinary project. Courses and outreach
materials are developed at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and the
University of Kansas (KU) and shared with the public, with an emphasis on
engaging with students from underrepresented communities and contributing to
future student diversity in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.