* 2211474
* Probing Local Structural and Chemical Properties of Atomically Thin Two-Dimensional Materials by Optical Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Nan Jiang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 363,704.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new technological
applications requires new materials with appropriate properties. Two-dimensional
(2D) materials attract tremendous interest because they have a broad range of
material properties for creating complex artificial structures with novel
functionalities unavailable in natural bulk materials. By harnessing their
unique properties, 2D materials can be used for many applications, such as
flexible electronics, miniaturized devices, and providing electricity for
wearable electronics. In this project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Nan Jiang and his
research group at the University of Illinois, Chicago, will focus on the
synthesis of boron monolayer (borophene) related 2D materials, which have unique
structural and physical properties. The project encompasses the development of
complex borophene-based structures and the measurement of their local properties
with an unprecedented spatial resolution. Such advanced understanding is
essential for fine-tuning the properties of 2D structures for electronics,
photonics, sensing, and energy-harvesting applications. This project will
recruit and train undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups and will be integrated into a broad set of outreach efforts, including
programs and demonstrations in elementary schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of
Materials Research, develops a new approach to precisely control and
fundamentally understand the interplay among lattice, defects, and the
electronic structure of novel 2D materials, such as borophene. The studies
involve the direct observation of vibrational modes of borophene-based
structures using a state-of-the-art technique that combines scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) with tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS). This method
facilitates the imaging and characterization of local vibrational and electron-
phonon coupling properties of nano- and atomic-scale heterogeneity with
approximately 5-Angstrom spatial resolution and 5-wavenumber spectroscopic
resolution. In addition to detecting topographical and electronic properties,
the STM-TERS approach elucidates localized interfacial features, including
strain, defects, and doping at the atomic-thickness limit. Building on these
groundbreaking technological advances, the project investigates the chemical
modification of borophene via oxygen, defines the hybridization of borophene
with organic molecules, and constructs borophene-related 2D van der Waals
heterostructures. Collectively, these studies provide unprecedented insights
into the relationship between charge and lattice at the atomic-thickness
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.