* 2211740
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Learning to coordinate between human and a robotic prosthesis for symbiotic locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jennie Si, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Individuals with lower limb amputation depend on assistive devices such as
prostheses to restore basic mobility in daily living, and emerging robotic lower
limb prostheses are powered and programmable, showing great potential for
improved functionality. Yet, the expected benefit of these modern devices has
not yet been fully realized, partly because of a lack of seamless coordination
between computer controlled artificial joints and human joints in walking. This
project will develop novel technology to address this “human-prosthesis
symbiotic locomotion problem” which is to say that a human and a wearable
robotic lower limb prosthesis interact as collaborating agents and function in
unison to achieve a common locomotion performance goal. This research will
improve amputees’ walking performance and efficiency while enhancing their sense
of prosthesis embodiment and device acceptance, thus dramatically improving
their quality of life. This is the first study of human-prosthesis coordination
and co-adaptation in locomotion, and will contributes important knowledge in the
fields of physical human-robot interaction and human-centered computing.
Additional broad impacts will derive from integration of the research into
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students, in areas
including machine learning, human motor control and learning, and rehabilitation
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create
and evaluate a Human-Centered Computing and Control (HC3) framework for improved
human-prosthesis walking performance (in terms of symmetrical gait, postural
stability, and reduced sense of effort) and prosthesis embodiment, the research
to include three thrusts: (1) an innovative formulation of a coordinated human-
robot control problem and a learning-based design solution to achieve human-
prosthesis symbiotic locomotion, a problem that poses great and new challenges
to classical control and existing multiagent reinforcement learning methods; (2)
a novel augmented biofeedback interface to enable active human locomotion
adaptation to coordinate with the robotic prosthesis; and (3) a new measure of
embodiment of intelligent lower limb prostheses in walking based on the concept
of biological motion. Furthermore, the HC3 framework will be evaluated on
transfemoral amputees walking with a robotic knee
prosthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.