* 2211454
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Improving Software Quality by Automatically Reproducing Failures from Bug Reports
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* William Halfond, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 96,584.00

The large demand for mobile device based services emphasizes the importance of
software quality for mobile applications (apps). Because testing and other
verification techniques cannot generally detect all bugs, it is common for app
users to experience failures during normal operation. Developers rely on users
reporting these bugs in issue-tracking systems to understand and resolve the
failures. However, in current practice the process of reproducing the reported
bugs must be done manually by developers, making app maintenance inefficient.
This project will develop a family of techniques and tools that can extract
relevant information for steps to reproduce from bug reports, dynamically search
for reproducing sequences in the app to successfully reproduce the reported
failure, and improve the quality of information used for failure reproduction.
The products of these research initiatives will be used in several diverse
software-engineering applications, including bug-report mining, bug-report
reproduction, dynamic GUI exploration, and static analysis. This project aims to
transform the way developers debug, reproduce, and understand software bugs from
bug reports, and thus lead to more reliable software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to improve the process of resolving mobile-app
failures by automating the task of reproducing, creating, and generating tests
from bug reports. The analytical components of this project involve: (1) a novel
approach for accurately extracting steps to reproduce and their contextual
information, (2) a novel GUI exploration technique to automatically search for
reproducing event sequences, (3) a novel static analysis to help the
reproduction search avoid locally-optimal but globally sub-optimal searches and
lead to better overall and more successful reproductions. The integration of
static and dynamic analyses, machine learning, and natural-language processing
constitutes a novel reproduction framework that promises to provide not only
practical solutions, but also theoretical advances in the field of software
mining. The techniques developed in this project will be evaluated for
effectiveness via large-scale experiments on real-world mobile
apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.