* 2211232
* Collaborative Research: From cooperation to exploitation: context-dependent effects of nectar microbes on pollination mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Schaeffer, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2025
* USD 799,637.00

Cooperation is ubiquitous across ecological systems; yet how it continues to
persist, even in the face of cheating, remains an enigma. This project will
explore if and how microbes affect cooperation using plants and the microbes
that reside in floral nectar as a model system. Across different systems,
mutualistic species have been observed to steal floral resources without
providing pollination services in return. This project uses a combination of
field experiments across a community of wildflowers, floral visitors, and
associated microbes in the Rocky Mountains. The main goals are to characterize
(1) drivers of nectar microbial community structure; (2) how nectar microbes
influence behaviors displayed by floral visitors; and (3) how microbes and the
visitor behaviors affect plant reproduction. Broader impacts include student
training, public outreach, and improved understanding of a major ecosystem
service: pollination. The project will train undergraduate students, a graduate
student, and a postdoctoral researcher. Public outreach is planned through a
partnership with a non-profit museum, as well as through work with middle
schools and summer science camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions among
plants, pollinators, and nectar robbers have long served as an important model
system for exploring ecological shifts between states of cooperation and
conflict. Yet, despite their extensive study, the mechanisms that underlie
shifts between these states, and constancy within, remain surprisingly unclear.
Nectar microbes represent understudied but potentially significant interactors
that may shape the foraging conditions under which floral visitors may decide to
cooperate or cheat. This project will (1) employ the use of culture-dependent
and culture-independent approaches to characterize the nectar microbiome of five
montane wildflowers after legitimate vs. nectar robber floral visits; (2) assess
how nectar microbes influence floral odor, nectar chemistry, and visitor
behaviors; and (3) measure feedbacks of the microbes and floral visitor
community on components of plant reproduction. By studying nectar microbes,
their impact on floral phenotype, and whether they reinforce or facilitate the
breakdown of pollination, we will gain a broader understanding of the factors
that shape plant reproduction and pollination
mutualisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.