* 2211526
* III: Medium: Ask the Experts: Generating Question-Answer Pairs for Addressing Information Deficits about Vaccines
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,144,224.00

This project aims to support decision-making by developing a scalable pipeline
for identifying information deficits. In this context, deficits refer to topics
where there is a high demand for credible information but the corresponding
supply is low. The pipeline begins with developing automated methods for
identifying emerging and extant vaccine-related concerns from online sources.
The moves to the creation of generalized questions that exemplify the concerns
and then match the questions to credible answers. The techniques developed as
part of this research will facilitate decision-making in areas with an ever-
evolving knowledge base of contextualized answers to challenging questions. The
research will focus on addressing information deficits about vaccines as the
target application domain. The pandemic and the rapid development of vaccines
has resulted in many questions from the public. For example, has the COVID-19
vaccine led to more deaths than all other vaccines put together? As questions
about vaccines continue to propagate in online communication channels, timely
and accurate answers to them are key to supporting decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrusts of this research will be to
develop methods for: (1) identifying emerging and extant vaccine-related
concerns from online sources, such as social media and blogs, and categorizing
them using a novel taxonomy; (2) generating contextualized questions from text
aimed at addressing specific claims, concerns, knowledge gaps, and myths; and
(3) matching the questions to credible answers when they exist, or otherwise
recommending them to experts who can develop new answers. In addition to
producing broadly applicable research results and knowledge artifacts, this
project, guided by an expert advisory group on vaccinations, will develop a
public-facing dashboard aimed at assisting public health and medical
professionals by surfacing ongoing discussions about vaccines and highlighting
the areas that require attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.