* 2211404
* Microphysiological Models to Evaluate the Role of Age-Dependent Fibrinogen Sialylation in Wound Healing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Michael Daniele, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2025
* USD 508,801.00

Wound healing is a complex process. The first step in wound healing is clotting.
The clot that forms stops bleeding and provides support for cells to rebuild
damaged tissue. Wound healing is also different between babies and adults, but
these differences are not well understood. This project will develop new tools
to better understand (1) how clotting is different between babies and adults and
(2) how differences in clotting lead to differences in wound healing. Many cells
types are involved in healing, including platelets and fibroblasts. Platelets
play important roles in clotting and fibroblasts help rebuild damaged tissue
after bleeding stops. The project will also measure interactions between
fibroblasts and platelets in wound healing. Better understanding of wound
healing is expected to lead to identification of novel therapeutic targets for
the nearly 6 million people in the United States suffering from impaired
coagulation and non-healing wounds. The project's education component involves
training undergraduate and graduate students in engineering biomedical systems,
including working with clinicians. Outreach activities include developing hands-
on educational modules and activities that will be innovated for K-12 science
fair competitions and constructing a demonstration kit for the Annual College of
Veterinary Medicine Open House Day and the North Carolina Science Caf√©, which
engages K-12 students in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wound healing
involves the complex orchestration of biochemical and mechanical signals
directing behavior of multiple cell types. Due to the complex nature of wound
healing, much remains unknown about mechanisms underlying impaired healing.
After injury, a fibrin clot is formed that stops bleeding and promotes healing
by serving as a provisional scaffold for infiltrating cells that support tissue
repair. A deficient fibrin matrix can result in non-healing wounds. While it is
known that aging influences healing, it is unknown how age related differences
in fibrin properties may influence healing outcomes. Recent studies have
identified extensive differences in fibrin network properties between adults and
neonates. For example, fibroblasts attach and migrate better on neonatal fibrin
compared to adult fibrin, and neonatal fibrin scaffolds promote better healing
in vivo in a murine full thickness injury model compared to adult fibrin
scaffolds. While many variances in post-translational modifications likely
contribute to age-related differences in fibrinogen function, recent data
highlights that increased sialic acid (Sia) content in neonatal fibrinogen
contributes significantly to age-related differences in clot structure,
mechanics, and polymerization and degradation dynamics. The overarching
hypothesis of this work is that increased Sia content in neonatal fibrinogen
results in altered fibrin polymerization mechanisms, clot structure, and
mechanical properties compared to adult fibrinogen, which drives improved
healing outcomes. This project will investigate how Sia content in neonatal and
adult fibrinogen networks +/- Sia influence adult and neonatal fibroblast
responses in vitro. Next, this project will investigate how Sia content
influences cellular crosstalk in wound healing. Innovative tissue engineering
techniques and microfluidics will be employed to develop a microphysiological
system (MPS) to study the interactions of platelets and fibroblasts during wound
healing. MPS provide a means to generate actionable, translatable data by
recapitulating select human tissue functions with the requisite primary human
cell types, microanatomy, cell-cell interactions and micromechanical
cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.