* 2211749
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Near-Hardware Program Repair and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Westley Weimer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 566,000.00

The project addresses today's reality that special-purpose computing hardware
and hardware accelerators have become de facto necessities for supporting the
large-scale computations used for data analysis, AI and machine learning,
scientific modeling, and social-media platforms. At the same time, education and
existing tools still require computer programmers to have deep knowledge of both
low-level hardware considerations and higher-level application logic. Higher
levels of program abstraction are more tractable for humans and automated
program improvement methods because they separate algorithm logic from
implementation details, while lower 'near-hardware' levels of abstraction are
difficult for humans to understand and optimize because of the many crucial
architectural and hardware details that often interact with application-level
logic in non-trivial ways. The project addresses this gap by developing
automated methods for near-hardware run-time optimization of programs, bug
repair, and creation of new programs. It includes an evaluation featuring
interactive human evaluations, which studies human interactions with the
project's automated tools along several dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to improve the automation of software engineering tasks for near-
hardware domains. This requires addressing fundamental questions such as: What
representations span multiple levels of abstraction? How can one analyze and
select optimizations respecting both hardware and software constraints for real-
world applications? How can a tool communicate its results to users who may lack
expertise in either domain-specific architecture or hardware-specific details?
The project adapts higher-level automated program improvement methods to three
specific tasks: automatically finding optimizations that reduce general-purpose
GPU code runtimes; repairing defects in circuit designs; and synthesizing
debuggable code for hardware accelerators. Each task requires representations
and algorithms that cross abstraction levels, and each task features an
evaluation plan that places explicit emphasis on the human element, measuring
the semantic gap between automatically lifted optimizations and different levels
of human expertise, measuring ease of use of interactive synthesis tools across
human expertise levels, and using eye tracking to investigate which elements of
a multi-edit patch are most difficult understand. The project will enable many
of the benefits of source-level automated program improvement to be available to
near-hardware domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.