* 2211616
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Access, Mobility, and Security above 100 GHz
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2026
* USD 266,666.00

The use of frequencies above 100 GHz for wireless communication is rapidly
emerging as a key enabler for future (beyond 5G) wireless systems. These high-
frequency systems, which are referred to as terahertz (THz) links, offer
numerous exciting possibilities, such as ultra-high-speed data transmission and
enhanced resilience against malicious attacks such as eavesdropping. Yet, so
far, little research has been devoted to the question of how to implement a
network that can provide high bandwidth links for multiple mobile users, while
still maintaining security against eavesdroppers. The objective of this proposal
is to develop the hardware and protocols necessary to implement a secure network
for mobile users which efficiently exploits these high frequencies. The research
team will develop a set of methodologies to enable a base station to rapidly
locate multiple users in a broadcast region (even if they are moving), to
establish high-speed wireless links with each of them, and to detect and
mitigate eavesdropping attacks. In addition, the project includes a coordinated
plan for broadening participation of traditionally&lt;br/&gt;under-represented
groups, and includes a one-week summer course on THz research for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
develop a radically new node architecture which can intrinsically support
multiple access for mobile clients in a broadband THz network, while also
maintaining a high degree of security. One thrust of this project involves the
exploration of novel antenna designs which exploit strong angular dispersion. We
propose a new method to enable active fast electrical tuning of such devices
which will be exploited for detection of an eavesdropping attack, as well as for
localization of legitimate users and mobility detection. A second project thrust
aims to develop spatio-temporal modulated array architectures for scrambling the
information contained in side-lobes of the broadcast, via spectral aliasing.
Combined with agile sensing functionalities, the proposed interface will
selectively create secure zones for communication. In a third thrust, we will
leverage the power of this new node architecture to ensure that the quality of
service for multiple mobile users is maintained, even while guaranteeing that
eavesdroppers are unable to access, not only the primary communication channels,
but also control plane functions required to establish and maintain mobile
links. The result will provide the optimal performance for a spectrally
efficient and secure THz network, even in the presence of a sophisticated attack
by colluding eavesdroppers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.