* 2211151
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Influence of Resource Availability on Territoriality
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jessica Thompson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 31,487.00

Ecological conditions play a major role in shaping land use and settlement
system decisions across all human societies. Prior ethnographic and
archaeological research indicates that among hunter-gatherers abundance and
predictability of food resources mediate how often and how far groups move, and
if they maintain a defended territory. Recent ancient DNA work has shown that by
the end of the last glacial cycle , foragers in eastern and southern-central
Africa that had once had widespread biological interactions began to live in
small groups with little genetic exchange. Local ecological conditions may have
been instrumental in shaping patterns of hunter-gatherer interactions, but
researchers lack long-term data on how foragers adapted their land use systems
to environmental change in this region. The researchers will investigate how the
distribution of game animals varied seasonally over multiple millenia and how
this affected hunter-gatherer land use as inferred from the archaeological
record. The position of the study area in the tropics makes it especially
important to reconstruct rainfall seasonality through time, which depends on
millennial-scale changes in the position of the Earth relative to the sun and
has enormous impact on local plant and animal communities. This project will
provide a better understanding of the factors influencing collective decision-
making in small-scale societies when they are confronted with novel ecological
conditions and link these factors to changes in social interactions. This
knowledge will also provide a conceptual framework to understand changes in
lifeways as traditional societies around the world are impacted by climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the link between
ecology and land use through the lens of the Economic Defendability Model, which
posits that when resources are abundant and spatiotemporally predictable human
groups will tend to establish stable territories. Specifically, they will test
the hypothesis that these conditions were met after the Last Glacial Maximum
with the onset of the modern monsoonal regimen. They will collect
zooarchaeological, biogeochemical and chronological data from four rockshelter
sites. Archaeological animal remains will provide information about which
species were hunted at different times in the past, and how they were
transported and utilized in response to territorial behavior. Biogeochemical
data will be used to reconstruct ecological conditions, particularly rainfall
seasonality (oxygen isotopes), vegetation (carbon isotopes) and animal migration
(strontium isotopes). Finally, precise chronological data (radiocarbon dating)
will place these proxies on the geological timescale and allow correlations with
other paleoenvironmental and archaeological records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.