* 2211661
* Beyond sex determination: the evolution and function of Y chromosomes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Scott Roy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,486,812.00

Early in the 180 million-year history of mammalian sex chromosomes, the Y
chromosome lost most of its genes. Thus, surviving ancestral genes are highly
conserved across most mammals. However, recent evolution on the Y is remarkably
dynamic. The handful of fully annotated mammalian Y chromosomes all feature
lineage-specific genes acquired from other parts of the genome. This
regenerative property of Y chromosomes was not anticipated by theory and the
evolutionary drivers are poorly understood. To fill this knowledge gap, the
research will produce Y chromosome assemblies and multi-tissue transcriptomes
for eight closely related species of rodents with unusually high rates of sex
chromosome evolution. These data will be used to test hypotheses about the
functions of Y-linked genes. Further, the work will investigate the selective
forces that promote gene acquisition and survival. The research will be
integrated into inquiry-based undergraduate curriculum at two minority-serving
institutions. It will also provide mentored research experiences for
undergraduates recruited through programs targeting under-represented groups.
The results of this research will shed new light on the function and short-term
evolution of Y chromosomes. This project will also promote engagement and
retention of under-represented minorities in science, and provide training
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use long read
sequencing technologies and optical mapping to produce telomere-to-telomere Y
chromosome assemblies for a group of voles (genus, Microtus). This group
includes M. oregoni, a species in which both sexes carry full complements of
Y-derived genes. Multi-tissue gene expression atlases will be produced for each
species. The atlases will be generated using a combination of long and short
read transcriptomes and single cell sequencing. Aim 1 will use a comparative
framework to understand gene acquisition, molecular evolution, and gene loss on
Microtus Y chromosomes. The first aim will also evaluate functional associations
and patterns of copy number amplification. Aim 2 has two goals. First, it will
test the dominant paradigm for mammalian Y-linked gene function, under which
surviving ancestral genes are broadly expressed regulators that compensate for X
chromosome hemizygosity, whereas genes acquired from other parts of the genome
are specialized for spermatogenesis. Second, aim 2 will test for expression
patterns consistent with alternative drivers of Y-acquired gene survival in
Microtus. Aim 3 will leverage the unique sex chromosome system of M. oregoni for
two purposes. One, to re-evaluate the dominant paradigm for Y chromosome gene
function by analyzing the effects of sex and X chromosome dosage on Y-derived
gene expression. Two, to test the longstanding prediction that sex-limited
chromosomes accumulate genes with sexually antagonistic effects in the shared
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.