* 2211858
* NSF-DFG: Advances in Ion-Surface Interaction-Driven Manufacturing of One-Dimensional Metal Oxide Heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eva Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2025
* USD 343,615.00

This grant supports research into the manufacture of large area arrays of
nanostructures needed in many application areas such as biomedical sensing and
quantum technologies. The research benefits the advancement of science
associated with the formation of nanostructures through ion beam surface
interactions. In this manufacturing process, the combined atom and ionized
particle impingement at the surface under oblique angle of incidence is used to
controllably form arrays of three-dimensional nanostructures. A wide spectrum of
materials and elemental combinations can be used in this manufacturing process
leading to a versatility in nanostructure formation. This process would provide
a measure of control over the physical and chemical structure which currently
limits the range of resulting elemental compositions, nanostructure geometries
and shapes. The use of multiple of ion beams combined with selected elemental
compositions and choice of kinetic properties widely extends the range of
materials for nanostructure manufacturing. This research closes a gap in three-
dimensional nanomaterials fabrication to achieve precise geometrical shape and
elemental control. The new nanomaterials with improved shape and material
composition control and precision will enable new applications, for example in
photonics, energy harvesting, or biosensing. This research will benefit the
economy and society of the United States through enabling new materials for
device applications. The grant supports an international collaborative study
utilizing and addressing manufacturing, plasma physics, materials science, and
numerical methods. A strategic alignment with German collaborators under a joint
program co-funded by both the National Science Foundation and the German
National Science Foundation accelerates the progress and research outcomes.
International exchange and interdisciplinary approaches support engineering
workforce training and serves to broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in science and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glancing angle deposition
is a versatile bottom-up technique to create three-dimensional nanostructures
without the inclusion of expensive and time-consuming lithographic and etching
processes. This work addresses current limitations for broad area nanostructure
formation and subsequent technical use which result from structure fanning,
which is the broadening of structure thickness or diameter with increasing
height, lack of controlled structure arrangements across a substrate surface and
insufficient control over compound compositions for relevant oxides, nitrides,
and carbides. Ion processing overcomes these barriers by utilizing ion erosion
for the initial substrate patterning, reactive ion-assisted growth for compound
formation with precise stoichiometry and ion beam figuring to limit fanning and
improve structure homogeneity. The research will investigate mechanisms which
determine the influence of low-energy ion processing during glancing angle
deposition using a computationally driven experimental approach. The research
team will perform experiments for ion-assisted manufacturing and material
modification supported by Monte Carlo based simulations to explore ion-surface
driven interactions on the nanoscale. The experiments are characterized by in
situ optical process control and finite element based dynamic modeling to
explore the impact of ions during material fabrication in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.