* 2211573
* Spatial gradients in dynamics of near-interface polymers: Experiments and theory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Shiwang Cheng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2025
* USD 262,836.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-interface polymers or
interfacial polymers refer to polymers at the nanometer vicinity of a boundary
between two phases or two components. The dynamics and mechanics of near-
interface polymers can have strong implications for the design and performance
of various nanostructured polymeric materials, polymer nanocomposites, thin
polymer films, and functional interfaces which have numerous applications in
areas such as energy, environmental, healthcare, infrastructure, and
sustainability. For instance, thin polymer film design plays an essential role
in the multi-billion dollar semiconductor industry. In many instances, the
polymers at the nanometer vicinity of interfaces can exhibit large spatial
variations (sometimes orders of magnitude) in elastic moduli, viscosity, and
diffusion coefficient. A fundamental issue that this project will address is the
molecular mechanisms responsible for these large variations and the spatial
dependence of the near-interface polymer dynamics. By improving our
understanding of these microscopic effects, this project will allow for the
rational design of polymers at the interface. This project will also offer
training for graduate students with multiple characterization tools, including
spectroscopy, rheology, and small-angle scattering, and will provide
opportunities for them to use national user facilities and build a network of
professional contacts. Furthermore, the project expands research participation
by engaging undergraduate students, with recruiting emphasis on students from
underrepresented groups through the Lansing School District (74% population are
African American) and the Lansing Community College/Michigan State University
2+2+2 Engineering Program. An educational program on polymers at the interfaces
will also be implemented at the graduate level. A K-12 outreach-activities
module will be created and delivered through MSU K-12 high-school summer camp to
improve public understanding of polymers and polymers at the
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to elucidate the dynamics
gradients of near-interface polymers and their dependence on polymer chemistry
and nanoconfinement. Polymers at the interface can exhibit profound alterations
in dynamics and mechanical properties compared with the bulk. These changes can
involve large shifts (&gt; 50 K) in glass transition that correspond to six to
eight decades of change in structural relaxation time. However, deficiencies in
the quantification of gradients of interfacial dynamics impose grand challenges
and obfuscate the understanding of interfacial dynamics and their connection
with the bulk glass transition. A comprehensive experimental program will
quantify the dynamics gradients at the interface through a combination of
dielectric spectroscopy, rheology, and small-angle scattering. A new dielectric
marker system will be developed with their precise placement at the interface to
quantify the dynamics of the near-interface polymer at ~ 1 nm spatial
resolution. With this new development, the PIâ€™s group will further quantify the
exact function forms of the interfacial dynamics gradient and the effects of
polymer chemistry and nanoconfinement on the interfacial dynamics gradients.
These experimental results will provide critical tests of existing theoretical
models, and help to formulate a qualitative description of the interfacial
effect and nanoconfinement effect for near-interface polymer
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.