* 2211148
* Self-Assembling Volumetric Optical Metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Grigory Tikhomirov, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 211,377.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge of
nanotechnology is to convert abundant, naturally occurring materials into high
performance materials with desired properties. Inverse design is one way to
create materials with extraordinary optical properties such as invisibility. In
this approach, a computer algorithm combines just two materials such as sand and
air into tiny three-dimensional structures with the desired optical properties.
However, the extreme complexity of resulting designs makes them extremely
difficult and costly to make. This project aims to develop a new approach for
facile synthesis of materials with special optical properties. The investigators
will develop a new nanoscale synthesis approach that exploits the remarkable
programmability of DNA to enable construction of 3D structures that previously
existed only in theory. Nanoscale particles will be decorated with DNA strands
with precise sequences and locations, inducing their self-assembly into
“inversely designed” structures. The research team will characterize these new
materials and explore how their use in high performance devices. The proposed
research will yield a general approach to design and synthesize materials with
unprecedented scalability and precision, while eliminating the need for
expensive and unsustainable nanofabrication facilities. The PI is committed to
empowering the creativity and adoption of the new approach by diverse students
of all ages. Towards that end, the proposed research concepts will be
disseminated via inclusive mentoring and outreach activities for students
spanning high school, college, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to develop an approach to self-assemble
nanoscale dielectric and plasmonic “material voxels” into volumetric
metamaterials with arbitrary photonic functions in the visible spectrum. This
research will take powerful concepts developed in the fields of electromagnetic
inverse design and DNA nanotechnology and combines them to construct materials
with previously unattainable optical functions. The self-assembly of nanoscale
inorganic voxels will be achieved by embedding DNA recognition capabilities into
them. The main scientific challenges to tackle are: (1) How to synthesize DNA-
functionalized material voxels. Several ways to transfer the unique
addressability of DNA origami from a 2D DNA-only breadboard to a 3D material
voxel surface will be explored. (2) How to self-assemble voxels into
microstructures with arbitrary photonic functions such as color sorting. Several
strategies to self-assemble the DNA-functionalized voxels into desired
nanophotonic architectures will be developed. (3) How to design and characterize
optical functions for multivoxel architectures. The investigators will construct
architectures with several specific functions in visible and IR windows and
characterize them. (4) How to precisely place optical elements onto existing
devices. Integration of the obtained architectures with existing optoelectronic
device platforms will be explored. The ultimate goal is to turn self-assembly
into a versatile, robust, and accessible tool for practical construction of
photonic materials and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.