* 2211238
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Continuous Concrete Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 393,147.00

In theoretical computer science the well-established field of concrete
complexity studies structural properties of "Boolean functions", which are
decision rules that amalgamate a list of responses to yes/no questions to
produce a single yes/no output value. Boolean functions are central to many
branches of computer science, including the study of machine-learning algorithms
(where a major goal is to efficiently infer Boolean functions based on their
input-output performance) as well as hyperefficient "property testing"
algorithms that inspect only a tiny portion of a massive data set in order to
estimate some global property of the data. In a parallel, but to-date largely
disconnected, line of research, mathematicians have expended great effort
towards understanding structural properties of various types of geometric sets
in high-dimensional continuous space. Such sets can also be viewed as "decision
rules", but ones that amalgamate a list of continuous numerical values, rather
than discrete yes/no answers, in order to produce a yes/no value (which
indicates whether or not the input point described by the numerical values
belongs to the set). Viewed from this very high-level perspective these two
lines of research have similar broad goals, but the techniques they use are
quite different, and the two fields have mostly considered distinct types of
questions and mathematical objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the
investigators will work to establish and deepen connections between the two
settings --- discrete and continuous --- described above. The driving force
behind this project is an analogy, developed by the investigators in a sequence
of recent works, between Boolean functions that are monotone non-decreasing and
high-dimensional sets that are convex. This perspective has already led to a
number of surprising new results and suggests a broad range of new notions and
questions as well as methods of proof. Building on their preliminary work, the
investigators will work to establish new structural results for high-dimensional
geometric sets (focusing in particular on convex sets in continuous high-
dimensional spaces that are endowed with the Gaussian distribution) that are
inspired by analogous structural results that have been established in concrete
complexity for Boolean functions. As mentioned above, the structural results
obtained to date in concrete complexity for discrete domains have proved very
useful for computer science applications such as computational learning,
property testing, and derandomization; the investigators will work to establish
similar applications in learning, testing, and derandomization in the continuous
setting. The investigators will also develop the connection between the discrete
and continuous settings in the other direction, by working to apply some of the
powerful methods of high-dimensional convex geometry to obtain new structural
and algorithmic results in the discrete Boolean setting. Finally, another
important goal of the project is to train graduate students through the process
of research collaboration and dissemination, with a particular goal of building
expertise that spans both the topics of high-dimensional convex geometry and
discrete Boolean concrete complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.