* 2211472
* I-Corps:  Control of invasive ants using an environmentally friendly bait approach
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Spencer Behmer, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an eco-friendly bait for the control of invasive ants. Commercial
toxic baits are currently the most efficient way to control invasive ants, but
these baits negatively impact native biodiversity due to their lack of
specificity. This, in turn, facilitates quick recolonization by invasive ants
because no competitors are left to limit their spread. In addition, commercially
available baits are incompatible with wet or sunny meteorological conditions as
these events deactivate the baitâ€™s active ingredient, and most commercial baits
are attractive to ants mainly in spring and summer. The proposed technology
provides a solution to these issues by delivering an ant bait formulation and
delivery system that is 1) protected from moisture and sun, 2) attractive year-
round, and 3) specifically targets invasive and pest ant populations. The
proposed technology may allow pest-control companies to service parks and yards
at any time of the day or year, yard owners to reduce the amount of insecticide
applications per year, and ecosystems to recover through the recolonization of
native invertebrate populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a formulation for an eco-friendly ant bait and a
system to deliver it. The attractiveness of the bait was improved by the
characterization of the key macronutrients required by Red Imported Fire Ants
(Solenopsis invicta, hereafter RIFA) at different times of the year. Various
proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates were tested, alone or in combination to
create a bait that is highly attractive to RIFA populations in field conditions.
The selected formulation combines the macronutrients that are the most important
to the ants during each season, which ensures the attractiveness of the bait
remains high at any time during the year. Unlike currently available products,
this bait is not broadcasted over the infested area but is placed at the bottom
of an opened, small, and biodegradable vial. The delivery of the bait into vials
constrains foraging ants to compete for the access to the bait, passively
selecting for the most abundant and competitive species: invasive
ants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.