* 2211345
* EAGER: Machine Learning and Data Assimilation for Discovery of Generalized Fokker-Planck Equation for Radiation Belt Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Dmitri Kondrashov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 250,059.00

This project supports a two-year investigation into a better understanding and
prediction of the extreme dynamic regions of space known as the Van Allen
radiation belts. The near-Earth radiation environment is filled with high-energy
particles trapped by the Earth's magnetic field. The particle intensity and
distribution change as part of a much larger space weather system driven by the
Sun. The radiation belts can be hazardous for satellites and astronauts in
space. Therefore, it is crucial to be able to predict these energetic particles
better for our space exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new investigation is
expected to lead to a more accurate understanding of the radiation belts using a
novel combination of data assimilation and machine learning methods to discover
generalized Fokker-Planck equations for radiation belt modeling. The Principal
Investigator (PI) will use University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA)'s
Versatile Electron Radiation Belt (VERB) model and data assimilation to learn
and incorporate additional dynamical terms that would describe nonlinear wave-
particle kinetic effects. The project will promote and pave the way for novel
use of machine learning and data assimilation tools to discover missing physics
in high-dimensional and complex space physics models. The initial implementation
and vetting of combined data assimilation and machine learning algorithms in the
radiation belt diffusion model will not only lead to significant advances in
space weather modeling capabilities. Still, they will also have substantial
broader impacts on space plasma physics and other disciplines. The project will
thus have the potential to drastically change our understanding of radiation
belt modeling, and advanced tools can find broader use for Earth's climate
studies and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.