* 2211287
* SG: Density dependence and disease dynamics: moving towards a predictive framework
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Shweta Bansal, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

In humans and animals, a more active social life often means more exposure to
disease. Likewise, living in high density areas increases one’s chance of
encountering disease-causing microorganisms (“pathogens”), thereby increasing
the likelihood of getting sick. Scientists don’t know, though, how often density
drives the spread of infectious disease, and in what way. In many cases, animals
in social groups may reduce their risk of infection – for example, by avoiding
infected individuals or through improved nutrition – so perhaps population
density may not matter very much. Understanding how density and disease relate
to each other is necessary for predicting, modelling and controlling disease
outbreaks (like COVID-19). Investigating whether pathogens restrict animals from
forming more complex, denser societies will tell us how human disease burdens
are likely to change as our societies become more urbanized. This is especially
important in a densely populated world that is increasingly beset by novel
infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate whether
and how density drives greater infection within animal populations. Using a
compiled collection of dozens of wildlife disease datasets, investigators will
employ meta-analyses to ask 1) whether individuals in high-density areas have
more pathogens; 2) whether specific interactions become more likely with higher
host densities; and 3) whether these relationships can explain density effects
for diseases spread by those interactions. In doing so, it will form the basis
for predicting density-infection interactions, thereby improving general models
of disease dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.