* 2211294
* Brave new whorl: Vortex ring impingement on concave surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Byron Erath, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 309,956.00

Vortex ring interactions with solid and deformable surfaces abound in nature and
engineering flows. This situation is particularly relevant to the problem of
replacement speech following a laryngectomy, where unsteady flow exiting a
tracheoesophageal prosthesis produces pulsatile vortex rings that impinge on the
curved wall of the esophagus. The resultant esophageal pressure field is
responsible for successfully producing tracheoesophageal (i.e., replacement)
speech. As such, understanding the mechanics that arise as vortex rings impact
curved surfaces, in particular the pressure loading that is produced, could lead
to improved success rates of replacement speech. This work is also more broadly
applicable to both biological and engineering flows, such as cardiac
hemodynamics, fluidic energy harvesting, wall-bounded turbulence, etc. The
physics of these interactions will be investigated via flow visualization and
both two-dimensional and tomographic particle image velocimetry. Acquisition of
the velocity fields will enable determination of vorticity topologies, pressure
field estimation, and identification of pressure source terms, as well as the
resultant wall loading that arises during these interactions. This proposal
blends the research efforts with a novel outreach plan to help high-school
choral students envision how an interest in artistic expression in voice can
lead to a career in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work plan will explore the mechanics of vortex ring-surface interactions with
both hemispherical and cylindrical cavities. Flow visualization and particle
image velocimetry will be utilized to explore how a primary vortex ring
approaching a cavity induces flow on the surface of the cavity, and subsequently
causes the flow to separate and roll-up into a secondary vortex ring, and
potentially develop azimuthal instabilities. This interaction will be
investigated in both axisymmetric (hemispherical) and two-dimensional cavity
geometries as a function of cavity radius relative to the primary vortex ring
radius. The pressure loading that develops on the concave surface will also be
quantified to provide insight into the fluid-structure interaction. The outcomes
from this research plan will improve success rates of tracheoesophageal speech.
The project will also facilitate the training and education of one graduate and
multiple undergraduate students. Finally, the outreach program will inspire
high-school students to pursue careers in science and engineering fields, while
also providing paid summer research experiences for two of
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.