* 2211258
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Learning Compositional Implicit Representations for 3D Scene Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Jiajun Wu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Scene understanding systems take visual inputs, like images or videos, and
reconstruct and interpret the underlying scene in terms of 3D structure, objects
like cars and people, and other scene properties. Such systems are crucial in
applications in computer vision, computer graphics, and robotics, including in
self-driving cars. To represent the 3D world as observed from the input imagery,
such systems use mathematical models, and in recent years neural networks have
been very popular as the models used in such systems, due to their
expressiveness and ability to capture fine details. However, current neural
network-based scene representations are only good at modeling the specific
conditions under which a scene was observed, and cannot generalize to new
scenarios, limiting their use in many applications. For example, if a self-
driving car is trained to model scenes using only images from sunny days, the
car’s perception system might break down on rainy or snowy days. This project
aims to introduce new scene modeling techniques that will enable machines to
perceive and reconstruct 3D scenes in a more generalizable way. The
investigators will integrate findings from this research into course development
and student advising, and partner with educational and non-profit organizations
to teach AI, vision, and graphics to underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators will explore new methods
that will make representations capable of encoding more structure (e.g., light
field) and root them in physics. Designing such representations requires
knowledge from AI, computer vision, and computer graphics. The key innovations
include a new class of scene representations that aims to bridge the ability of
implicit neural representations to capture scene details with that of physical
representations to model scene structure; new methods that infer the
representation from raw images and videos with new parametrizations to enable
data-efficient, self-supervised learning; and new methods that leverage the
representation for downstream computer vision and graphics tasks, such as
interactive design and scene synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.