* 2211790
* SHF: Medium:  Automated Software Engineering Techniques for Improving the Accessibility of Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Sam Malek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 894,677.00

The ability to use software with ease is important for everyone, especially for
approximately 15% of the world population with disabilities. Even the simplest
operations, taken for granted by regular users, can be daunting tasks for
disabled users. Unfortunately, in the current state of affairs, software
inaccessibility is widespread. This can be attributed, at least partly, to the
deficiencies in existing techniques and tools available to software engineers.
Automated solutions for validating the accessibility of software are woefully
insufficient. They either fail to detect many real accessibility issues or
report too many superficial issues that are irrelevant in practice. Automated
repair techniques, shown to be quite effective for improving various quality
attributes of software (e.g., reliability, security), are scarce for
accessibility. Existing interaction modalities are too rigid and cumbersome,
seriously hindering the disabled users' use and enjoyment of the profound
advances in software technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays the
groundwork for innovative technologies that will enable end-users with vision
and motor impairments to interact more effectively with software. Combining
empirical data-driven research and tool building activities, the project will
advance the state-of-the-art in several ways. First, the team of researchers
will devise a use-case and assistive-service-driven accessibility issue
detection technique capable of automatically identifying accessibility issues
that are not detectable using the existing state-of-the-art techniques. Second,
the researchers will develop an automated program repair solution that employs a
combination of novel deep-learning and search-based strategies for fixing a
variety of accessibility issues. Furthermore, the team will construct the means
for automatically identifying use case macros for navigation optimization,
allowing a disabled user to rapidly execute frequently accessed use cases
through intuitive commands. Finally, utilizing a mixed-methods approach of user
studies and interviews with both disabled users and software engineers,
researchers will evaluate the efficacy of techniques developed in this project.
Ultimately, the project will result in a suite of tools, which will be made
available publicly, for helping developers with improving the accessibility of
software systems that they construct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.