* 2211628
* HCC: Small: Accessible Data Visualizations for Blind Users
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jonathan Lazar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 432,866.00

This project’s goal is to improve blind and low-vision people’s ability to use
their other senses to analyze big data. Scanning tabular data is slow even for a
sighted person, but this problem is exacerbated for blind individuals because of
the low bandwidth of current accessibility tools such as screen-readers. Charts,
graphs, and other data visualizations help democratize data access for a general
audience through graphical representations, but such representations are a
closed-off avenue for blind and low-vision users. Tools that convey data through
hearing and touch do exist, but these efforts are scattered, inconsistent, and
often rely on expensive hardware. Even if these devices were readily available,
few practical tools support realistic dataset sizes consisting of thousands or
hundreds of thousands of data items. This project aims to close these gaps
through work to make large-scale visualization and data analytics accessible to
blind individuals, which may have a fundamental impact on millions of visually
impaired and blind people, while also providing new ways for people without
visual impairments to analyze data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
define a comprehensive model of accessible visualization: high-bandwidth data
representations based on sound, touch, and physical computing to enable blind
users to view, analyze, and understand large-scale datasets as effortlessly as
sighted users. The research is organized into two aims: (1) understanding
current contexts of use for large-scale data among blind information
professionals through interviews, observations, and tool reviews; and (2)
designing large-scale accessible data applications that are practical,
realistic, and inexpensive solutions to enable blind professionals to interact
with large-scale data. The research team consists of two investigators with
complementary expertise in visualization and accessibility. While the team will
explore a wide variety of different devices, a fundamental goal will be to
design solutions that are inexpensive and compatible with the accessibility
equipment blind users already possess. To facilitate this, the team will work
with the blindness community and technology organizations to review
accessibility in leading data analytics tools, to use these tools as baseline
comparisons, and to suggest future guidelines and tools to support accessible
data graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.