* 2211301
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: IoCT:  System Mechanisms for Enabling an Internet of Collaborative Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mani Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 813,126.00

The rapid growth of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices points to a future with
trillions of devices deployed at a planetary scale for use in diverse
application domains, ranging from healthcare, to transportation, to energy, to
manufacturing, to environmental sensing, and more. Such growth poses significant
challenges. First, due to the relatively slower growth of cloud infrastructure,
the current practice of offloading data from IoT devices for computing at cloud
servers will not be sustainable due to scaling challenges. Second, future IoT
devices will operate in environments where they will host multiple applications
simultaneously and move across physical spaces with different owners, thus
requiring flexible sharing across trust domains of sensing, processing,
communication, and action resources present in the devices and the physical
spaces. Addressing these emerging challenges requires a radical rethinking of
the current device-edge-cloud architecture of IoT systems. In this project, the
researchers are exploring a new architecture approach called the “Internet of
Collaborating Things” (IoCT). In IoCT, instead of offloading device data to edge
and cloud servers, the application computation is distributed across an
amorphous collection of interconnected IoT devices that produce and consume
data, while harnessing emerging on-device compute accelerators. The project will
address three key challenges associated with the IoCT vision: (i) secure
multitenancy on resource-constrained IoT devices; (ii) secure collaboration
among IoT devices; and (iii) resilient management of resources distributed
across IoT devices and the spaces they are operating in.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal benefits of the project are twofold. First,
it will provide the foundations for a massive-scale IoT infrastructure, without
the large cost and energy footprint associated with using traditional server
infrastructure. Second, it will allow IoT applications involving rich high-
dimensional sensors and sophisticated physical control to be run anywhere by
securely harnessing resources present in nearby devices and physical spaces.
This includes autonomous urban robots interacting in complex manners with social
spaces and built environments. Additionally, the project team will undertake
specific broader impact activities to advance education, transition technology,
and broaden participation. In particular, for creating and nurturing an IoCT
community of researchers and practitioners, the project team will release open-
source software, create experimental testbeds, organize workshops, and
contribute to broadening participation in computing through outreach to local
high schools using two pre-college programs: the Los Angeles Computing Circle at
UCLA and the Summer Turing Institute at UMass Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.