* 2211991
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Village Organization in Non-complex  Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Kacy Hollenback, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 24,129.00

Interactions between foragers and agriculturalists are widely recognized as
pivotal processes of cultural, technological, linguistic, and genetic changes
worldwide. This doctoral dissertation research assesses the responses of hunter-
gatherer groups to the first introduction of farmers and their products. This is
not only significant to understanding the nature of these interactions, but also
for reconstructing watershed moments of change for modern descendant
populations. Outputs from this project will be used to develop new interpretive
materials for heritage organizations at the state and federal levels, especially
the National Park Service. Additionally, the researchers will provide training
on basic animal identification and analyses at the State Historical Society of
North Dakota to the public and Indigenous community members. These outputs will
increase scientific literacy and engagement. This research involves the
formulation of a collaboration plan with members of the Mandan, Hidatsa, and
Arikara Nation, with planned lectures and/or curriculum development for tribal
schools. As such, a broader impact will be increased partnership between
academia, public heritage organizations, and Indigenous
nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the nature of contact
between hunter-gatherers and farmers on the North American Great Plains using
isotopic and ancient DNA analysis of dog remains from 17 previously excavated
sites spanning from BC 6450 to AD 1880. It will do so by tracking the use of
maize by communities, before, during, and after the first introduction of
farming by using dog diet as a proxy for maize presence. Ancient DNA analyses
will differentiate dogs from wolves and coyotes, and stable isotope analyses
will determine the degree of maize in the dogs’ diets. Dogs are found in almost
all archaeological assemblages on the northern Plains and consumed food and
waste produced by their owners just as they do today. These datasets, when used
in concert with archaeological data, will help illustrate the nature of forager-
farmer interactions, mainly rejection, economic exchange, adoption.
Specifically, this research addresses how and when these relationships
originally formed, and how they changed over time. This project uses the Canine
Surrogacy Approach as a new tool for identifying these interactions. Although
dogs were crucial to the livelihoods of many different historic North American
Indigenous groups, ancient DNA research of dogs from the Great Plains is
limited. Ancient DNA, while used primarily in this research to identify dog
remains from wild coyotes and wolves, will also contribute to the greater
understanding of the variability of dogs in the Americas and potentially shed
light on the timing of breeding with non-indigenous breeds from
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.