* 2211427
* Collaborative Research: Linking Permafrost Soil Inundation to Carbon and Mercury Uptake in Aquatic Food Webs of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Elchin Jafarov, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

The element mercury is a common global contaminant released from human
activities that impact both environmental and human health worldwide. One form
of mercury, methylmercury, is produced by microorganisms in a process called
mercury methylation and can accumulate to toxic levels in aquatic organisms
across the food web. Permafrost soils of the Arctic contain large stores of
ancient mercury that are also being released to freshwater and coastal marine
environments from thawing soils due to a warming Arctic. Women and children in
rural communities in the Arctic that rely on subsistence fishing are most
vulnerable to the toxic effects of mercury. The central questions surrounding
mercury in the Arctic are the relative importance of ancient mercury released
from thawing permafrost soils versus newer mercury from the atmosphere, and how
rapidly changing conditions in Arctic landscapes will affect the transformations
and food web uptake of these different sources of mercury. To address these
questions, this study will use multiple approaches to track the releases,
transformations, and uptake of both carbon and mercury from permafrost soils to
aquatic ecosystems and subsequently to resident fish. The project further aims
to develop a practical approach to model the potential for important mercury
transformations in lakes and ponds with underlying permafrost soils. Through
dialogue with rural communities in Arctic Alaska, we will share what we learn
with people who are heavily impacted by mercury pollution. We will also help
train the next generation of scientists working on these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be carried out using a series of
expanding thermokarst lakes and recently formed beaver ponds in U.S. National
Park Service lands in northwest Alaska. First, field studies will target the
microbial methylation of permafrost mercury and its dependence on permafrost
carbon using metagenomics, field experimentation, and measurements of carbon
respiration pathways. Next, the uptake of permafrost carbon and mercury in
aquatic food webs will be quantified using a combination of radio and stable
isotopes (carbon, mercury, nitrogen, and sulfur) and isotope mixing analyses.
Isotope mixing models aim to differentiate ancient versus contemporary mercury
and carbon in Arctic food webs. The goal is to establish a process-level
understanding of the mobilization, microbial transformation, and biotic uptake
of carbon and mercury from permafrost soils to aquatic food webs. Lastly, field
observations will inform modeling efforts of lakes and ponds to establish
linkages between thermal and biogeochemical regimes of water bodies and mercury
methylation. This combination of process-level science and predictive model
development will provide the necessary information to understand mercury cycling
in Arctic systems under present and future conditions. The research findings
will be communicated to rural communities in Arctic Alaska through participation
in Subsistence Resource Council meetings, to the general public through public
presentations and media in collaboration with a science communication specialist
at the U.S. National Park Service, and to the scientific community through
conference workshops and peer-reviewed journal articles. Undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers will cross-train with collaborators
across institutions and participate in outreach activities, to develop a diverse
and globally competitive STEM workforce to address future environmental
challenges beyond this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.