* 2211039
* Collaborative Research: Model-guided design of bacterial interspecies interactions and trans-organismic communication in living intercellular circuits
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Lauren Andrews, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 668,913.00

Bacteria in the environment live in multispecies communities with dynamic
interactions that can bring about complex collective behaviors. Bacteria use
biochemical cell-to-cell communication via diffusible molecules and gene
regulatory elements to bring about large-scale responses. The ability to
predictably design multicellular responses in diverse bacterial communities
would have a wide range of applications including efficient biomanufacturing,
bioenergy conversion, novel therapeutic strategies, sustainable agriculture, and
bioremediation. To date, numerous naturally occurring interactions and modes of
communication within bacterial communities have been identified, yet there is
not the ability to engineer synthetic bacterial communities that have these
complex interactions and dynamic responses among diverse bacteria. This
collaborative project aims to improve understanding of interspecies biochemical
cell-cell communication that can occur in natural microbial communities and
allow us to leverage the highly complex functions afforded by these systems
within synthetic diverse bacterial communities as programmable living devices.
This project will create synthetic bacterial consortia for biosensing and
bioremediation of many hazardous water contaminants, including some of the most
dangerous drinking water and aquatic ecosystem contaminants. This project will
provide education and research training for numerous K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students. Hands-on workshops will be run at UMass Amherst and Boston
University each year for high school students to learn about studying and
engineering bacterial communities. Many undergraduate opportunities for
synthetic biology research training will be created. These educational
activities will increase K-12 STEM education, help address the
underrepresentation of women and minorities in synthetic biology, and train the
next generation of scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a
generalizable framework for the design of multicellular transcriptional
regulatory networks distributed within bacterial communities containing gram-
negative and gram-positive bacteria. The universality of recent discoveries of
homoserine lactone-mediated quorum sensing in gram-positive bacteria will be
determined using libraries of LuxRI-type quorum sensing systems and model gram-
positive bacteria. This work will generate a set of standardized quorum sensors
for gram-positive bacteria that allow for controlling interspecies communication
between diverse bacteria. The sequence-function relationship for these quorum
sensing systems will be determined using statistical design and systematic
mutagenesis. Using these quorum sensors, the team will test fundamental
questions about the evolution of quorum sensing in bacteria. A high-throughput
multilayer microfluidics platform for studying and maintaining bacterial
communities will be developed to analyze temporal signaling at single-cell
resolution. This platform will be used to develop a database of parameters and
models to predict the signaling dynamics of these distributed transcriptional
regulatory networks. This work aims to enable researchers to create diverse
bacterial communities that have complex interactions, designable interspecies
communication, and prescribed dynamic responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.