* 2211923
* HCC: Small: Designing Health Data-Tracking Technologies for Children
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yunan Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 563,797.00

Data-tracking technologies such as smartwatches, fitness bands, and patient
monitoring devices have been widely adopted to manage children’s health and
wellness. When successful, tracking technologies and practices can encourage
children’s self-awareness, enhance health knowledge, and foster a sense of
agency and control. However, tracking health for children is complex, requiring
collaboration between children, parents, and healthcare providers, as well as
designs that can serve children of different ages and children with varying
health conditions. Many existing systems fail to meet these challenges, being
mainly designed for general wellness and to meet parents’ tracking needs rather
than children's. This project aims to study these challenges through a
systematic approach to examining the design of data-tracking technologies for
children of different ages, health contexts, and modes of collaboration. Results
from the work will be shared broadly with patient advocacy groups and health
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on four intertwined
research topics: data needs and data literacy; data work and data
representations; different modes of tracking intended for children, parents, or
healthcare providers; and varying data needs with different health conditions.
To support the last, and to increase the generalizability of the findings, the
project will address three diverse health contexts: children’s general wellness,
asthma as an example of a common chronic illness, and a set of rare diseases
that share similar characteristics. The project will consist of three
interconnected stages: first, an interview study examining data literacy,
tracking experiences, and technology use with children, parents, and healthcare
providers; second, a co-design study exploring parents and children’s data
needs, data work, and data representations; and third, a design and deployment
study examining stakeholders’ in situ experiences of health tracking and
soliciting feedback for further improvement in the
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.