* 2211334
* NSF-BSF: High-Temperature Superconducting Photon Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kenneth Burch, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 316,039.00

This proposal aims to enable quantum limited photon sensitivity in practical
applications by developing superconducting nanowire photon detectors based on
high-temperature superconductors (high-Tc). To date such sensitivity is achieved
with standard superconductors operating at extremely cold temperatures.
Nonetheless such sensors offer the ultimate sensitivity needed in quantum
communications, chemical detection, and low light imaging. High-Tc cuprates
could achieve such performance above liquid nitrogen, offering a revolution in
the practicality of such devices. While these materials have been studied for
decades, they are quite sensitive to the typical approaches to making devices.
The fundamental limitations in making such devices will be studied and overcome
via a collaboration between the groups of Alex Hayat (Technion), and the group
of Kenneth Burch (Boston College-BC). Specifically, they will use recent
advances in the thin film growth of these materials, single atomic layer
graphene as a protective coating and fabrication in inert atmosphere to uncover
the origin of material degradation and methods to protect the high Tc for
fabrication into optical sensors. In addition, the effort will enable a range of
diverse trainees to be exposed to cutting fabrication and optical techniques as
well as topics at the forefront of quantum communications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; High Tc cuprates have been extensively studied over the
years, with a focus on the underlying mechanisms of their magnetic, strange
metal and superconducting responses. In addition, substantial efforts have
focused on using the cuprates for low loss electrical transmission. This project
focuses instead on the fundamental challenges to incorporating these materials
in optoelectronic devices and quantum optics experiments. Specifically, the team
will investigate new methods of preparing templates for selective area growth of
YBCO films. They will also explore the use of CVD graphene as a protective layer
on the films to minimize damage in fabrication. Both will involve the use of a
cleanroom in a glovebox to minimize atmospheric contamination. In addition to
standard e-beam lithography, thermal scanning lithography will be attempted to
reduce unwanted damage. Ultimately the resulting films and devices will be
characterized by a range of the techniques (EDX, Raman, AFM, TEM) to uncover the
mechanisms limiting performance. In addition, the quantum detector properties
will be measured to reveal the key parameters governing the performance for
quantum limited photon sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.