* 2211489
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: New Machine Learning Empowered Nanoinformatics System for Advancing Nanomaterial Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Hao Zhu, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 10/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to address the computational
challenges in the innovative nanomaterial data analysis or nanoinformatics for
predicting nanomaterials properties. Nanomaterials are very small materials that
can be used in a variety of applications, including nanomedicine development.
The vast quantities of existing experimental data require new nanoinformatics
approaches and toolkits for data extraction, analysis, and sharing. This can
help guide the safe design of next-generation of nanomedicines with desirable
therapeutic activities, while also ensuring they have limited side effects.
However, there are currently two critical limitations to using machine learning
approaches in nanoinformatics modeling studies. First, most existing data
available for modeling were based on a limited number of nanomaterials that also
have limited experimental characterization of their chemical properties. Second,
despite significant efforts from various researchers, the available modeling
approaches that have been developed are applicable only for a specified small
set of nanomaterials and have rarely been used to design nanomaterials. This
project will address the computational challenges in large-scale nanomaterial
data mining, development and validation of an automated informatics framework to
digitalize nanostructures, identify molecular markers, and support fast
nanomaterial retrieval and integrative analysis. This project will also
facilitate the development of novel educational tools to enhance several current
courses at Rutgers University, University of Pittsburgh, and University of
Minnesota. The investigators will engage the minority students and under-served
populations in research activities to give them a better exposure to cutting-
edge science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel machine
learning based nanoinformatics framework will be developed to integrate new
digital nanostructure representations with the emerging key computational
techniques. The project focuses on designing principled machine learning and
data science algorithms for analyzing large-scale nanomaterial data to create
new informatics toolkits to facilitate the nanomedicine-based treatments and new
nanomaterial design. Specifically, the following research goals will be met in
this project: 1) new computational tools to automate nanostructure
digitalization; 2) interpretation method to enhance deep learning based
predictive models; 3) new cross-modal deep hashing network for fast and accurate
nanomaterial data retrieval; and 4) evaluate the proposed methods and system
using real large-scale nanomaterial data and release the database and
nanoinformatics toolkits to the public. Unlike most existing nanoinformatics
strategies that perform modeling and analysis at a small scale, this project
will provide promising new directions to the analysis of large-scale complex
nanomaterial data by addressing the critical data-intensive analysis issues
including efficiency, scalability, and interpretability. The investigations
combine rigorous theoretical analysis and emerging application studies and will
contribute to both academic research and potential commercialized products. This
project will advance and thus extend the relationship between engineering
innovation and computational analysis, and hold great promise for nanomaterial
and nanomedicine developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.