* 2211273
* I-Corps: Additive Manufacturing Quality Control Software
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Hui Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new framework for image-guided quality control of additive
manufacturing. At the point of production, operators will be alerted to product
defects so that they can take corrective action instantly. In turn, managers
responsible for product quality can investigate the root causes of defects and
make improvements to their production processes. Ultimately, by improving
product quality, US advanced manufacturers may decrease expenses associated with
poor-quality parts and increase their competitiveness by ensuring only the
highest quality products are delivered to their customer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
novel method for monitoring and controling the dynamic image profiles of their
products based on multiplex networks. This work is focused on creating a sensor-
based, nonlinear dynamics methodology for real-time system informatics,
monitoring, and control. Advanced sensing of industrial systems has given rise
to in-situ imaging that allows for real-time monitoring and control of complex
processes. For instance, high-speed cameras are often situated above powder beds
in additive manufacturing (AM) machines to capture layer-by-layer images for
process monitoring. This work will design and develop a new framework of image-
guided quality control for additive manufacturing. This novel method may put US
manufacturers at an advantage. In applying artificial intelligence deep neural
network algorithms, the team addresses the complex structures in the high-
dimensional image streams for in-situ monitoring and control of manufacturing
processes. This process enables real-time quality inspection, defect mitigation,
and process improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.