* 2211343
* Frequency-Domain Model Updating through Branch and Bound with Convex Relaxation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 649,800.00

A variety of engineering disciplines use computer models to describe the
mechanical and dynamical behavior of structures. Examples include buildings,
bridges, airframes, and ship structures, spanning various disciplines including
civil, mechanical, and aerospace engineering. Despite decades of progress in
computer simulation of structural behaviors, simulation by a computer model
usually differs from the response measured in-situ at the as-built structure.
Particularly when dynamic structural performance is of interest, the difference
between simulation and measurement can be significant. The process of improving
model accuracy by identifying structural parameter values is termed structural
model updating. This project will study numerical algorithms that can improve
model accuracy by effectively finding more optimized parameter values for the
structural model. These model updating algorithms can be useful in a variety of
real applications. This project has the potential to greatly improve the
accuracy of simulation response of structures subject to dynamic loading
conditions such as earthquake, blast, and impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
many research efforts have been dedicated to model updating, the underlying
optimization problems are known to be non-convex. In general, off-the-shelf
optimization algorithms cannot guarantee global optimality of a non-convex
problem that has unknown number of local optima. This project investigates
convex relaxation and branch-and-bound algorithms that can guarantee global
optimality toward solving non-convex model updating problems. Providing an
optimality certificate, the approach offers transformative solutions for the
model updating of various engineering structures. In particular, to find a high-
quality underestimating bound, multiple convex relaxations will be comparatively
studied, including the convex quadratic, the semi-definite programing, and the
second-order cone programing relaxations. The branch-and-bound solution is
applicable to both deterministic and probabilistic versions of the modal
property difference formulation in model updating. In addition to numerical
examples, densely instrumented sensor data from a number of as-built structures
will be used to validate the model updating
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.