* 2211993
* Collaborative Research: Molecular and evolutionary mechanisms underlying the rapid gain and loss of an insect pheromone
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Henry Chung, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 574,760.00

Insects make critical decisions about reproduction and survival based on the
perception of pheromones, specialized chemical signals exchanged between members
of the same species that indicate whether an individual is male or female and
its mating status. The chemical structures of pheromones can differ between
closely related species, implying rapid evolution. However, unlike visual
signals like wing patterns or auditory signals like mating songs, little is
known about how new chemical signals arise and diversify. This collaborative
project will investigate the genetic and biochemical processes that underlie the
evolution of an anti-aphrodisiac pheromone produced by Drosophila fruit fly
species. The findings will deepen our understanding of how evolution at the
chemical and molecular level can lead to organismal-scale changes in social
behaviors such as mate choice. The research outcomes will have direct
application to the design of pheromone-based strategies to disrupt the
reproduction of agricultural pests and insects that transmit disease. Training
opportunities will be provided to undergraduate students from underrepresented
minority backgrounds through laboratory- and literature-based research
experiences. In collaboration with Hawaiian language scholars, students will
investigate the history of entomological science in Hawai‘i from a Native
Hawaiian perspective by researching and translating archival materials that
document endemic insects, their habitats, and their role in Hawaiian culture.
That work will be disseminated through exchanges between the two participating
institutions, University of Hawai‘i Manoa and Michigan State University, and at
local public outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects represent 80% of the
world’s species and use a wide variety of chemosensory signals to make critical
decisions about reproduction and survival. However, little is known about the
biochemical and genetic processes that shape the diversification of chemosensory
traits. The overall goal of this project is to understand how pheromones
originate and evolve. The study will identify the metabolic and genetic
mechanisms that control the synthesis and evolution of CH503, a male anti-
aphrodisiac pheromone produced in the ejaculatory bulb, which is present in some
species of Drosophila, but not others. The central hypothesis is that the
evolution of the lipid pheromone CH503 is driven by diversification of secondary
metabolites and changes in the tissue-specific activation of lipid biosynthesis
genes. To uncover mechanisms underlying the rapid evolution of this pheromone,
mass spectrometry, transcriptomic analysis, and genetic manipulation will be
used to: 1) identify and trace the evolution of the metabolome of the
ejaculatory bulb in CH503-producers and non-producers, including D.
melanogaster, six other members of the same subgroup, and two distantly related
species; 2) identify and trace the evolution of the genetic components
underlying the biosynthesis of CH503; and 3) determine how introduction of a
novel biosynthetic pathway to species that do not produce CH503 changes the
chemical profile of the ejaculatory bulb. The high-sensitivity mass
spectrometry-based methods for lipid analysis to be developed, as well as the
metabolomic data generated, will be made available to other researchers. This
award will also contribute to the training of at least two post-doctoral
scholars and six undergraduate researchers, and the results have potential
applications in agriculture for the development of methods to control insect
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.