* 2211049
* GOALI: Development of Next Generation MXene-based Li-S Batteries with Practical Operating Temperatures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michel Barsoum, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 488,522.00

The workhorse of energy storage for transportation and personal electronics has
been, and remains, the lithium-ion battery. And while that technology has proven
to be quite robust and useful, one of its major drawbacks is the amount of
energy they store. An alternate battery technology that has seen extensive
research in the last decade is lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries. All else being
equal and assuming some hurdles can be overcome, the Li-S battery would have 2-3
times the energy storage capacity of current lithium-ion batteries. It follows
that if an electric car’s current range is 200 miles, its range if equipped with
a Li-S battery would be 400-600 miles. Two important hurdles that need to be
overcome for Li-S batteries are: the nature of the electrolyte between the
electrodes and their rapid fade. In this project, the researchers, together with
industry partners, will address both problems. Currently, most of the research
in Li-S batteries make use of electrolytes (ether) that are highly volatile and
pose safety risks when operated above room temperature. Moreover, additives to
this electrolyte comes with serious transport regulations due to degassing
safety concerns. In this project, the researchers will make use of the same
electrolyte that is currently being used for Li-ion batteries, which has an
excellent safety record and can be used at temperatures higher than room
temperature. The second problem of the rapid fade in capacity with cycling is
another challenge. To solve that problem the researchers will study new
2-dimensional materials (think sheets of paper at the atomic level) to
immobilize the S, both physically and chemically, to prevent it from shuttling
between the battery electrodes that leads to their fade. In terms of broader
impact, the researchers, by partnering with a major battery company and an end-
use heavy-duty automotive company, will ensure industrial relevance of the
research. If successful, this technology could lead to longer lasting batteries,
creating new jobs and ensuring that the United States becomes a major player in
the energy storage field. Educational broader impact will be achieved by
providing training and research opportunities for graduate students pursuing
PhDs and undergraduates’ involvement in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental GOALI project will address two key barriers for Li-S battery
performance, an electrolyte that can operate at higher temperatures and
mitigation of capacity loss due to polysulfide shuttling loss. The project will
study a new class of materials to host sulfur, S-terminated MXenes. MXenes are
two-dimensional (2D) carbides and/or nitrides discovered at Drexel in 2011 that
exhibit metallic conductivity. Preliminary results have shown that MXenes are
one of the few material platforms that allow both physical and chemical
confinement/immobilization of S, thus reducing/minimizing the polysulfide
shuttle effect. The MXenes’ metallic conductivity and “dual-immobilization”
strategy will allow stable operation in carbonate electrolytes, while still
enabling &gt;70 wt.% S, with 7 mg/cm2 loadings and 83% effective S utilization
(1400 mAh/g) – all necessary pre-requisites to approach the application targeted
500 Wh/kg. The cathode research on synthesis, fabrication, and study of redox
activity of S-MXene cathodes will be integrated with carbonate electrolyte
engineering to further suppress possible adverse polysulfide-carbonate reactions
by reducing the electrophilicity. Post-mortem and in-operando spectroscopic and
microscopic studies will be conducted to elucidate the quasi-solid-state redox
pathways in S-terminated MXene hosts, detect the presence of polysulfides, or
other undesired side products, from S-carbonate interactions. Cell-level Newman-
type modeling, identifying limiting phenomena will further guide material
design. The ultimate objective of this GOALI project - in collaboration with
industry partners - is to develop Li-S batteries with practical S-loadings and
S-utilizations that stably operate in high boiling point commercial carbonate
electrolytes for application in heavy-duty battery electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.