* 2211634
* RF infrasonics for internal tissue characteristics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Edwin Kan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

The change of tissue mechanical properties in internal organs, vessels, airway
and larynx can serve as diagnostic and prognostic indicators for many disorders
that cause swelling, inflammation, tumors and plague deposition. In addition to
the self-initiated vibrations induced by vital signs and egophony, mechanical
motions of internal tissues can be triggered through an external actuation, when
the subsequent vibration responses and damping characteristics can be observed
outside the body. Present devices based on auscultation or stethoscope can
retrieve tissue vibration higher than 20 Hz, and portable ultrasound can
retrieve motion details with characteristic frequencies lower than 2 Hz with a
frame rate of 20 Hz. However, many important internal tissue vibration
characteristics in the infrasound band between 2 – 20 Hz are difficult to be
accurately measured by present tools, especially in primary care and at home.
However, the infrasound band covers the typical vibration characteristics of
main vascular and respiratory tissues. For example, when the lung has
inflammation, such as in the COVID-19 pneumonia, the lung and bronchi tissues
will contain more water, a condition called edema, and have a large change in
their vibration and damping characteristics. When plague is deposited inside
aortic and coronary arteries, the vibration feature also evolves. Ultrasound and
stethoscopes have been perfected over the years, but improvement beyond the
present capabilities to close the gap of the infrasound range would be
challenging. This project will develop the required hardware and software to
achieve new capabilities and test on a manikin with artificial tissues. The
developed sensor tools can be used for telemedicine or with other conventional
diagnostic and image tools to improve imaging quality. The research results will
be translated into undergraduate courses on sensors, and into promotional
materials for K-12 students and public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of this research is to develop a wearable or portable radio frequency
(RF) sensor that can cover broad tissue vibration bandwidth including the
critical infrasound band of 2 – 20 Hz, together with signal processing
algorithms appropriate to retrieve the transient features in both temporal and
spectral domains. The sampling rate for radio signals can cover a very broad
range for detecting very slow to very fast tissue and organ motions. In
comparison, fast tissue motion is difficult for internal imaging with limited
frame rates, and slow motion does not make a sound for the stethoscope to pick
up. As many internal tissues have high viscosity and anisotropy, multiple RF
sensors can be deployed as a multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) network to
improve the spatial resolution. This project will develop near-field MIMO RF
sensing similar to the ground-penetrating radar, and the acoustic detection is
similar to seismology. Specifically, the project will construct a body phantom
with imitation internal tissues a MIMO RF sensor array on the phantom. Signal
processing algorithms for vibration and damping characteristics with high
temporal and spectral resolutions will be developed and benchmarked. A physical
model from the tissue excitation to the RF transceiver outputs with scalable
geometrical parameters will also be developed. Lastly, human study with healthy
participants will be conducted to provide feedbacks for improvement on sensor
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.