* 2211845
* III: Medium:  Counterfactual-Based Supports For Visual Causal Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* David Gotz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,215,999.00

Data visualization is a critical and ubiquitous tool used to support data
analysis tasks across a variety of domains. Visualizations are valued for their
ability to “show the data” graphically, rather than using letters and numbers,
in a way that enables users to assign meaning to what they see. This in turn
helps users analyze complex data, discover new insights, make data-driven
decisions, and communicate with other people about their findings. The
correctness of these findings is therefore clearly contingent upon the
correctness of the inferences that users make when viewing or interacting with a
data visualization tool. However, recent studies have shown that people often
interpret visualized patterns as indicators of causal relationships between
variables in their data even when no causal relationships exist. The result is
that visualizations can dramatically mislead users into drawing erroneous
conclusions. This project develops a new approach to visualization, based on the
concept of counterfactual reasoning, designed to help users draw more accurate
and generalizable inferences when analyzing data using visualization tools. The
project's results, including open-source software, are intended to be broadly
applicable across domains. In addition, the project will be evaluated with data
and users in the population health domain with the potential to contribute to
improvements to human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this
project will develop a set of innovative counterfactual-centered methods for
visualization. In recognition of users' natural tendency to draw causal
inferences about data while looking at data visualizations, these methods will
directly aim to mitigate risks of drawing erroneous conclusions while amplifying
users' ability to robustly discover patterns that are more likely to be
indicators of statistically supported causal interactions. Building upon the
principles of counterfactual reasoning, this project will achieve three key
aims. First, methods will be developed to enhance traditional filter-driven
visualizations with comparisons against counterfactual subsets. The goal is to
provide users with the information required to make more robust conclusions from
visualizing data. Second, methods will be developed to leverage statistics
derived from these counterfactual subsets to help guide user's exploratory
activity with the aim of increasing efficiency of discovery. Third, a workflow
for identifying and accounting for secondary variables that correlate with those
used for counterfactual comparison will be developed. The project will result in
the design and development of new computational methods and user workflows,
open-source software implementing these contributions, and evaluation studies
that will characterize the efficacy of these counterfactual-based
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.