* 2211867
* RAPID: Behavioral Drivers and Social Pathways in the Spread of the COVID-19 Omicron Variant
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Amy Stambach, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,884.00

This project examines the behavioral drivers and real-time changes in behavior
affecting the potential transmission of the Omicron variant off the SARS-COV-2
respiratory virus during critical moments of crowding, mingling, and interacting
in close quarters. It aims specifically to understand the social complexities of
ritual and travel that reduce or heighten the risk of COVID-19 infection. Data
from the study contributes intellectually to high-priority biomedical research
that seeks to advance public health interventions. This study will provide
critical information for the development of public health programs and
guidelines that address the risks communities face with the Omicron variant. The
project also provides training for graduate and undergraduate students in
methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study tests existing theoretical
presumptions that people disregard state-mandated health regulations at moments
when cultural, religious, and social rites of solidarity and obligations take
priority. The emergence of the highly contagious Omicron variant during a peak
travel season provides an opportunity to map transmission pathways in real time.
This project triangulates ephemeral data regarding holiday travel and religious
ceremonies with social network information and household demographics. Data from
behavioral observations of religious ceremonies will yield information about
social practices compared with state-mandated regulations of masking,
vaccinating, and social distancing. Data regarding social networks will yield
information about linked urban-rural migrant pathways for potential disease
transmission. Data from interviews will record age, ethnicity, sex,
socioeconomic status, marital status, family size, and will aid in mapping
migratory patterns and social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.