* 2211896
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Understanding Online-to-Offline Sexual Violence through Data Donation from Users
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Kelly Berishaj, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2026
* USD 403,107.00

This project will improve our understanding of online-to-offline sexual violence
by exploring how computer-mediated communication shapes consent exchange
practices, or the ways in which individuals give and perceive to receive consent
to sexual activity. Sexual violence is a serious public health problem in the
United States: every 68 seconds an American is sexually assaulted. Online-to-
offline sexual violence refers to nonconsensual sexual acts that occur via the
combination of computer-mediated and face-to-face communication. The ways in
which Americans discover and interact with potential sexual partners are
increasingly computer-mediated, however we have little understanding of how
computer-mediated communication influences perceptions of appropriate sexual
behavior, which may predispose individuals to becoming perpetrators or victims
of sexual harm without their realization. The knowledge produced through this
project will benefit public health and constitute crucial advances in multiple
intersecting fields such as human computer interaction, nursing, and psychology
via informing entirely new solutions to online-to-offline sexual violence that
are truly preventative and do not rely on conscious intent by the perpetrator to
cause harm, or recognition by victims that harm is occurring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a mixed methods, longitudinal approach
to studying online-to-offline sexual activity through online dating, a well
known context for sexual violence. A framework of online-to-offline sexual
violence through the lens of computer-mediated consent will be developed by
creating, curating, and analyzing a dataset of user behavior examples during
online dating. This will comprise instances of online daters' behavior across
online and offline interaction as it relates to sexual activity such as consent
practices, as well as the impacts of such behavior on key psychological
constructs. Data collection will be made more scalable and privacy-preserving
with a data donation app embodying best practices for sexual experience
reporting. The research plan involves user-centered design, implementation, and
evaluation of the data donation app, followed by multiple cohorts of
longitudinal data collection with online daters through use of the data donation
app and recurrent interviews about their online dating and associated sexual
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.