* 2211715
* Transcriptional control of growth regulatory modules by AIL transcription factors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Beth Krizek, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,151.00

The size of plant organs depends on both the number and size of the constituent
cells. Growth within developing organs consists of an early phase in which there
is an increase in cell number followed by a later phase in which cells expand in
size. Pathways that regulate the rate of cell division or expansion, or the
duration of either phase of growth have been identified. However, the regulation
of these pathways and how output from these different pathways is integrated to
control the final size of a plant organ is not well understood. The work
proposed here will investigate regulation of growth pathways in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. Understanding the mechanisms regulating the growth of
leaves and flowers can have important economic benefits in increasing plant
yield and biomass. Larger leaves in leaf vegetable crops and larger flowers and
the products they give rise to (fruits, seeds, and grains) can contribute to
increased agricultural production needed to feed a growing world population. In
addition, the project aims to broaden participation in science by developing a
molecular biology lab skills workshop that will be offered to first generation
and underrepresented students in their first semester of college. The project
will also involve a local K-12 teacher for a summer research experience as part
of the South Carolina Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key promoter of organ growth in plants is the
transcription factor AINTEGUMENTA (ANT). ANT mutants produce smaller leaves and
flowers while overexpression of ANT results in larger leaves and flowers. ChIP-
Seq studies show that ANT and the related transcription factor AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE
6/ PLETHORA3 (AIL6/PLT3) are bound to a number of different growth genes in
developing floral primordia. This project will test the hypothesis that ANT and
AIL6 directly regulate expression of genes from several different growth
regulatory modules and that feedback among these different modules integrates
growth information to control final organ size. The roles of ANT and AIL6 in
regulating the expression of six genes from the miR396/GRF-GIF, DA1/BB, and KLU
growth modules, which control the duration of the cell proliferation phase of
growth, will be investigated. RT-qPCR, in situ hybridization, promoter:GUS
reporters, and laser capture microdissection will be used to characterize the
expression levels and patterns of these growth genes in response to changes in
ANT and AIL6 activity. Cis-regulatory elements bound by ANT and AIL6 will be
determined using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Mutated promoter:GUS
reporters, CRISPR-Cas genome editing, and ChIP-qPCR assays will probe the
importance of these identified cis-elements in vivo. In addition, the project
will investigate whether reciprocal cross-regulation occurs between ANT/AIL6 and
these other growth modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.