* 2211663
* Nature of State Instability
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Andrew Somerville, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 279,779.00

In 2007, the number of people living in cities across the globe surpassed the
number in rural areas, highlighting the need for more research on the
development, organization, and decline of cities within cross-cultural and
diachronic frameworks. Within this context investigators will lead a research
project to investigate an example of the collapse of early urbanism at the
ancient city. Continuously occupied for over 600 years, the site presents an
opportunity to study an ancient city over a long temporal sequence, and to ask
questions relevant to urbanism in other times and places. What makes cities
vulnerable to collapse and what makes them resilient? Can collapse be predicted
from material evidence? To what extent is immigration involved in the processes
of urban development and decline? In addressing these questions, this research
will contribute to our broader understandings of urbanism and to the factors
involved in societal disintegration. Results of this study will be widely
disseminated through popular and academic sources and will be shared with the
local community through public displays, lectures, and through guided tours of
the site. Because the research employs multiple analytical approaches, moreover,
it will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate training in methods
relevant to S.T.E.M. and social science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will bring together researchers to better understand the
factors involved in the decline of urbanism, the mechanisms of its
reconfiguration after collapse, and the effects of urban decline on the local
population.The project focuses on a region of the city which was occupied
through its decline, making it an opportune location to explore urban processes
over a long temporal sequence. With the explicit goal of better characterizing
the nature of the collapse, the project explores which aspects of material
culture: which exhibited continuity between the pre- and post-collapse periods
and which aspects exhibited discontinuity or change over time. To accomplish
this, the research will proceed along several avenues of data collection
including field survey, horizontal excavations, AMS radiocarbon dating, ceramic
and lithic analyses, isotopic analysis of human and animal bone, and faunal
studies. By combining these datasets, the project will examine the continuities
and discontinuities in aspects of social identity, economic networks, diet, and
the use of space over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.