* 2211241
* Collaborative Research: Halogen Behavior In the Pluton-to-Volcanic Arc System
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Emily Cooperdock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2025
* USD 291,557.00

Halogen elements (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine) are abundant, highly
reactive elements in the atmosphere, oceans, and lithosphere. Halogens within
Earth’s crust can affect magmatic properties and carry elements to form economic
mineral deposits. Within volcanic arc systems, halogen elements are carried to
depth by subducting crust and can travel within melts through the overriding
crust and out at volcanoes. Estimates of halogen inputs at subduction zones and
outputs through volcanic gases show a deficit that suggest a portion of halogens
are trapped deep within the Earth. There are multiple possible reservoirs to
host halogens that are not well characterized because they are too difficult to
access and sample. One example is the magmatic system under volcanoes where
concentrations of halogens in subsurface magma chambers and erupted volcanic
rocks are not well known. This team will measure the full halogen suite in
intrusive plutonic rocks and extrusive volcanic rocks from the same ancient arc
system now exposed in the Sierra Nevada, California. This will allow them to
address key open questions including: whether halogens are enriched in the
plutonic magma chamber or erupted volcanic rock; where halogens are hosted
within the rocks; and what impact halogens have on magmatic processes and
mineral deposits at volcanic arcs. Through this research, the principal
investigators and graduate students will design an undergraduate mineralogy and
petrology class with accessibility, equity, and inclusion principles and engage
in undergraduate students in research and safe, inclusive field experiences. A
subset of the samples used for this study come from an historic collection.
These samples will be digitized using 3D technology and created into an
educational resource hosted on the Virtual Microscope public
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogen movement and reservoirs within
the deep Earth are highly uncertain due to the lack of data from key reservoirs,
namely, the fore-arc, deeply subducted slab residues, subcontinental mantle, and
– the focus of this study – continental crust. Given halogen incompatibility in
the mantle and affinity towards more evolved melts, continental crust is a
potentially important reservoir; however, bulk rock compositions of plutonic and
volcanic arc rocks are relegated to a handful of studies. This research will
characterize the full halogen (Fl, Cl, Br, I) composition and behavior within an
arc magmatic system by analyzing a suite of spatially-related plutonic and
volcanic rocks that share similar chemical composition and age from the Sierra
Nevada Arc. Specifically, this team will measure bulk rock halogen (Cl, F, Br,
I) concentrations, in-situ mineral concentrations (F, Cl), and O and H-isotopes
on a suite of geochemically well-characterized samples. This sample suite will
be used to 1) determine whether halogens are concentrated in the plutonic or
volcanic section within a single arc system, 2) identify where halogens are
hosted (i.e., in minerals or other sites), and 3) assess the role of halogens in
magmatic processes during the formation of continental crust. In order to
interpret the role of processes, such as assimilation and hydrothermal
alteration, on halogen behavior, they also propose to analyze a complimentary
suite that includes lower crustal xenoliths, host wall rocks (e.g., schists,
marbles), hydrothermally altered rocks and associated veins, and more mafic
lithologies (e.g., gabbros) to strengthen our interpretations. The dataset will
significantly contribute to what is known of bulk rock halogen compositions for
continental arc crust, and be used with major element, trace element, and
isotopic compositions to evaluate the impact of primary magmatic processes
(e.g., crustal assimilation, fractional crystallization) on the halogen record
and interpret overall halogen systematics through the arc magmatic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.