* 2211804
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Programmable Computational Antennas for Sensing and Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alireza Vahid, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The performance of wireless communications and sensing is fundamentally
determined by the available degrees of freedom in space, frequency, and time.
However, as the wireless systems are moving into mmWave 5G and beyond-5G with
larger bandwidths (e.g., tens of GHz) combined with larger antenna arrays (e.g.,
64 or more antennas at base stations), the number of degrees of freedom becomes
so large that it is no longer feasible to access them in a practical manner. In
other words, it is challenging to achieve sufficient computational degrees of
control in practice to access the available degrees of freedom in higher
spectra. This project seeks to address this challenge by developing
computational antennas (CompTenna) that can perform programmable analog
computations at the antenna in the mmWave and sub-THz bands. CompTenna is best
viewed as a new computational unit â€“ when combined with analog/digital
computations, CompTenna will significantly expand the degrees of control to
enable novel wireless communications and sensing applications on next-generation
mobile devices. Through its coherent educational plan, this project will also
train the next-generation workforce in the semiconductor and wireless industry
by engaging graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students, especially the
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
the foundations of computational antennas (CompTenna) and novel methods to
increase network capacity and enable new wireless sensing. It includes three
research tasks. (1) CompTenna Foundations: develop CompTenna hardware, its
computational model, and simulator. The goal is to synthesize a first-pass
physical CompTenna design in a time-efficient manner, based on targeted high-
level application needs. (2) Speeding Up the Network Using CompTenna: develop
techniques to leverage all the degrees of freedom enabled by the CompTenna in an
energy-efficient manner. In particular, this project focuses on how to use
CompTenna to create optimal beamforming for single-user and multi-user
communications and distributed interference management. (3) Doing More with
CompTenna: develop foundations and methods for a layered joint sensing and
communications architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.