* 2211697
* Building a Sustainable Community College CURE Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2026
* Melanie Harvey, Johnson County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2026
* USD 555,911.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project will serve the national interest by
developing course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) for students
attending Johnson County Community College (JCCC) through a faculty-team
approach aimed at creating a culture of research at a two-year college. CUREs
provide opportunities for students to participate in scientific research and the
dissemination of results that have the potential to be of interest to a broad
community of scientists, researchers, and ultimately the public. The project
team will develop and support CUREs for students across STEM disciplines
including astronomy, cell and microbiology, chemistry, environmental science,
geology, horticulture, human biology, organismal biology, and physics). A
developmental approach to enhance students’ deeper knowledge of research will
guide the creation and enhancement of CUREs that are aligned with the sequence
of courses offered in the programs of study in science. The project will
leverage and investigate the power of faculty professional development, faculty
learning communities, and an institutional change framework to engage faculty in
the ever-changing priorities of community colleges in their mission to educate
and train the nation’s future scientists and technicians. At JCCC, CUREs will
become components of the regular requirements for the programs of study in the
sciences. Building on current work in professional development, the CUREs will
also become the cornerstone of a faculty-team approach to institutional change
and to sustaining CUREs at JCCC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
common barriers to the implementation of CUREs at community colleges as the
CUREs are designed by creating an institutional culture that combines teaching
and learning with research and a robust program assessment of expected outcomes
at the institution. Faculty teams will develop, pilot, and revise curriculum to
ensure that current and future faculty have resources and support to tackle
potential barriers. Based on an institutional change framework, the project team
will investigate the implementation of CUREs and create a model for sustaining
CUREs at community colleges. The framework focuses and builds on (a) creating
institutional accountability, (b) creating strategic partnerships, and (c)
expanding CUREs by leveraging the curriculum. In addition, the effort draws on
current work by an established faculty learning community that is fostering STEM
discipline-based education research at the community college level. A mixed
methods evaluation study supported by a targeted investigation of CUREs will
generate knowledge about critical factors associated with successful CUREs and a
shift in the culture of teaching and learning. To disseminate the approach and
resources, the project team will host two workshops and a conference for faculty
at the institution and science faculty who are teaching at colleges in the
Midwest. Speakers with expertise in CUREs, faculty, and community college
administrators will present and discuss CUREs, focusing on opportunities and
challenges associated with implementing them at community colleges. The NSF
program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that
advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The project description
promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education
at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.