* 2211409
* RAPID: Effects of Drying Disturbance on Energy Flux Across the Aquatic-Terrestrial Boundary: Dam Malfunction Influences Aquatic Insect Emergence Quantity and Phenology
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Lindsey Albertson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 189,528.00

Aquatic insects emerging from rivers during the hatch provide a major source of
energy and nutrients to many predators. The nutrients, such as carbon and
nitrogen, that are contained in aquatic insects are an important food subsidy to
terrestrial ecosystems. However, insects are sensitive to and declining globally
because of altered water availability, pollution, and temperature warming.
Despite these widespread declines, little is known about how emergence may
affect neighboring terrestrial ecosystems because the critical adult aquatic
insect life-stage that allows energy and nutrients to be transferred from the
aquatic environment to terrestrial consumers is sorely understudied in
monitoring programs. This project investigates the role of a severe drying
disturbance in regulating emerging aquatic insect hatches, in particular that of
the salmonfly, which is a species of large aquatic insect in the stonefly order
that is sensitive to global change. The researchers are evaluating how
drastically reduced water flow from a dam gate failure influences salmonfly
density, biomass, and emergence timing. A postdoctoral scholar and several
undergraduate research assistants are being trained, a public survey on the
topic of drought will be completed, and the research will be presented at a
local festival in southwestern Montana. Public outreach will highlight the tight
connections between water and land and the importance of emerging aquatic
insects as a source of nutrients and energy to fish, birds, and
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make transformative
contributions to our understanding of the shifting role and resiliency of
aquatic-terrestrial linkages under anthropogenic change by contributing novel
information about the influence of a pulse drying disturbance on the adult life-
stage of aquatic insects. The research project investigates how a dam
malfunction on the Madison River in southwestern Montana that resulted in a
short but extensive drying event could change aquatic insect emergence compared
to prior years. The focal organism for the research is the giant salmonfly,
which is an ecologically and culturally important aquatic insect in rivers in
the Rocky Mountain West. The project will quantify salmonfly density and timing
during emergence using field observations, laboratory flume experiments that
manipulate drought conditions to assess salmonfly survival and movement, and
simulations of different drying extents to quantify the influence of drought on
export of nutrients from aquatic to terrestrial habitats. This project is one of
the first to evaluate how global change alters nutrient cycles by changing
aquatic insect hatches and severing ties between aquatic and terrestrial
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.