* 2211843
* A Study of Water-Spread Polymer Micelles on Water Surface: Toward Developing a First-in-Kind Polymer Lung Surfactant Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* You-Yeon Won, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 403,394.00

Every year around 200,000 patients in the US are diagnosed with Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) as a result of such causes as viral
infection (e.g., COVID-19), physical trauma, and inhalation of chemicals.
Patients diagnosed with ARDS (critically low blood oxygenation levels) face a
staggering &gt;40% mortality rate. The use of animal-derived lung surfactant
replacement therapy that has been used to treat certain respiratory conditions
has not been successful in treating ARDS. Therefore, there is dire need for an
effective therapeutic that goes beyond current treatments (mechanical
ventilation). The investigator’s laboratory is pioneering a transformative
first-in-kind “Polymer Lung Surfactant (PLS)” therapy that is composed of a
block copolymer and can address limitations of conventional animal-derived lung
surfactant therapeutics. By studying their fundamental behavior, advances can be
made in the development of a PLS with the hope of ultimately translating this
research to improvements in human health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lung
surfactant replacement therapy is one of the greatest achievements in
interfacial science research. Each year in the US alone, this lung surfactant
technology saves over 30,000 newborns suffering from deficiency of endogenous
lung surfactant. Adults can suffer from similar symptoms (ARDS) when the
function of their native lung surfactant becomes impaired due to injury to lung
parenchyma. Unfortunately, the surfactant replacement therapy which is used to
treat neonates with insufficient lung surfactant stores has not been shown to be
effective for ARDS. It has been discovered that micelles derived from a
synthetic amphiphilic block copolymer, poly(styrene)-poly(ethylene glycol) (PS-
PEG), show great promise for the treatment of ARDS. A greater understanding of
the fundamental science of the interfacial mechanical and transport behavior of
water-spread block copolymers is required for further advancement of this
technology. This is the gap that this award aims to fill. Specifically, the
experiments provide understanding on the molecular origin of the unique surface
mechanical behavior of water-spread PS-PEG micelles on water surface (toward
further optimization of PLS formulations). Surface rheological behavior of
water-spread PS-PEG micelles (to understand their unique protein resistant
behavior) will be studied. Interfacial flow and coating properties of PS-PEG
micelle solutions through lung airways (which will help optimize PLS delivery
processes) will be investigated. This award provides multidisciplinary training
for graduate and undergraduate students involved to learn state-of-the-art
concepts and skills in interfacial engineering. Available campus resources are
used to enhance recruitment of underrepresented/minority undergraduate students
for this project. Local high school students are provided with research
experience opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.