* 2211347
* US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Structure-property relationships of new polar liquid crystalline phases through synthesis and characterization using a range of analytical technique
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Fisch, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 511,885.00

Nontechnical Explanation:&lt;br/&gt;The well-known liquid crystal display is
generally based on molecules that are rod-like and may be modeled as a pencil
sharpened at both ends. In the past 10-15 years there has been significant
scientific interest in liquid crystals formed from bent molecules, modeled as a
hockey stick, which also coincide with their mirror image. The study of
molecules with these two structural properties has led to the discovery of new
liquid crystalline phases with unique properties that are largely unexplored.
The purpose of this research is to chemically synthesize new molecules that have
these structures and exhibit these new phases and then study their physical
properties with the dual goals of better understanding the relationships between
molecular structure and liquid crystal properties and facilitating future
applications of these materials as photonic, energy storage, and switching
devices. These goals are accomplished by the pooling of the complementary
expertise of a synthetic chemist, a physicist, and an engineer, from Northern
Ireland, the US, and the Republic of Ireland respectively. This provides
students and post-doctoral fellows a unique multidisciplinary and multinational
environment for scientific, professional, and cultural enrichment through
collaboration, scientific residencies in other Principal Investigator’s
laboratories and the acquisition of skills that are not obtainable by working in
a single laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Current liquid crystal technologies are almost
exclusively based on rod-like (calamitic) molecules that form nematic, and/or
smectic phases. However, over the past 10-15 years there has been great interest
in non-chiral molecules that are not rod-like. This led to the discovery of new
nematic phases and corresponding nematic-nematic phase transitions. These new
phases are called the twist-bend, the splay-bend, the splay, and the ferro
nematic. These phases and their phase transitions and physical properties are a
largely unexplored frontier. Molecules of this geometry sometimes form polar
smectic phases, and should such phases be found; they too will be studied. The
goal of this research is to synthesize and study the physical properties of new
liquid crystalline materials that form from “bent” molecules with the objective
of better understanding and advancing the relationship between molecular
structure, the resulting liquid crystalline phases, and the physical and
chemical properties of the resulting polar nematic and smectic mesophases. This
is achieved through systematic synthesis of new mesogens that form the desired
phases from bent core, bimesogen, and twisted core moieties; determination of
liquid crystal phases and their transition temperatures; use of electro-optical
and complementary spectroscopic techniques (x-ray scattering, Raman scattering,
infrared, birefringence, wideband dielectric spectroscopy, and second harmonic
generation) to investigate the structure and physical properties of these
phases. Finally, test cells with well oriented liquid crystal molecules will be
fabricated. These will be used to investigate the effect of various (electric,
magnetic, surface anchoring, and flow) fields to investigate applications of
these phases as well as to facilitate measurements of physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.