* 2211149
* I-Corps: A Smart Context-Aware Multi-Fingered System for Dexterous Grasping
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Viswanathan Madhavan, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a potential platform for many industries and companies, such as
advanced manufacturing, e-commerce, retailer, mailing, and logistics. The
platform could revolutionize and automate the process of sorting and packing
irregular-shaped objects, e.g., sorting plastic mail bags with various
dimensions and weights for USPS; and packing irregular-shaped goods for Walmart
and Amazon. The project could also revolutionize portable automation that relies
on general tools in advanced manufacturing, e.g., enabling the large footprint
of aircraft assembly in confined space access for Spirit AeroSystems; and
automating manufacturing processes that require various kinds of manipulation
such as placing, grasping, and capping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a platform system extending robotic
grasping towards dexterous strategies for multi-fingered hands, and increasing
the capability of context perception by fusing novel sensors. To accomplish
dexterous grasping and manipulation, a dexterous robotic hand was designed by
tightly integrating anthropomorphic gripper mechanics, context perception, and
task-oriented grasp planning. The robotic hand achieves in-situ perception of
object affordances by fusing multimodal sensors, including object dimensions and
object characteristics such as materials, rigidity, and mass. This is the first
robotic gripper that perceives object characteristics by using infrared sensors
and machine-learning methods. To deploy efficient strategies for various task
requirements and object affordances, a knowledge-driven model is developed to
resolve the planning of dexterous manipulation motion. The model represents
human knowledge as hand topology and learns task-oriented manipulation plans to
adapt to different work context. Due to the integrated structure of knowledge
and learning, the model produces robust and adaptive plans with a high
efficiency in learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.