* 2211764
* Collaborative Research: Continent-wide forest recruitment change: the interactions between climate, habitat, and consumers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* James Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2026
* USD 654,781.00

The sustainability of North American forests depends on seed production by trees
as well as seedlings that must establish for the next generation of trees. For
most of North America, neither the amounts of seed that are produced, nor how
much of that seed survives to become adult trees is known. Population spread
beyond current frontiers will be governed by seed production of trees
(fecundity), germination, and seedling survival—the capacity of trees to produce
seed and disperse it to the habitats where populations can survive in the
future. Planning for environmental change impacts requires this knowledge to
anticipate tree species migrations and its impacts on the birds and mammals that
depend on forests for habitat and food. Understanding these forest recruitment
responses requires a methodological shift from the current method of monitoring
of seeds, seedlings, and consumers on small plots to extensive sampling methods
that can be implemented at biogeographic scales. This study combines continental
scale tree fecundity estimates with a new generation of monitoring and synthesis
methods for integrating tree fecundity, seedling success, and its impacts on
animal consumers. This research will quantify current trends across the
continent, the changes in forests that are happening now, and the habitat
changes that are causing them. Development of a biogeographic network of tree
fecundity and recruitment will provide the monitoring platform needed for
science and management of future forests. Broader impacts will focus on
stakeholder integration, including conservation and management planning,
information transfer to stakeholders in federal and state agencies, and citizen
science outreach. Products of the study will have immediate application to
forest regeneration practices in the coming decades. Agency and NGO stakeholders
will advise and disseminate products of the study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
analytical tools will identify where tree recruitment is limited in North
America, its rate of change, and what’s causing it. The project focuses on three
recruitment stages, seed supply (seed mass per tree abundance), seedling
establishment (seedlings per seed mass), and recruitment rate (advanced
regeneration per seedling). Each recruitment stage will be linked to climate and
habitat variables and to the vertebrate consumers of seeds, fruits, and nuts.
Extensive gradient sampling (EGS) is a new approach to estimate the key
demographic rates that are relevant at the scale of habitats or plant
communities, while combining it with traditional data already available from the
meter-scale intensive monitoring sampling (IMS). The project will include data
collection based on this new approach, (EGS) of fecundity, tree recruitment, and
vertebrates distributed across climate and habitats. Predictive vertebrate
modeling (PVM) of activity based on camera traps (snapshot USA, NEON, and this
study), live trapping (NEON sites) and bird point counts (BBS, NEON, and eBird)
across North America will be conducted by the research team. By understanding
tree recruitment and the vertebrates that depend on them, this study will i)
identify the species that are limited by recruitment, including the habitats and
stages where limitation occurs, ii) quantify the relationship with vertebrate
activity, and iii) evaluate predictive distributions of change that account for
climate-vertebrate interactions fitted to data. Quantifying tree fecundity and
animal-consumer relationships at biogeographic scales will provide a foundation
for the next generation of efforts to understand food web implications of
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.