* 2211557
* SHF: Medium: Automating High Level Synthesis via Graph-Centric Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yizhou Sun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Domain-specific accelerators (DSAs), such as those developed in recent years to
accelerate deep learning applications, have been shown to offer significant
performance and energy efficiency over general-purpose CPUs to meet the ever-
increasing performance needs. However, DSAs are hard to design and require deep
hardware and circuit-design knowledge to achieve high performance, which are
lacking by most software programmers. Although the recent advances in high-level
synthesis (HLS) tools made it possible to compile high-level software programs
to circuit designs, one still needs to have extensive experience to perform
microarchitecture optimizations by restructuring or augmenting the programs,
which presents a significant barrier to a typical application-domain expert or
software developer to design a DSA. The project aims to leverage machine
learning and AI techniques to automate microarchitecture optimization and enable
a typical software programmer to be able to design highly efficient hardware
DSAs, with the quality comparable to those designed by well-trained circuit
designers. As a result, it will enable wider and more rapid adoption of
customized computing using DSAs to achieve significant improvement in computing
efficiency. This project also plans to integrate the research with education to
expose students to exciting opportunities in applying AI and ML techniques to
electronic design automation, and broaden the participation in computing via
high-school summer programs and partnership with the Center for Excellence in
Engineering and Diversity (CEED) and Women in Engineering at
UCLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses two challenges in automating
program transformation for HLS microarchitecture optimization: (1) the
evaluation of each HLS design is time-consuming; and (2) the HLS design space is
extremely large for brute-force search. The project develops a fully automated
framework, named DeepAccel, for evaluating and optimizing the microarchitecture
of a DSA design without the invocation of the time-consuming HLS tools. It
represents the input C/C++ program as one or a set of graphs with the proper
data-flow and control-flow information, including auto-inserted optimization
directives (pragmas), and then makes use of the latest advances in graph-based
machine learning (ML) and ML-driven optimizations to quickly evaluate each
solution candidate and guide the optimization process. The approach is
transformative, including the following research components: (1) the project
tackles the fundamental representation problem on how to represent programs and
associated transformations via graph-representation learning so one can apply
the latest advances in deep learning, such as graph neural networks, knowledge
distillation, meta-learning, and casual inferencing, to HLS design optimization;
(2) the project designs trustworthy and adaptive deep-learning models for HLS
performance prediction based on biased and sparsely labeled dataset; and (3) the
project uses reinforcement learning and other scalable search algorithms to
effectively cope with the combinatoric explosion of the search space. Based on
these capabilities, DeepAccel is expected to automate the DSA design process for
most performance-oriented software programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.