* 2211951
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: From Acoustic Signal to Morphosyntactic Analysis in One End-to-End Neural System
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Graham Neubig, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2026
* USD 897,998.00

There are approximately 7,000 languages in the world today, but this number is
declining precipitously.&lt;br/&gt;Even many languages that currently have
thousands upon thousands of speakers are likely to fall out&lt;br/&gt;of use
within a generation. For the speakers of these languages, this represents a
tragic loss of cultural&lt;br/&gt;and linguistic heritage, which are important
anchors of their social identity. Each language also
carries&lt;br/&gt;irreplaceable data about language as a phenomenon of human
behavior—the limits of its variation and&lt;br/&gt;the patterns in its structure
and development. Linguists and language activists are currently working
to&lt;br/&gt;quickly and comprehensively document as many languages as possible.
In the unfortunate event that a&lt;br/&gt;language fades from use, documentation
ensures that its data will remain available for future cultural
or&lt;br/&gt;scientific analysis. This project partially automates the process
of language documentation using tools&lt;br/&gt;from Natural Language Processing
and Machine Learning. It differs from similar projects in using
one&lt;br/&gt;integrated system to process the sounds of speech and the
structure of words, instead of using two or&lt;br/&gt;more separate components.
With the collaboration of native speaker scholars, the researchers are
applying&lt;br/&gt;their methodology to four languages: Highland Puebla Nahuatl,
Yoloxóchitl Mixtec, San Pedro Amuzgos&lt;br/&gt;Amuzgo, and North Slope
Iñupiaq.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will dramatically transform
the landscape of automatic morphosyntactic and&lt;br/&gt;morphophonological
analysis by introducing an end-to-end system that consumes speech as an input
and&lt;br/&gt;produces interlinear annotations as an output. The research team
proposes to build an end-to-end system,&lt;br/&gt;a single neural net that, with
small amounts of labeled data produced by native speaker linguists,
can&lt;br/&gt;directly convert recorded speech to analyzed text, producing four
outputs: (1) surface transcription, (2)&lt;br/&gt;morphological segmentation of
surface forms, (3) an underlying or canonical form for each
morpheme,&lt;br/&gt;and (4) a gloss or standardized label for each morpheme. The
proposed single end-to-end neural network&lt;br/&gt;represents the first attempt
to integrate the four aforementioned tasks into a single neural network,
avoiding&lt;br/&gt;the error-propagation problems that have plagued earlier
attempts at creating a pipeline and mitigating the&lt;br/&gt;complexity of the
technology for end-users. The researchers also propose innovative ways to
incorporate linguistic&lt;br/&gt;knowledge into neural networks, including the
use of differentiable weighted finite-state transducers,&lt;br/&gt;which are
independently motivated by an iterative self-training architecture. This
approach to iterative self training,&lt;br/&gt;in its own right, will represent
an advance in machine learning — a new algorithm for upweighting&lt;br/&gt;words
and morphemes. The research also makes significant contributions to
computational morphology.&lt;br/&gt;It includes a simple but expressive
modification to existing schemes for segmentation and glossing,
specifically&lt;br/&gt;for the representation of discontinuous morphemes.
Furthermore, the proposal extends popular&lt;br/&gt;approaches to morphological
analysis (e.g., UniMorph) by systematically addressing derivation as well
as&lt;br/&gt;inflection. This proposal addresses glossing of reduplication and
noun-incorporation, which earlier work&lt;br/&gt;has
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.