* 2211939
* HCC: Medium: Improving data visualization and analysis tools to support reasoning about analysis assumptions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Matthew Kay, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,194,588.00

Using statistics to model data often requires making assumptions about what the
data represent, including the nature of underlying patterns and errors. For
example, an analyst interested in the relationship between wealth and age might
remove extremely low or high reported ages from her data as outliers, and choose
to model the remaining data using a linear model, which implies that age
increases wealth by some constant factor. Her results could imply substantially
different conclusions about how wealth and age relate compared to an analysis
that made different decisions about which data to include. One way for analysts
to account for such sensitivity is by reporting the results of many reasonable
analyses given a dataset and questions they want to answer using the data.
Unfortunately, existing data analysis and visualization tools offer little
support for reasoning about such a “multiverse analysis.” They provide limited
support for comparison of multiple models and visualizations that make different
choices, and even less support in helping analysts reason about and express
those choices. Further, there are few known ways to effectively convey both
uncertainty in the results of a given analysis and uncertainty related to the
assumptions made in that analysis. This project’s goal is to improve multiverse
analysis: to better understand how analysts currently think about multiverse
analysis, and to identify needs, opportunities, and approaches to help analysts
use multiverse analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these
challenges to expressing hard-to-quantify uncertainty related to analysis
choices by creating new methods and tools to help analysts define, reason about,
and express multiple alternative ways they could analyze their data. The
research will focus on two common types of tools analysts use: visual analysis
software that makes it easy to plot and compare data, and computational
notebooks that allow for more seamless integration of code and narrative
commentary. The project team will develop new user interfaces and programming
libraries to elicit analysts’ knowledge, as well as new visual representations
and interaction techniques by which an analyst can compare between alternative
models or analysis paths. The project will also produce novel software
infrastructure to make conducting and evaluating multiple analyses feasible
within existing tools and workflows. Further, the team will develop ways to
better communicate multiverse analyses: ways to make multiverse analysis reports
shareable, interactive documents that contain both the analysis code and figures
as well as narrative context, and empirical results describing how different
representations of plausible analyses impact readers’ understanding. These
research activities will be guided by the results of formative studies with
real-world analysts that will address gaps in existing knowledge about the
difficulties analysts face in defining and reasoning about alternative models or
analysis steps they could have taken. All study results and computational tools
will be made freely and publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.