* 2211914
* GP-EXTRA: Using a Multidisciplinary Approach to Environment Geo-Risk Analysis Careers
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Camellia Okpodu, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2023
* USD 320,443.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA) in partnership with
Louisiana University Marine Consortium (LUMCON) will use several of the
geoscience-related grand challenges identified by an Integrate Project,
including but not limited to, eutrophication, erosion, environmental stability,
environmental change, water and food production, the life cycle of water-borne
pathogens and carbon cycling to introduce students to the Geosciences. The
project between XULA and LUMCON will develop students' ability to address
transdisciplinary problems (sustainable agriculture, conservation, resource
management, energy, carbon) by using data visualization and analysis skills
applied to authentic data. Faculty from across the College of Arts and Science
(including Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Public Health and Business) will work on
this project. Faculty will use the Integrate model to develop a field course at
the LUMCON research station. Students will work with a XULA faculty mentor, who
will partner with LUMCOM faculty experts on topics in geology, chemistry,
atmospheric science, sustainability, GIS and water monitoring. Environmental
Geosciences, including Geo-risk Analysis, which has a strong emphasis on real
practical applications and uses state-of-the-art methodology, which are of
interest to governments, corporations and NGO sectors worldwide will also be
included. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;As an established best practice
this project aims to reshape the image of what it means to be a Geoscientist. In
addition to the field and course work, students will have opportunities to
network with geoscience professionals from academia, federal agencies, and non-
profit organizations with the objective of helping them to identify key
geoscience career skills, as well as helping them to identify with the
profession. The specific objectives of this project will be 1) to utilize the
ERA-E model as a strategy to prepare students for the workforce with hands-on
experiences that utilize field studies, 2) to create an Integrative Geo-Risk
Analysis and Water Management Certificate, and 3) to provide mentoring, coaching
and networking for both the student and faculty participants in this program
using existing platforms. Findings will be shared with both the academic and
professional communities via a dedicated website on the University's website.
The PI team plans to host workshops (specifically targeted at other minority-
servicing institutions) and organizational meetings around topics of Environment
Geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.