* 2211894
* 230Th/U Dating of Megafaunal Remains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gifford Miller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 230,254.00

While there has been longstanding interest in the role humans play in large-
bodied animal extinctions across many continents, it is often challenging to
settle without precisely dated evidence of both early human presence and the
last appearances of large animals prior to extinction. Researchers will
undertake to clarify the earliest arrival of humans and the timing of
extinctions of large animals on one continent. Previous scholarship on the
timing of human arrival has utilized other dating techniques that are either
poorly suited for the time interval of interest, or they require difficult-to-
verify assumptions. This topic of research also relates to the general question
of human impact on the environment in the past: do animal extinctions correlate
in time with natural climatic changes, or human-driven environmental changes,
such as landscape modification? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will further
develop a promising new approach to uranium-thorium (U-Th) dating of large avian
eggshells. Fossils and eggshells of large extinct flightless birds, are found in
archaeological and paleontological sites. The proposed new dating approach is
potentially applicable over the past 500 thousand years and will be especially
useful to date archaeological sites representing the time when humans first
arrived on the continent. Using U-Th dating the project aims to clarify the
timing and tempo of both early human arrival and the extinction of a large
flightless bird, which may have been impacted by human arrival via predation and
environmental modifications leading to loss of food sources and/or habitats. In
addition, the results of this work will anchor other previously published
records of environmental changes in time, allowing a more rigorous assessment of
the relationship of human arrival to environmental changes. These research goals
will integrate training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.