* 2211884
* SBIR Phase I:  CNT-Enhanced carbon fiber structural composite with high performance and spec-tunability
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Hongjun Zeng, ADAXIUS CORP
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project will be materials that are
lighter weight, tougher and more durable than existing carbon fiber reinforced
polymer composites. This will allow companies incorporating these materials into
their products to save energy by making products and vehicles that are lighter
weight and also to improve range and fuel economy which will subsequently reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. In aerospace applications payloads will be reduced
saving both money and energy. In defense applications, tougher materials will
improve reliability and reduce field repairs, which can be dangerous. In all
these applications, the likelihood of catastrophic failures is reduced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will enhance the strength of carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites (CFRPs)
by improving the fiber/matrix integration and developing an interlayer (sizing
layer) to protect CFRPs from being broken down by stress accumulated at the
interface. This project will minimize or eliminate the interfacial weak points
by using a patented surface engineering process. The process functionalizes the
surface of the carbon fibers and dramatically promotes the wettability of the
matrix resin on the fiber surface. The principal technical objective is to
develop a surface engineering process that will improve the fiber/matrix
wettability. Distinguished from the reported methods, the proposed surface
engineering will process fibers larger than 100 mm in any dimension and more
than five plies per load. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) will be added to the sizing
polymer to facilitate stress transfer between the carbon fiber reinforcements
and the matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.