* 2211322
* Using Caenorhabditis viruses to identify the ecological role of spillover outcome on the evolution of disease emergence
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* David Kennedy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 06/30/2025
* USD 714,745.00

The emergence of new infectious diseases can have important consequences for the
health of many organisms. Most emerging diseases arise when a pathogen of one
host species infects a new host species and then evolves the ability to
replicate well within hosts and transmit well between hosts. When the pathogen
transmits itself well enough to remain in the new host species indefinitely,
this is referred to as a disease emergence event. This phenomenon is also known
as a "host jump". Preventing host jumps depends critically on identifying traits
associated with disease emergence so that actions can be taken early to stop the
spread of the disease. However, knowledge of the factors that facilitate or
prevent host jumps is limited. This research seeks to identify the conditions
following exposure that determine risk of emergence. The findings of this
research will have direct relevance for conservation efforts, food security and
human health. The researcher will also widely disseminate the knowledge gained
from this work to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathogens can be classified
by spillover potential. SP1 pathogens are incapable of infecting new hosts. SP2
pathogens can infect new hosts but not transmit. SP3 pathogens can infect new
hosts and transmit but not well enough to persist. Pathogens in any of these
three categories could presumably, under the right circumstances, evolve to
become established pathogens. Current theory assumes that emergence risk is
highest for SP3, followed by SP2, followed by SP1 pathogens. Despite these
theoretical predictions, little empirical work has explored how emergence risk
varies by spillover class. This research will use experimental and theoretical
approaches to challenge this theory. It will identify the underlying mechanisms
that explain variation in emergence success using a novel experimental system
(Caenorhabditis hosts and viruses native to C. elegans and C. briggsae). The
Caenorhabditis-virus system allows for pathogen transmission in large, replicate
host populations. Furthermore, preliminary data has shown that host-virus
combinations span the range of SP1, SP2, and SP3 pathogens. Specifically, the
research will first characterize virus dynamics following exposure of
Caenorhabditis hosts to their non-native viruses. Second, the work will
characterize the evolution of pathogens following exposure of Caenorhabditis
hosts to their non-native viruses. Finally, the work will develop mathematical
models connecting virus dynamics to host jump success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Environmental Biology (Evolutionary
Processes Cluster) and the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
(Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.