* 2211895
* Determining the origin of Haxby lineaments using magnetotelluric and bathymetric data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 695,330.00

An unsolved mystery of the deep ocean seafloor is the presence of regular, wave-
like fluctuations in the strength of Earth’s gravity above the seafloor. These
features repeat over regular intervals and can be clearly detected by satellites
orbiting the Earth. There are three theories for the processes forming the
gravity fluctuations: seafloor cracking as ocean crust moves away from mid-ocean
ridges and cools, mantle convection cells, or melt channels beneath the crust.
This project will find out which of these theories is correct - or perhaps
discover the answer is something altogether unexpected - by acquiring
geophysical data at a region in the Pacific Ocean where the gravity features are
particularly prominent. Regardless of what is causing the gravity fluctuations,
the answer will reveal more about the dynamics of our planet beneath the oceans
and how plate tectonics works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study
is to determine the origin of Haxby lineaments which are small, periodic
undulations in the gravity field above oceanic lithosphere that, despite decades
of study, remain mysterious. This project will deploy 40 ocean-bottom broadband
magnetotelluric instruments to measure variations in mantle conductivity in the
lithosphere and asthenosphere, and will map the seafloor topography and sonar
backscatter, in a 200 km by 600 km area northeast of the Marquesas Islands in
the Pacific Ocean basin. By correlating conductivity, bathymetry, and gravity,
the project will be able to distinguish between multiple competing models
attempting to explain the Haxby lineaments. The proposed experiment would
effectively discriminate between three hypotheses: thermal contraction of the
lithosphere, small-scale convection in the asthenosphere, and asthenospheric
return flow channels. The thermal contraction model predicts that bathymetry
should be positively correlated with the gravity rolls without an asthenospheric
component. The small-scale convection and return flow channels models suggest an
asthenospheric source of the gravity lineaments - hot, low-density mantle
detectable by magnetotelluric data - but differ in how the conductivity
anomalies correlate to topography and gravity. The results will help determine
the nature of lithosphere-asthenosphere dynamics far from ridges or subduction
zones, including whether there is partial melt beneath older lithosphere (42
Ma).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.