* 2211045
* CNS: Core: Small: Consistent, Geo-Distributed Data Stores on the Public Cloud Using Erasure Coding
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Viveck Cadambe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 593,845.00

Cloud-based data stores employ data replication combined with algorithms that
allow consistent, concurrent access to data to offer low response times to their
global client-bases. Erasure coding (EC) is a generalization of replication
known to be more storage efficient for the same fault tolerance in theory.
However, reaping the benefits of EC for geo-distributed data stores in practice
poses several new scientific challenges. The overarching goal of this project is
to address these challenges by developing a comprehensive understanding of the
response time vs. cost trade-off for EC-based consistent geo-distributed stores.
The research will be conducted in the following four thrusts: (i) development of
EC techniques and distributed algorithms to satisfy consistency criteria known
as eventual and causal consistency, (ii) development of efficient, EC-compatible
reconfiguration algorithms that provably maintain consistency despite changes in
object configurations, (ii) development of analytical models of performance and
cost, and associated optimization frameworks, and (iv) integration of developed
techniques into Apache Cassandra. The proposed research will be conducted in the
context of the public cloud, where inter-DC latencies and pricing information
are readily available allowing competing schemes to be compared in a fair
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research could lead to cost reductions
for geo-distributed data stores hosted on public clouds, which are fundamental
building blocks for several applications including collaborative editing, social
media, financial transactions, reservation systems, and multi-player gaming. The
validation plan involves experiments performed using an Apache Cassandra-based
prototype that will be made open source. The prototype will serve as a testbed
for other researchers and engineers to plug in their own algorithms and compare
findings. The proposed research has a cross-disciplinary nature and will be
supplemented with an education plan that involves development of survey articles
and curricular integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.