* 2211134
* I-Corps: Universal Linear Integrated Photonic Device for Analog Computing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Mohammad Ali Miri, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of integrated universal linear photonic devices that perform
fundamental computing operations with light. This invention performs real-time
matrix-vector multiplication that is essential for classical and quantum optical
information processing applications. In classical computing, this device is core
for developing photonic chips for unconventional computing with photonic spin
simulators, neuromorphic computing, and machine learning with analog photonic
neural networks. In quantum information processing and quantum machine learning,
a similar functionality is required for performing linear operations in photonic
integrated circuits that manipulate quantum states of light. In addition to
applications in optical computing, the proposed component may serve as a
universal multi-input multi-output device for ultra-high-speed manipulation of
light in photonic integrated circuits for a broad spectrum of purposes ranging
from analog optical signal processing to metrology and sensing and involve
applications in telecommunication and LiDAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of photonic integrated circuits that perform
analog matrix-vector multiplications with light. A universal photonic device
that can perform arbitrary linear operations is an indispensable component of
classical and quantum optical computing, while it also serves as a critical
multiport circuit for advanced manipulation of light in photonic integrated
circuits. One of the main limitations of integrated photonic matrix multipliers
is their relatively large, compared to the wavelength of light, feature sizes
that prevents their scaling to large numbers of ports. The proposed technology
introduces a new architecture for realizing compact photonic circuits that
perform arbitrary linear operations by dense packing of two building blocks:
waveguides and phase shifters. The plan is to develop scalable and energy-
efficient integrated photonic circuits that can perform arbitrary complex linear
operations with light by utilizing this architecture. In addition, the goal is
to develop programmable photonic circuits for general-purpose applications by
incorporating tunable phase shifters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.