* 2211046
* Conference: Phytobiomes 2022:  Bridging the Broad Range of Disciplines Involved in Complex Systems of Plant-based Agriculture
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Dusti Gallagher, INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE FOR PHYTOBIOMES RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2023
* USD 19,710.00

Plants interact with complex communities of organisms, and these interactions
are influenced by environmental conditions as well as land and agricultural
management practices. A phytobiome is a plant (phyto-) in a distinct
geographical unit (-biome) that includes the plant itself, all micro-and macro­
organisms living in, on, or around the plant and the environment, including
soil, air, water, weather, and climate. Understanding the diversity and dynamic
processes occurring within phytobiomes is critical to ensuring the sustained
health and productivity of crops, plant ecosystems, and, ultimately, consumers
of plants and plant products. The 4th International Conference entitled
“Phytobiomes: Bridging the Broad Range of Disciplines Involved in Complex
Systems of Plant-Based Agriculture” will be held September 13 -15, 2022 in
Denver (CO) and will bring together a broad community of U.S. and international
researchers and scientists from the public and private sectors to collectively
advance the newly emerging field of phytobiomes research. Funding is provided to
support the participation of early career investigators, postdoctoral fellows,
and students through travel awards and by providing real-time virtual access to
conference sessions as well as by publication of conference proceedings in an
open access scientific journal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phytobiomes 2022 will
highlight cutting edge, multidisciplinary research in the study of microbiomes
and the interactions between microbiomes and other phytobiome components. In
addition, specific activities are designed to present students with an array of
career opportunities to inform and recruit the next generation of plant
scientists. Topical sessions include Phytobiomes &amp; Farm Sustainability,
Exploring Interactions within Phytobiomes, Predicting Life in Earth System
Models, Imaging and Modeling of the Phytobiome, Communication among Microbes in
the Phytobiome, Phytobiome Engineering, Paradigm Shift in Breeding for
Sustainable and Precision Agricultural Practices, Regulatory Challenges
Affecting Advances in the Phytobiome, Soils and Rhizosphere, and Applying
Phytobiome-based Solutions. It is envisioned that these discussions will lead to
the identification of strategic research priorities, technology or resource
needs, and the establishment of collaborative, multidisciplinary research
partnerships. Outcomes include the development and distribution of white papers,
as well as education and outreach activities that will engage the scientific and
agricultural communities and society at large to educate the next generation of
early career professionals and students about the opportunities within
phytobiomes science and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.