* 2211704
* Regimes of particle settling for finite-sized particles in the inertial range of turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Nimish Pujara, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 310,100.00

Particle settling is affected by turbulence in various environmental and
industrial settings. Examples include vertical fluxes of nutrients via the
settling of plankton and marine snow particles, deposition of marine debris such
as microplastics on river, lake and sea beds, and settling tanks in wastewater
treatment facilities. An accurate understanding of settling velocities in such
applications would improve efficiency and minimize environmental impacts, but
gaining this understanding is challenging since such particles are often too
large to be modelled as small points. Thus, the principal aim of this project is
to understand the underlying physics that leads to altered settling rates of
larger particles in turbulent flows. The project will also include the design of
a bench-top experimental facility that will provide research, education, and
outreach opportunities for undergraduate students in the Civil and Environmental
Engineering department at UW-Madison. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Settling of finite-
sized particles in turbulence are characterized by (1) particle interactions
with turbulent flow that occur at Reynolds numbers above unity and (2) complex
and multiscale particle-turbulence interactions as the particles distort the
local flow around them. Previous work in this regime has found that particle
settling rates in turbulence are reduced relative to terminal velocities in
quiescent fluid, but it is unclear how this should be understood in terms of the
underlying physical mechanisms. This project seeks to fill this gap in
understanding by conducting a thorough experimental investigation into settling
regimes of finite-sized particles, exploring a range of particle sizes,
densities, and volume fractions. The experiments will use the newly constructed
octagonal turbulence chamber and three-dimensional high-speed camera
measurements of flow and particle motion. The focus will be on identifying new
scaling parameters that capture turbulence effects on particle settling rates,
including the effects of particle clustering. It is expected that this approach
will lead to the identification of mechanisms that alter particle settling rates
based on scaling laws that collapse data across a range of parameters. In turn,
this understanding will lead to a new predictive model that could inform future
designs in water treatment and ecosystem engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.