* 2211032
* Research: Asset-based Practices in Engineering Design (APRENDE): Formation of Engineers through a Funds of Knowledge Approach
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Joel Mejia, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 148,507.00

The Latinx (a gender-neutral term for Latinas/Latinos) population is a severely
underrepresented group in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) careers. As a result of this persistent underrepresentation, Latinx K-12
students lack role models with careers in these fields -- especially in
engineering. In addition, sometimes engineering in K-12 education is not
presented in a way that excites the interests of students from a variety of
ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Having full representation from all groups that
make up the rich and diverse talent in the U.S. is crucial to reach our full
potential for advancement in the STEM fields. Therefore, it is important to
understand how all students can be encouraged to pursue STEM degrees,
particularly Latinx students in middle school. The purpose of this project is to
explore how teachers, as immediate role models, can serve as mediators and
agents of positive change for Latinx middle school students. Teachers can become
agents of positive change when they learn how to integrate the knowledge, skills
and experiences (also known as "funds of knowledge") that students bring into
the classroom to engineering content. It is important for teachers to understand
how engineering connects with the realities of Latinx students' lived
experiences at home and at their communities to provide students with better
opportunities to engage in engineering. This study seeks to build teacher
capacity to help students link these in-school and out-of-school experiences.
Doing so provides a foundation for students to get excited and feel empowered to
become future engineers. By building a more inclusive learning environment for
engineering education, teachers of K-12 students, including their Latinx
students, can contribute to diversifying and increasing the numbers of students
prepared to pursue careers in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there
is little research around how to develop teachers' capacity to integrate funds
of knowledge with engineering, or the impact of such integration on students.
The goal of this project, therefore, is (1) to explore how and to what extent
the integration of funds of knowledge with engineering design can facilitate
Latinx students' interest in engineering, and (2) how to develop teachers'
capacities for activating and acknowledging students' funds of knowledge. The
project focuses on middle school students and teachers in a predominantly Latinx
area in the U.S.-Mexico border with a high ELL population. It (1) offers
teachers the opportunities, structure, and support to recognize, value, and
activate Latinx students' funds of knowledge in relation to engineering; and (2)
creates a structure and culture that helps Latinx students cultivate their own
awareness of their funds of knowledge, as well as their interest in and
knowledge of engineering. The sample includes eight middle school mathematics
and science teachers, and one engineering teacher. Each teacher is expected to
contribute to the development and implementation of curricula that integrate
funds of knowledge in engineering contexts with at least one class of 25
students, totaling 225 students per year of implementation. This mixed methods
study uses data from observations, interviews, digital logs, focus groups,
artifacts and surveys, as well as both quantitative and qualitative analyses
methods, to study how the integration of funds of knowledge and engineering
occurs. The study addresses the need to promote a more equitable formation of
engineers where diverse voices are acknowledged. Thus, the knowledge generated
in this study is essential for creating future engineers and culturally
responsive teachers. Most importantly, this study explores what teachers and
schools can do to support engineering learning, excite students, and motivate
them to become outstanding, creative, and productive
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.