* 2211996
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Integrated Verification of IoT and Real-time Communication Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Stephanie Balzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2025
* USD 625,000.00

Internet of things (IoT) and real-time systems have become pervasive in society,
ranging from convenient gadgets to life saving tools. Correctness of the
programs governing these systems is paramount. Unfortunately, programming
languages used to build such systems lack built-in verification methodology.
Research so far has focused on formal methods, deriving an abstract model of the
program, which is then verified. This approach inherently suffers from a
disconnect between the program and the model: the model may be inaccurate and
get out of sync with the program, which evolves. The project's novelties are to
integrate the verification of IoT and real-time systems with their development
through the use of session types. The project contributes a new programming
language and type system that enable verification of IoT and real-time systems.
Such systems consist of many processes that communicate by messages, and
verification entails ensuring that processes adhere to the intended protocol of
communication. To verify communication protocols, the project develops new
session types applicable to the domain of IoT and real-time systems. The
project's impacts are the advancement of session type theory to address the
challenges posed by this new application domain and the training and development
of Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notions of periodicity, rate,
delays, and time in general, while common to IoT and real-time systems, are
lacking in session type theory. The project develops a new session type theory
capable of expressing these notions. The development forces a foundational
reconsideration of the definition of communication compatibility (a.k.a. session
duality). The introduction of time demands consideration of the rate at which
outputs and inputs are produced and consumed, respectively. The investigators
start with the Curry-Howard correspondence established between intuitionistic
linear session types and the session-typed pi-calculus. Building on this
foundation, the investigators integrate the various facets of time-aware
communication including: inherent periodicity, synchronous communication,
asynchronous communication, delays, sporadic events, and event-based interaction
of a process. The project will produce a formalization with proofs and an
implementation in Rust. Metatheoretic results will include statement and proof
of novel temporal correctness properties, using the logical relations
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.