* 2211001
* Collaborative Research: Prechlorination, aging, and backwashing effects on spatiotemporal ultrafiltration fouling:  Optimizing productivity by combining experiments and theory
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Francesca Bernardi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 109,767.00

Worldwide, approximately 4 billion people experience severe water shortages at
least one month per year and over 500 million people experience shortages
throughout the year. Wastewater reclamation is increasingly being utilized by
water utilities in the United States and worldwide to increase their supply of
drinking water. In many wastewater-reclamation plants, a hollow fiber (HF)
ultrafiltration (UF) membrane system is combined with a disinfection
pretreatment step (e.g., chlorination) to remove suspended solids in secondary
treated wastewater including bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens. However,
the filtration efficiency and water production decrease during operation as the
pores of the membrane HFs become clogged by the removed suspended solids. Thus,
the HF UF membrane modules of wastewater reclamation systems needed frequent
cleaning (multiple times per day) during their operation. The overarching goal
of this project is to develop and validate a new generation of mathematical and
computational models that could guide the operation and optimization of an HF UF
membrane system with the aim of maximizing its water production while reducing
its energy consumption during wastewater reclamation. To advance this goal, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to carry out an integrated experimental
and modeling research program to build and validate mathematical/computational
models of membrane operation that take into account the effects of membrane
module geometry, fiber packing density, and chlorine pretreatment on the
filtration efficiency and water production of an HF UF membrane system. The
successful completion of this research will benefit society though the
development of new fundamental knowledge and modeling tools that could guide the
operation of UF HF membrane systems in wastewater reclamation plants to improve
and maximize water production while reducing the energy required to operate such
systems. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of three graduate students at
Florida State University, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hollow fiber (HF) ultrafiltration (UF) membrane
modules/systems are increasingly being used in wastewater reclamation plants to
remove suspended solids, bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens from secondary
treated wastewater. However, the development of validated mathematical and
computational models that could accurately simulate the operation and
performance of an UF HF membrane module/system has remained elusive. The goal of
this project is to derive a mechanistic understanding of spatiotemporal
variations in the performance of HF UF membrane module/system over multiple time
and spatial scales. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs)
propose to leverage analytical solutions of fluid flow equations starting with a
single fiber, moving to a “few” fibers arranged in different patterns to
reproduce the geometry and hydraulic properties of a commercial HF UF membrane
module. In addition, the PIs propose to develop and validate a computational
model that could be used to simulate the performance of an HF UF membrane module
with the goal of identifying optimal operational parameters including chlorine
pretreatment concentration, the flux/pressure regimes during forward filtration,
and the membrane backwash pressure and run time during cleaning. The successful
completion of this research has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge and validated
mathematical/computational models to guide the design, operation, and
optimization of HF UF membrane modules/systems in wastewater reclamation plants.
To implement the educational and training goals of this project, the PIs propose
to develop an online course to increase public literacy in water filtration and
water reuse in collaboration with Lifeology—a platform that brings together
scientists, communicators, and writers to design and produce educational
materials to engage broader audiences. In addition, the PIs plan to leverage
existing outreach programs at their respective institutions to design and
implement K-12 teacher training programs with a focus on the development of
lesson plans related to water quality and treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.