* 2211744
* HNDS-R: Extracting the Backbone of Unweighted Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Zachary Neal, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 108,970.00

In this project, methods are developed for extracting the backbone from dense,
unweighted networks to facilitate their analysis. Networks influence all domains
of society, including the diffusion of information and misinformation, the
contagion of illness, the passage of legislation, the emergence and maintenance
of norms, and the formation of close relationships. In many cases, these
networks can be difficult to analyze because they contain so many relationships,
and because the strength of these relationships is unknown. Backbone extraction
involves identifying and retaining only the most important relationships, which
yields a simpler network that can be more readily analyzed and visualized. In
this project, in addition, the widely employed backbone software is extended to
include these newly developed methods so that researchers can use them easily.
This work facilitates the analysis of networks that arise in many different
contexts and are studied in many different fields. It also involves the
development of training materials to guide researchers in the selection of
backbone methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of methods for extracting the
backbone from unweighted networks proceeds in three stages. First, the common
steps involved in existing backbone extraction methods are identified. Next,
each of these steps is implemented into a new function in the backbone package
for R. This function allows for the application of both existing backbone models
and new backbone models described by novel recombinations of common steps.
Finally, the performance of each existing and each new backbone model is
evaluated by extracting the backbone from simulated dense unweighted networks
that have been embedded with hidden community or hub structures. Once the most
promising backbone models are identified, their software implementations are
refined for scalability, allowing them to be applied to large networks.
Additionally, software documentation and training materials are prepared that
provide guidance to researchers using backbone models and the associated
backbone package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.