* 2211054
* INCLUDES Alliance Community Workshop: Toward Realizing NSF's Vision for Systemic Broadening Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Catalyzing the STEM enterprise to work collaboratively for inclusive change, is
the goal of the NSF INCLUDES program. Proposals includes alliances,
demonstration pilots, and conferences/workshops organized into cohorts,
depending on funding date. This work is in line with NSF’s mission to promote
the progress of science. The long-term effect of the national network is a STEM
workforce that reflects the population of the Nation. While current INCLUDES
alliances each have made progress and can demonstrate impact of their individual
goals, continuing to work independently will fall significantly short of the
combined potential. This project believes that the alliances can come
significantly closer to reaching overall INCLUDES program goals by building
synergy and collaboration of activities across the alliances. Numerous
interactions among Cohorts 1 and 2 leaders have led to the formation of the
INCLUDES Community Alliance that proposes a 2-day virtual workshop to bring
together and engage all three INCLUDES Alliance cohorts to leverage the
collective knowledge, lessons learned, and specific activities to accelerate
change in broadening STEM participation (BP) in realizing NSF’s bold vision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed virtual two-day workshop will further
capitalize on the synergy generated in the 2021 convening of the INCLUDES
Alliance collective. The organization of the workshop will use an inclusive,
participatory approach. There will be full involvement of the Alliance team
during pre-conference and post-conference interaction. Attendees and the
planning group include members of the CAHSI INCLUDES’ backbone team, NSF
INCLUDES program officers and two representatives from of the INCLUDES Alliance
Community team. The planning group invitees were selected based on those who
have the breadth and depth of experience in and knowledge of working with
complex systems to achieve bold goals and objectives. Ultimately, an equitable
representation of network members will be present in order to ensure outcomes
are usable and appropriate. The Alliances will select which representatives they
would like to represent them as there may be emergent leaders who are not in a
leadership role. The event needs representatives who have an overview of how all
the parts of the alliance and its goals fit together in order to best determine
how each alliance might relate to others. Discussions are ongoing to finalize
the agenda and guiding questions, as well as who would be best at presenting at
the event. Additionally, the external evaluator and thought leaders have
experience working with STEM projects of this magnitude and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.