* 2211944
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Softwarizing Millimeter-wave Radio Access Networks (RANs) at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Tingjun Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Emerging applications in augmented reality, connected autonomous vehicles, and
industrial IoT systems impose demanding requirements on next-generation mobile
networks that can hardly be met alone with radio resources below 7 GHz.
Therefore, 5G and beyond networks have embraced radios operating in millimeter-
wave (mmWave) frequency bands, which offer 25 times or more bandwidth worldwide.
On the other hand, mmWave radio networks require the dense deployment of
infrastructure nodes to achieve desirable coverage, because mmWave radio signals
suffer from high propagation loss and are vulnerable to blockage and mobility.
Unfortunately, mmWave infrastructure nodes, e.g., gNodeB in 5G, are made of
specialized, dedicated hardware and as a result, their dense deployment would
incur formidable capital and operational cost. The goal of the proposed project
is to reduce the cost of mmWave radio infrastructure nodes by softwarizing their
radio access network (RAN) functions and serving them from data centers close to
end users, i.e., edge data centers, therefore facilitating network
densification. More importantly, it will allow for previously impossible
flexibility in network implementation and configuration as well as efficiency in
resource allocation across the network and the edge data center. At the societal
level, this project will fuel the ongoing revolution of mobile network
virtualization and accelerate the development and deployment of next-generation
network systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight toward addressing the
challenges associated with softwarizing mmWave RANs at the edge is to exploit
the massive data parallelism inside the mmWave baseband and its inherent
structures, with programmable hardware in all domains. The project targets the
following scientific contributions in three interrelated research thrusts. (i) A
low-latency software realization of the mmWave physical layer for commodity
server clusters suitable for edge deployment. (ii) Adaptive RAN configuration
and in-network compression schemes that cope with the limited fronthaul capacity
in practice, without substantially increasing the cost of mmWave infrastructure
nodes. (iii) Novel sensing and imaging schemes based on mmWave radio signals
intended for communications. These include sensing with a single mmWave
infrastructure node and sensing that leverages multiple coordinated mmWave nodes
to achieve previously impossible coverage and
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.