* 2211918
* III: SMALL: Scalable In-Database Prescriptive Analytics for Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Peter Haas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,995.00

Decision makers in a broad range of domains, such as finance, transportation,
manufacturing, and healthcare, often need to derive optimal decisions given a
set of constraints and objectives; that is, they need to employ "prescriptive
analytics". Traditional solutions to such constrained optimization problems,
while having generated billions of dollars, are typically application-specific,
complex, hard to use by non-optimization-experts, and do not generalize.
Further, the usual workflow requires slow, cumbersome, and error-prone data
movement between a database and predictive-modeling and optimization tools. All
of these problems are exacerbated by the unprecedented size of modern data-
intensive optimization problems. The goal of this project is to significantly
advance the technology underlying in-database prescriptive analytics to provide
seamless domain-independent, easy-to-use, and scalable decision-making tools
powered in the database system where the data typically reside. Specifically,
the project aims to augment prior work on in-database support for constrained
optimization problems with capabilities to handle dynamic environments. This is
because decision environments are typically highly dynamic, with data that is
uncertain and evolving, and decision problems that may be not precisely defined
and changing over time. The investigators will contribute new models and
evaluation algorithms that handle uncertain and evolving data and problem
variants at scale. The improved methods for integrating optimization with
database technology will help lower the barriers to use of prescriptive
analytics by domain experts who are not experts in optimization, thereby
amplifying the benefits of these planning and management techniques to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the project will extend prior methods
to handle data uncertainty at scale via in-database support for large-scale
stochastic integer linear programs (ILPs) that are specified by the user as
"stochastic package queries" (SPQs) using an extension of the SQL database query
language. Such a query selects an optimal set ("package") of tuples that satisfy
both per-tuple and global constraints. Supporting efficient processing of SPQs
entails development of fast approximate query evaluation algorithms with
accuracy guarantees. The investigators will next develop fast incremental and
progressive query evaluation techniques to allow for rapid what-if analysis and
planning. They will first focus on deterministic data and investigate strategies
to allow for incremental maintenance of a package result when the underlying
data or query changes slightly. The team of researchers will investigate several
pathways, such as reengineering the ILP solvers to exploit the special structure
of package queries in order to speed up intermediate steps in the initial query
evaluation and also facilitate incremental re-optimization. These results will
then be leveraged and extended to support incremental evaluation over uncertain
data. The project will investigate both how data uncertainty impacts the
incremental evaluation strategies designed for deterministic data and how to
handle additional factors that instigate change in the stochastic setting, such
as changes over time to the probability distribution of uncertain items. For the
latter, techniques to be considered include updating a package solution via
stochastic search, evaluating the effect of query and data changes via
stochastic sensitivity analysis, and speeding up incremental SPQ processing
using pre-computation techniques. The final stage of the project will integrate
the foregoing algorithms and extensions into a full-fledged system equipped to
handle large-scale uncertain data, with the ability to employ incremental
evaluation strategies to adapt to data and query
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.