* 2212430
* I-Corps:  AI-assisted Job Search in the Aftermath of the Covid-19 Crisis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Anant Nyshadham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that will help customer-facing businesses hire from
a pool of candidates that have no prior experience in the sector. The proposed
technology may be used by hiring managers in mid- to large-scale employers of
entry-level service workers. It is anticipated that the beachhead market will be
retail. The key insights from preliminary customer discovery were that in large
stores with &gt;10k employees, the turnover in entry level positions is very
high (e.g., 76% in retail in 2019) and each entry-level vacancy attracts a high
volume of applications (e.g., up to 1,000 applications per position). Applicants
for these vacancies are often indistinguishable given limited technical skills
and previous experience. Therefore, current screening process for entry-level
positions relies heavily on arbitrary filtering heuristics, individual
judgement, and interviews, and, as a result, can be particularly prone to
discrimination. In addition, employers aim to hire candidates with particular
soft skills (e.g., conscientiousness, attention to detail, intrinsic motivation,
communication), but find it difficult to objectively measure them. In addition,
the cost of replacing a worker who leaves, excluding lost productivity, is high
(typically 1.5 to 2.5 times the worker’s annual salary). By focusing on
psychometric and simulated tasks, the proposed technology: a) reduces the risk
of systemic discrimination while hiring; b) allows employers to cheaply, quickly
and fairly identify best-suited candidates from a pool of indistinguishable
candidates; c) have the ability to match workers to best-suited occupations by
documenting the transferability of skills across occupations and sectors. The
hypothesis is that the technology may reduce screening and hiring costs by more
than 60% per head hired, in addition to finding employees that attrit at a lower
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
machine learning classification algorithms that use psychometric profiles and
performance on simulated tasks to identify best-suited candidates for entry-
level customer facing occupations. These tasks have been designed in partnership
with employers in each industry to mirror actual work. To select the optimal
algorithm for each task, the proposed technology uses a cost function that takes
into account the losses to the employer from wrongfully rejecting qualified
individuals as well as from interviewing unqualified applicants. Additionally,
the proposed technology uses labor market parameters in balancing false positive
and false negative predictions in selecting and calibrating the algorithms,
which pushes even the frontier in this space, and is beyond the capabilities of
any practical solutions in the market today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.