* 2212721
* Engineering the Inclusive Mindset for the Future: A Blueprint for Systemic Change in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Karan Watson, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,046,069.00

This project is examining the current state of the engineering curriculum and
making recommendations regarding its future direction to meet the needs of the
society of tomorrow. Many reports have emerged in the recent past regarding
needed changes in engineering education for the future; however, this project
will go one step further and actually develop a Blueprint for a plan of action
in how we can achieve that vision. Through a partnership between the National
Academy of Engineering and the American Society for Engineering Education, the
project is laying the groundwork for a sea change in engineering education that
will transform our educational system far into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world is rapidly changing. We are entering an
age of exponential change. Who knows what is in store for us in the next few
decades? What does the future hold for the engineering profession? How will our
curriculum get us there? Through this project, we will conduct the planning
activities and write reports necessary to move us forward in understanding the
required characteristics of the engineer of the future as well as defining the
type of curricular changes we will need to realize this vision. Two primary
documents will be the outcomes from this project. Engineering the Inclusive
Mindset for the Future Report will be the culmination of more than a two-year of
effort on behalf of the American Society for Engineering Education and will
outline a vision of the changes needed for the engineering curriculum of the
future. The second document will outline the details of a blueprint (tactical
plan) for a larger project to transform engineering education. The blueprint
will inform a planned NAE Engineering 2050 report and will include a multi-year
action plan to implement the ASEE/NAE recommendations. In short, The NAE
Engineering of 2050 Report will describe where we need to be and the ASEE
Mindset Report will describe how to get there. The Blueprint for Change (action
plan) we develop will ensure that these two reports are not merely read, put on
a bookshelf, and forgotten but will be acted upon to produce real and lasting
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.