* 2212142
* SHF: Medium: Improving the Efficiency and Applicability of Decision Diagrams
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Andrew Miner, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 716,000.00

This project extends and improves binary decision diagrams (BDDs), an important
technology that enables efficient solution for combinatorial problems in a
variety of application domains, via automatic discovery and exploitation of
patterns. The project's novelties are to increase the types of patterns that
BDDs can utilize, and to unify several different varieties of decision diagrams
into a single, consistent framework with broader applications. The project's
impacts are theoretical advancements in BDD technology, significant improvements
to the speed and memory efficiency of BDD solution techniques, making them
suited to broader application areas that in the past have not relied on BDDs,
and an open-source software library implementing the new BDDs. The software not
only facilitates evaluation of the work on a variety of benchmark models, but
also lowers the adoption barriers for researchers in other areas. In addition,
the project incorporates research results in their graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, BDDs exist in two main but separate
versions: fully-reduced and zero-suppressed, which can be viewed as different
reduction rules that exploit different types of patterns. This project involves
integrating these two reduction rules, along with new ones, into a single
structure. This allows users to exploit all the reduction rules simultaneously,
without having to choose one over the other. Similarly, the project integrates
(historically separated) variants to represent non-boolean functions, namely
multi-terminal and edge-valued BDDs, and incorporates the new reduction rules.
The framework design (i.e., reduction rules and edge value types) is guided by a
variety of application domains, including both domains where BDDs have already
enjoyed widespread success (model checking, hardware verification, and
constraint problems) and domains where BDDs have potential to make substantial
impact in the near future (motion planning, logistics, and network
verification). The technical challenges of the project include developing rules
so that the combination of features do not interfere with each other (in
particular, so that every function has a unique representation in the BDD, even
when several reduction rules apply), improving BDD algorithms to exploit the new
rules, and finally implementing those algorithms efficiently in a software
library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.