* 2212241
* CNS Core: Medium: Detection and Analysis of Infrastructure Bottlenecks in a Cloud-Centric Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alexander Marder, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,108,000.00

The CoVID-19 pandemic and associated quarantine has accelerated the Internetâ€™s
fundamental shift from a peer-to-peer to a cloud-centric model. Our entire lives
have moved online, now predominantly mediated by services in the cloud, and
public clouds are rapidly evolving to meet increasing requirements and demands
from customers and end users. The importance of the clouds in the modern
Internet triggers questions regarding how well existing Internet backbone
networks support the applications and content now served from the clouds. Cloud
providers can afford the infrastructure upgrades to support the needs of low
latency or high throughput applications, but their ability to adapt
infrastructure to application demands ends at their network border. The
economics of deploying and operating transit backbone infrastructure combine
with the surge in traffic toward cloud services to induce performance
bottlenecks in the changing Internet landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes an ambitious effort to design measurement and analysis tools
that can transform our understanding of cloud connectivity performance and
reachability in the U.S. and around the world. Researchers currently lack the
measurement ability to even identify such bottlenecks at scale, much less assess
their impact on Internet users. The project is structured as two tasks that will
combine to reveal performance bottlenecks outside the cloud networks where the
high cost of deployment and operations leads to infrastructure bottlenecks for
cloud applications. The first task will develop novel techniques to identify
performance bottleneck links between cloud datacenters and thousands of publicly
accessible speed test servers, by synthesizing active measurements with TCP
flows. The second task will analyze the bottleneck links we identify with
comprehensive path measurements from cloud datacenters to the entire public
Internet, and we will develop new techniques to support inference of the
geographic locations of bottleneck links by geolocating where paths exit cloud
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project stems
from the innovative methods we will develop and validate to conduct accurate,
scalable, and reliable topology and performance measurements of a critical
component of the modern Internet, overcoming cost barriers that have prevented
measurement studies from the cloud. The measured features and labels the project
generates will provide an ideal basis to address the persistent challenge in
applying machine learning techniques to network infrastructure research. The
project will also have broader impacts outside of the scientific research
agenda. The tools and data the project generates will be valuable to enterprises
and application developers deploying into the cloud, as well as policy-makers
seeking to understand bottlenecks in U.S. Internet infrastructure. The data,
tools, and analyses can also lead to the discovery of broadband performance
inequities in the U.S. and inform future public investment in infrastructure.
Experience with cloud applications and measurements will be incorporated into an
undergraduate data science course and undergraduate research
mentorships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.