* 2212051
* Unified Vision-Based Motion Estimation and Control for Multiple and Complex Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Roberto Tron, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2025
* USD 457,147.00

The project enables teams of robots to collaborate on physical tasks, such as
assembling a building from prefabricated components under the direction of a
human worker. In such settings, each robot might be equipped with cameras to
orient itself and have some limitations on how it can move. To achieve the
robotic teamâ€™s goals, each robot needs to know its location, where to find the
prefabricated components, and where the final building should be placed. In
addition, the robots need to coordinate with each other on how they move to
transport and assemble the components, and to inspect the results of their work.
This project develops novel mathematical and engineering methods that would
enable the robotic teams to work collaboratively to achieve their goals. The
developed methods will be generalizable making them applicable to many different
situations and obtaining better results than what is possible with existing
approaches. To facilitate a broader impact of this work, the research team will
develop an easy-to-use software that facilitates the application of the research
to different and new problems. The research team will also collaborate with
engineers from Autodesk Inc. to ensure that the developed solution can benefit
existing professional design and visualization tools currently used in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robot tasks lay out above imply non-trivial
vision-kinodynamic constraints (e.g., rotations, perspective projections)
deriving from the intrinsic geometric properties of how the robots move and
sense. This project introduces a novel parametrization of the problem, called
Shape-of-Motion, that can flexibly incorporate different combinations of vision-
kinodynamic constraints (such as close-kinematic-chain, feature matching across
multiple images, projection, and field-of-view constraints) as linear
constraints on a low-rank matrix. An associated optimization solver, based on
the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers, will find solutions in an
elegant and unified manner by iterating between low-rank projections and least-
squares steps; different application-specific requirements will then be simply
incorporated in the solver as linear constraints. The main intellectual merit of
the developed technique is in its versatility and ability to holistically tackle
complex problems that are traditionally solved using stacks of separate
algorithms (e.g., matching features across images, followed by a 3-D
reconstruction of the scene and localization of the robots, followed by planning
in the reconstructed map under kinematic constraints).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.