* 2212746
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Game Theory, Economics, and Mechanism Design for Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Elaine Shi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 230,000.00

Blockchains, and their capability of enforcing property rights for digital data,
have the potential to unlock the next incarnation of the Internet and a new wave
of important applications. Modern blockchains rely on incentives for cooperative
behavior differently than do classical distributed systems, such as our
traditional banking system. Decentralized blockchains usually rely on a native
cryptocurrency to motivate independent actors to run them correctly, whereas
classical distributed systems are typically deployed in directed and closed
environments. There is therefore an urgent need to develop rigorous foundations
of the economic and incentive factors in blockchains and cryptocurrencies in
general. The project team is also developing new and freely available
educational materials on blockchains, in order to make this important but
complex topic more accessible to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
research thrusts. The first thrust concerns transaction fee mechanism design
(that is, how to select which pending transactions are included for execution on
the blockchain, and at what prices). The goals here are to understand the
welfare and revenue approximation guarantees for different transaction fee
mechanisms, to leverage cryptographic primitives to overcome impossibility
results, and to achieve robustness to long-term collusion by cartels of block
producers. The second thrust pursues cryptographic protocols that possess strong
game-theoretic guarantees, with a focus on the design of cryptographic
mechanisms that are resilient to side contracts and game-theoretically fair
multi-party computation. The final thrust investigates how to design
decentralized blockchains with desirable economic properties. Specific goals
here include determining simple modifications to Nakamoto consensus that improve
its security, formulating a definition of economic security against liveness (as
opposed to safety) attacks, and rigorously comparing the economic security
offered by proof-of-work and proof-of-stake mechanisms. Together, these research
thrusts develop significant foundations for a theory of blockchains and
cryptocurrencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.