* 2212103
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Robust Behavioral Analysis and Synthesis of Network Control Protocols Using Formal Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ahmed Saeed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,020.00

Networked systems in general, and the Internet in particular, are complex
systems involving many interacting components. Network control algorithms
implemented in numerous network protocols are at the core of these systems. To
date, the design and analysis of network control algorithms has been based on
heuristics and idealized models of networks, without any guarantees on their
performance in practice. This proposal aims to address this shortcoming and
develop methods to prove performance properties of network control algorithms
and to synthesize algorithms with performance proofs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovations in network control algorithms are occurring at
a rapid pace, spurred by evolving network technologies, a fast-changing
application mix, and the rising importance of quality-of-experience for users,
who react negatively to poor performance (e.g., by giving applications poor
ratings or finding alternatives). Performance matters not only in the mean, but
also in the tail statistics. In response, the research community and industry
have developed numerous innovative network control algorithms to improve
performance. Despite these advances, little is known about performance
guarantees of such algorithms, nor is there is principled proof-driven framework
to help the development of these algorithms. The research proposed herein will,
if successful, improve the community's ability to verify performance properties
and synthesize new algorithms with provable properties. The tools produced in
the proposed work will open new directions in network resource allocation
research. The education plan includes the incorporation of this research's
findings into the undergraduate and graduate curricula and offers students an
opportunity to implement verifiable network control algorithms using the tools
from Veritas, treating performance as correctness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal develops a framework, Veritas, which uses formal verification to prove
performance properties of a network control algorithm. With Veritas a user can
(1) encode an algorithm in first-order logic, (2) specify a hypothesis about the
algorithm, and (3) test if the hypothesis holds by running the encoded algorithm
in a customizable, built-in environment model. In addition, given constraints on
a control algorithm---input observations usable by the algorithm and an action
space over which it can respond to observations---along with the environment
model encoded in first-order logic and a specification of performance
objectives, Veritas automatically searches over the space of controllers to
propose a mapping between input observations and controller
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.