* 2212972
* RUI: Understanding how de novo evolved genes evolve protein interactions and regulatory mechanisms in Drosophila reproduction
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Geoffrey Findlay, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2025
* USD 662,355.00

Newly evolved genes, which are non-essential at first, can acquire essential
roles over time, but how they do so is currently unclear. This project will use
the tractable fruit fly model system to investigate how three young genes, which
have gained essential functions in male fertility, evolved novel capabilities,
including physical binding partners and complex expression patterns. Ultimately,
these findings will shed light on the kinds of genetic changes a new gene
requires to gain functionality. This project will also enhance the research
capacity of an exclusively undergraduate institution, thus providing
opportunities for students to conduct original research. The PI’s lab will
participate in an immersive, paid summer research program for second- and third-
year students and a cohort-based mentoring program for first-year students
designed to bolster the persistence of first-year students from backgrounds
historically underrepresented in STEM fields. The host department’s
bioinformatic curriculum will be expanded through the development of a lab-based
genomics course that will provide a course-based research experience to
undergraduates who may not otherwise participate in original
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how newly evolved genes
that likely arose from non-protein-coding DNA sequences acquire essential
functions. It will use as case studies of three genes shown previously to be
essential for spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster. First, an evolutionary
approach will be used to estimate when each gene became essential for
reproduction and to identify key amino acids stretches important for the
function of the encoded protein. Specifically, the ability of both extant
orthologous protein sequences and inferred ancestral sequences to rescue D.
melanogaster flies lacking an endogenous copy of the gene will be measured.
These experiments will generate testable hypotheses about which sequence
features are required for these proteins’ essential functions in extant D.
melanogaster flies. Second, to investigate how newly evolved proteins evolve
functions in existing cellular networks and gain interactions with other
molecules, a combination of biochemical and genetic approaches will be used to
identify interacting partners of each focal protein. Third, this project will
investigate how newly evolved genes gain post-transcriptional mechanisms of gene
regulation and thus evolve spatiotemporal patterns of expression. These
experiments will compare transcript and protein localization patterns and
investigate genetically the role of different upstream and downstream regulatory
regions on new gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.