* 2212116
* Assembly Mechanism Investigation and Theoretical Framework Development of Magnetorheological Emulsions for Low Power Energy Dampers
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Shibin Dai, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2025
* USD 342,355.00

To protect buildings from earthquake vibrations and residual limbs from the
impact of movement, it is critical to develop materials that can dissipate the
energy of these forces safely and effectively. Magnetorheological fluids (MRFs)
are mixtures of magnetic particles in oil that form chains under a magnetic
field. MRF chains resist being broken up due to vibration or impact, instead
releasing that energy as heat, reducing the mechanical damage to surrounding
structural or biological material. Typical MRFs, however, require large amounts
of power to maintain a high magnetic field. This is a challenge due to
inaccessible power during an earthquake or poor safety of wearable high-power
batteries for prosthetics. This award seeks to develop a new type of MRF based
on oil-in-water emulsions that can achieve better energy dissipation at lower
magnetic fields, using significantly less power. The critical factors in MRF
formulation will be explored as well as the relationship between MRF chain
structure and overall performance both experimentally and theoretically. The
results of this award will not only improve infrastructure resiliency to natural
disasters as well as improve the quality of life of amputees but will also
support the mentorship of graduate students along their path towards STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials which dissipate energy are necessary
for a wide variety of engineering problems, such as to withstand seismic
vibrations or the impact of human motion. New materials are needed to improve
earthquake resiliency and prosthetic limb comfort. To address this need,
magnetorheological fluids (MRFs) can be used as part of viscous dampers to
dissipate large amounts of energy safely and effectively. MRFs are magnetic
particle dispersions that, when subjected to a magnetic field, form chains and
resist flow. The adoption of MRFs has been limited in large part due to
unacceptable power requirements for large-scale or on-body applications. This
award investigates a new emulsion-based formulation for MRFs to reduce the MRF
power requirement. A combined experimental and theoretical approach will be used
with the objectives of (1) determining the key parameters that govern the
performance of MRF-emulsions, (2) visualizing the magnetized state MRF-emulsion
morphology, and (3) developing a fundamental framework to generalize the
phenomena. This award enables the improvement of infrastructure as well as
prosthetic devices while also providing STEM mentorship and experience for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.