* 2212580
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Terabyte-scale Tiered Memory Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Simon Peter, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 290,633.00

As application demand for memory increases at an explosive pace, we witness a
slowdown in the rate at which the currently dominant computer memory technology
("DRAM") scales up in capacity. This growing gap leads to a need for large-
capacity memory systems that either disaggregate the DRAM memory components
across a network, or adopt a memory technology that offers higher capacity than
DRAM but at slower performance. This trend toward larger memories that are split
into different performance tiers within a single compute node poses challenges
that current memory management mechanisms and techniques cannot keep up with.
The critical challenges include how to characterize the memory behavior of
applications and workloads and how, when, and where to place and migrate data
with low performance, energy, and monetary overhead. This research project will
explore these fundamental challenges and develop and evaluate solutions
specifically for these large-scale, tiered memory systems. To be most effective,
these solutions will span both the computer hardware (i.e., the processor and
memory modules) and system software (i.e., the operating system). The combined
hardware-software research approach, along with continuous prototyping of the
proposed solutions, ensures that the challenges targeted are real and that the
solutions will have impact not only on academia, but also on industry and end
users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is timely and necessary because a
comprehensive, low-overhead, tiered memory management system is a prerequisite
for unleashing the potential of emerging memory technologies. These technologies
are, in turn, necessary, especially for cloud computing, to achieve the
performance levels needed for applications, while keeping costs, both monetary
and environmental, low. First, the effective use of tiered memories will both
reduce the number of memory components installed in systems, thus reducing the
embedded and operational carbon associated with them. Second, the developed
management techniques will enable a single computing node to successfully serve
a higher application load, reducing the carbon footprint of compute as well as
memory. Other societal benefits include the unique training this hardware-
software research project will provide to students, including undergraduate and
graduate students. The project also has a high likelihood of broadening
participation in computing. The primary investigators on this project have a
track record of advising female students; the participating universities are
committed to broadening participation; and the student recruitment environment
benefits from a large number of students from groups that are historically
underrepresented in computer technology. The University of Texas at Austin is a
recognized Hispanic-Serving University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.