* 2212193
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Programmable Disaggregated Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 390,455.00

Disaggregated storage has become an increasingly popular storage infrastructure,
gaining significant attention in public clouds and in the enterprise. Today’s
storage disaggregation lacks multi-tenancy support and dynamic adaptation to
consolidated workloads. Further, it requires costly coordination and provides no
application-specific control. This leads to severe interference, suboptimal
performance, and cost inefficiencies. This project’s goal is to make
disaggregated storage programmable. Programmable disaggregated storage (PDS) can
provide end-to-end control over disaggregated storage access. It leverages
recent storage and network innovations to make the entire disaggregated storage
data path programmable. This allows PDS to adapt to the workload requirements
and backend infrastructure conditions. PDS aims to provide predictably high
performance, enable flexible storage access, and offer efficient isolation and
fairness guarantees. Several research questions are addressed to make PDS
practical, such as how to build an elastic and backward compatible client-side
virtual disk; how to design control-plane and data-plane programming frameworks
to express application intents and define flexible computations; how to enforce
control-plane policies and perform fair resource allocations across
heterogeneous I/O substrates; how to schedule data-plane operators across
different devices; and how to achieve predictable storage access
latencies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Storage infrastructure is used by billions of
people around the globe on a daily basis. By tightly integrating disaggregated
storage with emerging programmable entities, this project has the potential to
substantially improve the performance, cost efficiency, scalability, and multi-
tenancy of storage applications. There are ample opportunities for involving
undergraduate students and bringing research into the classroom. For the broader
community of users and the society at large, this project endeavors to publicly
release hardware and software prototypes, enabling a rich set of storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.