* 2212940
* Leveraging Bandwidth-Rich Wireless Signals for Passive  Localization of RF-Silent Mobile Objects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hongbin Li, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

Many wireless communication signals, WiFi, cellular, radio/TV, and satellites,
can be utilized to provide passive radio frequency (RF) sensing services as by-
products, including object and event detection, localization, healthcare
monitoring, etc. Passive RF sensing is capable of locating non-cooperative
device-free objects, which are usually harder to locate than cooperative objects
equipped with an active RF device (e.g., a mobile phone). However, most prior
passive solutions are non-coherent processing based, using signal strength or
channel state information. Non-coherent methods suffer poor resolution, small
coverage, and fluctuating performance due to their intrinsic physical
limitations. They are ineffective in exploiting the larger bandwidth (BW) of
newer wireless signals. Aimed to surpass the limitations of state-of-the-art
non-coherent methods, this project will develop coherent high-resolution
techniques to locate passive RF-silent mobile objects in complex indoor and
outdoor multipath environments, by harnessing bandwidth-rich wireless signals
such as 5G/6G cellular, WiFi-6/7, among others. Passive RF sensing, which
obviates the need for dedicated transmitters, is environmentally green. It is
nonintrusive and economical, requiring no additional investment in
infrastructure. Research outcomes of this project can potentially be integrated
with existing wireless networks, enabling service providers to offer both
wireless communication and RF sensing services to their customers. Therefore,
the potential economic and societal impact of the proposed research can be
substantial. On the educational front, this project will offer opportunities for
training undergraduate and graduate students, summer research programs targeting
local high school students, and engagement of the PI to work with women,
minorities, and students from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop a coherent processing based framework
for robust high-resolution localization and mapping of multiple targets in
multipath environments. It comprises three research thrusts. Thrust A is focused
on the development of passive localization and mapping techniques by employing
RF emissions from multiple wireless base stations (BSs), which form a multi-
static sensing geometry and provide multi-perspectives of the surveillance area.
One task is to develop a direct mapping approach, which yields targets' location
and velocity estimates directly from the observed signals, thus bypassing a
combinatorial data association step involved in conventional indirect methods.
Other research tasks include the development of multipath-resistant localization
methods, by capitalizing on spatial and geometric diversity inherent in the
multi-static sensing system, and a multi-rate fast/slow-time sampling approach,
which enables decoupled location and velocity estimation to reduce the
complexity. While Thrust A mainly considers centralized methods that have access
to all BSs' measurements, Thrust B extends the effort and develops distributed
privacy-preserving localization and mapping algorithms for the proposed multi-
static passive sensing system. The purpose is to seek robustness, computational
efficiency, and privacy. The latter arises as the multi-static system involves
different BSs serving different communication users with potentially private
data. The proposed algorithms run in parallel at each BS, which shares
intermediate computing results instead of raw data to preserve data privacy, and
incur minimum communication overhead through novel graph partitioning
techniques. Thrust C is devoted to a software-defined-radio (SDR) based testbed
for experimental data collection and testing, as well as evaluation of data
cleaning methods for clutter and direct-path interference
removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.