* 2212860
* LEAPS-MPS: Entanglement, Transport and Collective Effects in Few-Photon Many-Emitter Chiral Waveguide Quantum Electrodynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Imran Mirza, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2024
* USD 192,077.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The requirement of establishing a strong coupling
between light (quantized electromagnetic radiation) and single atoms (quantum
emitters) is ubiquitous in the fundamental studies of light-matter interaction
at the smallest scale. Typically, this interaction is simplified to a scenario
of single-mode fields trapped inside optical cavities and coupled with a single
atom. However, the recent advancements in quantum computing and quantum
networking are requiring the coherent control of 100-1000 quantum bits (qubits)
with the possibility of reliable quantum communication over 100s kilometers. In
this context, multiple-emitter waveguide quantum electrodynamics (one-
dimensional waveguides/fibers strongly coupled with a chain of atoms) has
emerged as a fascinating platform due to its ability to host several useful
quantum effects (such as quantum correlations e.g., entanglement, atom-photon
bound state formation, one-way light-matter interaction or chirality, controlled
photon transport, and collective photon emission, etc.) in a single setup. This
project aims to study one-way or chiral waveguide quantum electrodynamics
architectures as a testbed to investigate many-body quantum optical effects
under the influence of environmental interactions. The completion of this
project will result in the development of more powerful theoretical and
numerical tools that will go beyond the typical single-atom single-mode field
interaction paradigm of quantum optics and will be suitable for the examination
of the state-of-the-art and futuristic quantum technological devices. The
project includes the development of a two-year program of integrating research
and education in quantum optics and quantum information science (QIS) in the
Physics Department at Miami University. With the growing interest and investment
in the National Quantum Initiative, there is a demand for training the next
generation of workforce in QIS. This award will offer such training
opportunities by engaging historically underrepresented students through direct
outreach at the high school and undergraduate levels. To further extend the
outreach program, the PI will develop online and face-to-face modules accessible
to high school students through the Miami University Summer Scholar Program and
undergrad students through the Miami University eLearning department.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the proposed research here aims to: (1) perform an in-
depth theoretical study of the quantum transport properties of few (one, two, or
three)-photon Fock states in chiral waveguides that are simultaneously coupled
with several noisy quantum emitters, and to (2) analyze the generation and
control of several types of quantum effects such as entanglement between
emitters, collective emitter effects (superradiance, subradiance, selective
radiance), and emitter-cavity bound states, etc. Open quantum system approaches
(Markovian and non-Markovian master equations, real-space quantization
technique, and quantum jump approach) will be utilized to quantify the photon
transport in terms of reflection and transmission spectra, second-order
correlation functions as well as to predict the time evolution of emitter-
waveguide systems. At every stage of the project, the connection of the results
obtained with the experimentally feasible applications in quantum information
transfer, storage, and processing protocols will also be emphasized.
Additionally, while accomplishing the goals of the project, the PI will train a
group of two graduate and six undergraduate students in quantum information
science at Miami University. The PI will also introduce concepts of quantum
computation in various undergraduate-level physics courses and will offer
quantum computing modules for underrepresented groups of high school students
through the Miami University Summer Scholar Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.