* 2212370
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Co-optimizing Spectral Algorithms and Systems for High-Performance Graph Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Zhuo Feng, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2026
* USD 391,325.00

Emerging graph learning techniques have shown promising results for various
important applications such as community detection, drug discovery, and
electronic design automation (EDA). However, even the state-of-the-art graph
learning methods cannot scale to large data sets due to their high algorithm
complexity. For example, the latest graph neural network (GNN) algorithms
collectively aggregate feature information from the neighborhood of each node,
which not only drastically increases the number of computations among nodes but
also leads to high memory usage for storing the intermediate results. Hence most
graph learning algorithms cannot efficiently handle large-scale problems due to
their high computation and storage costs, not to mention the real-world graphs
that may involve billions of edges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
addressing the most pressing challenges in modern graph learning tasks by
investigating high-performance spectral graph algorithms and systems based on
the latest theoretical breakthroughs. Unlike prior theoretical studies on
spectral graph theory that put less focus on practical algorithm implementations
and applications, the investigators of this project will develop practically-
efficient spectral graph compression algorithms to boost the efficiency and
solution quality of existing graph learning methods through algorithm and system
co-optimizations by taking advantage of the latest heterogeneous computing
devices, such as GPUs, FPGAs, and computational storage devices. The outcome of
this project will potentially advance the state of the art in spectral graph
theory, machine learning, data analytics, EDA, as well as high-performance
computing. This project is also likely to spark new research in other related
computer science and engineering fields such as complex system/network modeling,
computational biology, precision medicine, and transportation networks. The
investigators will partner with the STEM ambassador program at Stevens, and the
Diversity Programs in Engineering office at Cornell to recruit highly
diversified undergraduate and graduate students to participate in this project,
while the latest research results will be integrated into several graduate and
upper-division undergraduate courses to prepare a new generation of researchers
and practitioners in high-performance machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.