* 2212506
* CCF: Medium: Inference with dynamic deep probabilistic models
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 569,322.00

The dynamics of complex systems are often studied by processing multivariate
time signals that are produced by these systems. Improved understanding of the
systems from such signals hinges on working with accurate models of the systems.
The rationale of the proposed methodology for making inference from multivariate
time signals stands on three important principles: algorithmic compressibility,
locality, and deep probabilistic modeling. With algorithmic compressibility, one
interprets seemingly complex high-dimensional data in much lower dimensional
spaces. With locality, one exploits the fact that in nature the most influential
events to an event are its local events. With deep probabilistic modeling, one
aims at finding algorithmic compressibilities. These principles are used for
developing novel models with little prior knowledge about the dynamics of the
observed system. Another challenging problem of interest in the project is
discovering causes and effects based on the adopted models. The developed
methods are tested on multivariate local field potentials acquired from patients
with epilepsy. Based on these signals, the objective is to find the zones in the
brain that cause seizures in the patients. Finding these zones and removing them
by surgery often cures the patients. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
conceptualizes a principled approach to building deep state-space models with
deep probabilistic modeling. The research includes the development of theory and
methods for estimating the unknowns of these models, investigation of methods
for estimating the structures of the models, extension of the new methods to
models that capture regime switching, development of theory and methods for
discovering causalities among multivariate time signals, and identification of
states that cause seizures in patients with epilepsy. The research is based on
minimal assumptions about the models and is carried out within the Bayesian
framework. The methodology is not data hungry, and all the produced results are
probabilistic in nature. This research on deep probabilistic models and causal
discovery considerably extends the capabilities for modeling multivariate time
signals, which not only facilitates our understanding of complex systems but
also offers new paradigms that extend the horizons and scope of signal
processing and machine learning. The applications in medicine and neurosurgery,
such as identifying the pathological zones in the brain of epilepsy patients
that cause seizures stand on their merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.