* 2212182
* CIF: RI: Medium: Design principles and theory for data augmentation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mark Davenport, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

Generalization, or the ability to transfer knowledge from one context to the
next, is a hallmark of human intelligence. In artificial intelligence (AI),
however, models trained in one setting often fail when tested in a new setting,
even if the shift is minor or imperceptible. To build more generalizable AI,
most modern methods employ some form of data augmentation (DA), which applies
transformations to the data to create virtual samples that are then added to the
dataset. The resulting synthesis of new examples appears to build helpful
properties in AI such as invariance or resistance to change to certain natural
transformations, and robustness to new tasks as well as noise in existing tasks.
Despite the promise and performance of DA procedures, they are mostly applied in
an ad-hoc manner and need to be designed and tested on a dataset by dataset
basis. A set of fundamental principles and theory to understand DA and its
impact on model training and testing is lacking. To address this outstanding
challenge, the investigators will provide a precise understanding of the impact
of DA on generalization, and leverage this understanding to design novel
augmentations that can be used across multiple applications and
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators propose a
principled mathematical framework to 1) understand when DA helps and when DA
could potentially hurt learning, 2) understand the structure induced by DA and
characterize what makes high-quality augmentations, and 3) provide novel,
systematic, and scalable design principles for augmenting data in new domains
where we lack prior knowledge to guide us. These design principles will
significantly broaden the applicability and promise of DA from computer vision
to new domains (e.g., neural data, graphs and tabular data) where principled
augmentations are still not known. Of special focus in this project will be
applications of DA to neural activity, where augmentations have shown promise in
building a more generalizable link between the brain and behavior. This research
will also yield prescriptions for the role of DA in advancing fairness,
accountability and transparency in modern machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.