* 2212962
* MPS-Ascend:  CRITICAL METALS FROM COMPLEX WASTE STREAMS: AN ELECTROCHEMISTRY ROADMAP TO SELECTIVE EXTRACTION
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Chavis Stackhouse, Stackhouse, Chavis A
* Fellowship Award
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Chavis A. Stackhouse is awarded a NSF Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-
Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr.
Stackhouse supports his research entitled “MPS-Ascend: Critical Metals from
Complex Waste Streams: An Electrochemical Roadmap to Selective Extraction”,
under the mentorship of sponsoring senior scientists. The host institution for
the fellowship is Texas A&amp;M University, and the sponsoring scientists are
Dr. Sarbajit Banerjee and Dr. Karen Wooley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
fellowship, Dr. Stackhouse investigates new methods to advance the recovery of
rare-earth elements (REEs) from waste streams using energy efficient and
electrochemical processes to selectively recover rare-earth elements in high
purity from complex waste streams. REEs are crucial elements to technologies
important to the energy transition, manufacturing competitiveness, and national
security. Current industrial recycling efforts are impeded by the limited amount
of REE obtained, lack of commercial recycling technologies suitable for the
recovery of the small amount of REEs present in the evolving complex mixture of
metal within consumer products, and low metal value per unit, which makes
dependence upon primary sources more cost-effective. These issues compound
national reliance on foreign natural resources. This project exploits the unique
properties of a class of salts known as ionic liquids (ILs) for a targeted
recovery of rare-earth metals from commercial waste streams (e.g., permanent
magnets, computing devices, etc.). With the help of advanced characterization
tools, such as cutting-edge synchrotron X-ray spectroscopy techniques, the
researcher advances the collective knowledge of this research community, by
elucidating a detailed mechanistic understanding of rare-earth solvation, and
the developing fundamental electrochemical and chemical design principles that
offer new routes to obtain rare earth metal from waste streams. In addition to
societal broader impacts, exemplified by mitigating the environmental impact of
REEs in waste streams as well as the reliance upon foreign sources of REEs, Dr.
Stackhouse actively broadens participation of underrepresented minorities in
STEM with this fellowship. He develops a mentoring program for undergraduate
students from two minority-serving institutions, Prairie View A&amp;M and Texas
A&amp;M Kingsville, an HBCU and Hispanic-serving institution,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.