* 2212565
* GOALI: CNS: Medium: Communication-Computation Co-Design for Rural Connectivtiy and Intelligence under Nonuniformity: Modeling, Analysis, and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Love, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Urban societies throughout the world have come to depend on access to reliable
and high-speed wireless, as well as the intelligent data-driven services they
can deliver to end users. Low population densities and sparse infrastructure in
rural areas, however, make them less attractive for investment in network
connectivity. Fifth generation (5G)â€™s support for vertical industry integration
has further magnified the broadband access inequalities between urban and rural
environments. Technologies that have been proposed to provide rural broadband
access are not designed to address the non-uniformity in demand for
communication and computation resources that are found throughout these
environments; for example, many automated farming services will have stringent
delay requirements for short periods during the day while residential areas
exhibit traditional diurnal patterns. This project aims to address this
challenge by establishing a core set of methodologies that synergize the design
of rural connectivity and computing. Emerging massive multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) technology is integrated with the design of hierarchical data
processing architectures across the rural infrastructure to adapt based on
spatial and temporal demand variations. Extensive evaluations are conducted
based on a massive MIMO platform and wireless device equipment available from
the industrial partner. The project contributes to the development of a diverse
workforce in rural broadband and intelligence through the formation of research
teams integrating undergraduate and graduate students across
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research activities are organized
into three thrusts. Thrust 1 develops agile communication techniques under non-
uniform rural settings, addressing the needs for multi-user management and
resource allocation for massive MIMO infrastructure. This includes the
development of novel network control algorithms with scheduling policies that
are customized for heterogeneous rural connectivity needs. The developed
algorithms are further enhanced by reducing scheduling overhead through
position-aided channel representation techniques. Thrust 2 investigates the
orchestration of computation tasks under rural non-uniformity, focusing on
establishing intelligent rural data processing architectures leveraging the
broadband connectivity provided by Thrust 1. Techniques for distributing data
processing among clusters of rural devices aiming to execute collaborative tasks
rapidly are developed via joint optimization of device-to-device communications
and task utility metrics. The orchestration of data processing and intelligence
synchronization steps along the rural network hierarchy is also considered to
adapt based on task demand variations. Thrust 3 consists of proof-of-concept
implementation and testing of the methodologies in Thrust 1&amp;2. This employs
a testbed developed leveraging a commercial-grade hybrid massive MIMO base
station system engineered by the industrial partner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by CNS and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.