* 2212233
* AF: Medium: Research in Algorithms and Complexity for Total Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Mihalis Yannakakis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Finding efficient algorithms for practical computational problems has defined
computer science from its beginnings almost eight decades ago. Equally
fundamental has been the search for intractability, that is, establishing that
certain computational tasks cannot be solved efficiently. The important concept
of NP-completeness has come a long way over the past half century in classifying
practical problems into tractable and intractable, modulo the yet unresolved P
vs NP question. This project will address the most important body of
computational problems which cannot be so classified, namely the class of
problems in which a solution of certain kind is sought, and the solution is
guaranteed to exist. Surprisingly, even though the existence of a solution may
appear to render a problem easy, there are many important computational problems
of this sort for which efficient solvability is not understood. In addition, and
quite importantly, the apparent difficulty of some of these problems lies at the
foundations of modern Cryptography. The investigators, who helped initiate this
line of research in the 1980s and 1990s, will address many old and new open
questions in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the investigators
shall pursue a number of open complexity questions related to total functions
including the complexity of Tarski fixpoints; unclassified combinatorial
problems, generalizing the pigeonhole principle class PPP; new complexity
problems relating total functions with Cryptography, as well as certain
fundamental problems in Complexity that arose from their study of the class
APEPP. They shall also explore the power and limitations of black box algorithms
for TFNP problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Algorithms; complexity; total
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.