* 2212084
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Neural Materials for Realistic Computer Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Steve Marschner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Realism has always been an important goal of computer graphics, not only because
it makes images more convincing and virtual environments more immersive, but
because accuracy is important when renderings are used to make real-world
decisions. Realistic images are made by using models to simulate the physical
process of light reflection from surfaces in the scene, and state-of-the-art
reflection models, while accurate for smooth, homogeneous materials, are quite
inaccurate for materials with detailed surface structure. This project explores
an entirely new way of modeling surface reflection, by learning the
characteristic reflectance patterns of particular classes of materials from many
detailed measurements of surfaces. These new models will have broad impact by
completely transforming the way materials are modeled for computer graphics in
applications like moviemaking, industrial design, marketing, advertising,
architecture, virtual reality and home remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research centers around building models that are more appropriate for describing
fine-scale detail. Current “physically based materials” are essentially
parametric reflectance models with parameters modulated by texture maps. These
can match aggregate large-scale behavior, but not the complexities of real
reflectance at close scale. This project explores a fundamentally new way to
represent materials, based on neural function approximators. The work will go
beyond simply attaching reflectance to opaque objects, by developing thin neural
reflectance fields that accommodate fuzziness, translucency and unmodeled
geometric detail. The new neural materials will be flexible and general for the
full range of materials needed from virtual environments to visual effects,
supporting applications ranging from automatic look development from only a few
reference photographs, to inverse object modeling from images, combining
geometric and material detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.