* 2212222
* SBIR Phase I: Dense Nanolipid Fluids (DNLFs) for Delivery of Drugs with Poor Bioavailability: Synthesis, Manufacture, and Drug Properties
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Eric Morrison, SUPERIOR NANO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to care for patients suffering from diseases
including diabetes, multiple Sclerosis (MS), acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS), and cancer using nano dosage forms of drug molecules. Making drugs nano-
sized helps them be absorbed and move to parts of the body where needed. The
ability to manufacture nanosized drugs comes from the discovery that drug sizes
may be decreased with a twin screw extruder, a type of machine usually used to
produce bulk products such as plastic pipes, garbage bags, snack foods, cereal,
and pasta. Before the discovery of the twin screw extruder, drug nanoparticles
were only made in thimbleful quantities and were prohibitively expensive. This
NSF SBIR Phase I project seeks to tap the potential of nano-sized drug forms by
allowing them to be made economically and getting them into the hands of medical
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to provide new knowledge related to surfactant-
lipid-water systems and drug delivery nanoparticles. Although there has been
much research focused on increasing the bodyâ€™s absorption of drugs using lipid
nanoparticles, translation to the clinic has been limited because nanoparticles
cannot be produced with sufficient reproducibility, quality, or in sufficient
quantities, making them prohibitively expensive. This SBIR project seeks to
solve these problems by using twin-screw extrusion, a process typically used for
bulk manufacturing of commodity goods such as plastic pipes, garbage bags, snack
foods and pasta. The twin screw extruder process is based on the transient
formation of rupturable surfactant-lipid-water mesophases during transit through
the extruder barrel. To be successful at the twin screw extrusion of drug nano
dosage forms, new scientific knowledge must be created to advance
conceptualization of surfactant-lipid-water systems from time invariant
equilibrium structures to highly time dependent dynamic non-equilibrium
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.