* 2212465
* OAC Core: Interpretable Resilience Analysis Platform for Scientific Workflow Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Qiang Guan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 574,640.00

For years, scientists have continued to improve the performance of the
simulations where resilience was neglected. This approach was driven by a lack
of understanding of the "cause and effect" in resilience analysis. While the
current resilience analysis tool continues to lack transparency and
interpretability, it is critical that the importance of resilience analysis is
promoted and that scientists are educated on its criticality. This project's
novelties are redefining the resilience analysis in terms of interpretability
and explainability. The approach is significantly different from existing
endeavors. It can explain or identify the logic behind these predictions and
differentiate the functions and usages of the existing tools built on different
theories. The project's impacts include designing a new resilience assessment
system using visualization and DevOps to enable transparent resilience analysis,
vulnerability positioning, and automation of resilience continuous integration.
The project work with NSF and DoE-sponsored supercomputing centers to adopt the
system with proven success. Graduate and undergraduate students, especially from
underrepresented groups, will be trained in multiple disciplines that will
enable them to have successful careers in computing/scientific research areas
that are becoming increasingly interdisciplinary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon existing knowledge to create a new insightful approach that
enables the resilience property of scientific applications to be assessed under
the inevitable existence of surging soft errors in next-generation high-
performance computing systems. This project will bring further clarity, insight,
and understanding into how systems behave while running high-performance
computing scientific workloads composed of parallel simulations for data
generation, big data analytics, and machine learning to extract data insights in
scientific research. The project proposes 1.) the design and implementation of
an error propagation analysis platform, which creates interpretable
visualization of the critical paths and critical sections of the codes; 2.)
analytics to allow domain scientists to compare and contrast the different
resilience models on the simulation codes; 3.) a continuous resilience
assessment (Resilience CI) that can be integrated into a standard continuous
integration to automate the procedure; whereby the resilience property between
committed versions will be delivered to developers as a standard report and to
support the DevOps of exa-scale scientific applications; and 4.) quantum
chemistry workflow will participate in the evaluation as the driver
applications. The project's outcomes, such as tutorials, collected data, and the
visualization software system, can encourage the application developers to
incorporate cost-effective fault tolerance strategies. In addition, the
investigators will incorporate research outcomes in new courses and tutorials
for the workforce training. The project will engage and advance the partnership
with the industry for commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.