* 2212256
* OAC Core: A Scalable and Deployable Container Orchestration Cyber Infrastructure Toolkit for Deploying Big Data Analytics Applications in Public Cloud
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Liting Hu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 03/31/2023
* USD 324,275.00

Today many big data analytics applications (e.g., fraud detection, social data
analytics, education, climate modeling, epidemiology, and finance) need to
process enormous datasets from geographically distributed locations. An emerging
trend is to host these big data analytics applications in the public cloud. They
can be packaged to run in a lightweight isolated execution environment
(containers) and deployed on computing resources rented from public cloud
providers, which can be updated and scaled seamlessly. However, the complex
inter-container correlations and the heterogeneity of hardware resources pose
significant challenges in managing these big data analytics applications in the
public cloud. This project enables the easy deployment of containerized big data
analytics applications in the public cloud and provides cloud providers with
insights to better tune their systems for current and future big data
workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
scalable and deployable cyber infrastructure (CI) container orchestration
toolkit for deploying large numbers of containerized big data analytics
applications on heterogeneous nodes in state-of-the-art public multi/hybrid-
cloud. This project spans three complementary thrusts: (i) a novel “black-box”
lightweight tool is implemented, which detects inter-container correlations for
containerized big data analytics applications in a non-intrusive manner via
hierarchical clustering and co-occurrence analysis; (ii) a novel scalable
container scheduler is implemented, which deploys containerized big data
analytics applications on heterogeneous nodes in the public cloud in a
correlation-aware manner; and (iii) the system is implemented on open-source
container orchestration tools and validated by subjecting it to experimentation
on both the lab-based prototype and the practical, real-world data centers. In
addition to its technical contributions, this project involves various
educational and outreach activities as well. The results of the research are
integrated into the undergraduate and graduate systems courses. Finally, the
toolkit, source code, datasets, and course materials developed in this project
are documented and open-sourced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.