* 2212010
* EAGER: Side Channels Go Deep - Leveraging Deep Learning for Side-channel Analysis and Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Aidong Ding, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Side-channel attacks (SCAs) have presented serious threats to confidentiality
and privacy in various areas including finance, transportation, mobile
communications, and clouds. The new exploits, Meltdown and Spectre, have
revealed that indispensable performance-related optimizations of modern computer
architecture have turned into fundamental vulnerabilities for information
leakage. However, finding SCA leakage thoroughly on real systems can be
challenging, and inferior leakage evaluation methods used by the system
developer would result in devices or software without appropriate protection
entering field operations, vulnerable to dedicated adversaries possessing more
sophisticated attacks. The recent advancement of machine learning techniques,
particularly deep neural networks (DNNs), has facilitated SCAs to learn and
utilize side-channel power leakage of complex forms, resulting in outperforming
the strongest classic template attacks and even breaking certain common SCA
countermeasures. Power leakage and security evaluation has shifted to DL-based
methods. However, there is little application of DNNs in microarchitectural
attacks, despite the surging discovery and exploitation of vulnerable
microarchitectures. This project aims to leverage the rapidly evolving advances
of deep learning in both microarchitectural SCAs and countermeasures. The
novelties of the project lie in both a new microarchitecture monitor and the
follow-on data analytic and system obfuscation methods. The project's broad
significance and importance are it will advance the state-of-the-art on
microarchitectural attacks, side-channel security evaluation, and protection
against confidentiality and privacy breach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates foundational issues of applying deep learning techniques for both
microarchitectural side-channel analysis and protection. The technical approach
includes a persistent cache monitoring mechanism, which significantly improves
the observability of the victim execution by the spy and captures detailed
information leakage in timing traces. Appropriate DNN models are being built to
exploit the timing traces for secret retrieval. The entire framework of
microarchitectural monitoring and deep learning-based attacks is applicable to
diverse platforms, enabled by cross-device transfer learning and generative
adversarial networks (GANs). The concept of adversarial examples is being
leveraged to direct novel effective countermeasures against DL-based side-
channel attacks. The outcome of this project, thorough DL-based side-channel
attacks, sound security evaluation, and efficient protections, will have
profound impact in securing the clouds and critical systems and
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.