* 2212549
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Smart Surrogates for High Performance Scientific Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

High-fidelity computer simulations underpin discovery in a broad range of
scientific domains. However, their computation cost limits their full potential.
There have been increasing efforts in approximating scientific simulations with
deep neural networks, to accelerate simulation workflows by orders of magnitude.
Current practice, however, largely relies on fixed network architectures and
offline simulation data -– predefined by experience, rather than optimized by
quantitative metrics. This leads to an empirical, subjective, and laborious
practice, yet with a suboptimal outcome. This research addresses the above
critical gaps with a new conceptual, mathematical, and infrastructure framework
for developing Smart Surrogates. As a domain-agnostic framework, Smart
Surrogates will deliver timely support for an increasing but yet-to-be-met
demand for surrogate modeling for scientific simulations. The prototype
surrogates created in this project will also directly enable long-term follow-on
research in each of the domains involved. This collaborative research provides
multidisciplinary training at the intersection of artificial intelligence, high-
performance computing, and scientific simulations in a variety of domains,
helping prepare next-generation researchers adept at transdisciplinary thinking
and skill. It plans to proactively recruit students from underrepresented
groups, and develop a hands-on workshop on Smart Surrogates for dissemination to
a broader student body. Finally, the dissemination of ROSE as an open-source
toolkit will impact HPC simulation workflows in a broad range of social
applications, including but not limited to drug design and the study of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of Smart Surrogates includes three
parallel but interwoven methodological, infrastructure, and domain evaluation
thrusts: 1) Thrust I – Methodological Innovations: This thrust develops
fundamental innovations in deep active learning to jointly optimizes training-
data selection and neural architectures, in a Bayesian setting equipped with
uncertainty quantification. This allows Smart Surrogates to support the
intelligent active selection of training simulations along with dynamic
adjustment of neural architectures; 2) Thrust II – Infrastructure innovations):
This thrust designs, implements, and disseminates the RADICAL Optimal &amp;
Smart-Surrogate Explorer (ROSE) toolkit to support the concurrent and adaptive
executions of simulation and surrogate training and selection tasks.; 3) Thrust
III – Scientific innovations: This thrust grounds the developments and
evaluation of Smart Surrogates in two domain problems: surrogates for 1)
diffusion equations with singular initial conditions and 2) personalized virtual
heart simulations, built on the team’s past works with established domain
collaborators. This allows fast prototyping, while setting the basis for a
continuum of follow-up research to adopt Smart Surrogates in a larger range of
complex scientific simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.