* 2212591
* Development and function of the Xenopus tadpole retinotegmental projection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kara Pratt, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2025
* USD 582,054.00

New-born neurons (brain cells) have the amazing ability to self-assemble into
circuits – groups of functionally connected neurons. These circuits give rise to
our perceptions, thoughts, emotions, and behaviors. Understanding how neurons
self-assemble into circuits is an important aim in the field of neuroscience,
and it is the overall aim of this project. This would be difficult to study in
mammals with their billions of neurons, complex circuits, and variable
behaviors. This project studies a more experimentally tractable circuit: the
developing visual system of the African Clawed Frog (Xenopus) tadpole. Previous
studies on the tadpole visual system have focused on the retinotectal
projection, a circuit consisting of the synapse between the retinal ganglion
cells (RGCs) in the eye and the optic tectum, a major visual processing center
on the dorsal (top) surface of the amphibian midbrain. In preparatory work for
the current project, we characterized a second projection between the retinal
ganglion cells from the Xenopus eye and the ventral (bottom) midbrain called the
retinotegmental projection. Preliminary data indicate that these two projections
are built differently and carry out different functions within the visual
system. The goal of this project is to provide a detailed description of the
development and function of the retinotegmental projection. Overall, this work
will contribute important new insights about how neural circuits form and carry
out specific functions. Educational and broader impact activities for this
project include teaching a “Vision and Art” course for non-science
undergraduates, and an upper-level developmental science lab course in which
students design and carry out experiments to determine how environmental factors
impact the developing Xenopus embryo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How neurons self-
assemble into circuits that give rise to behaviors is a fundamental question in
neuroscience. For decades, the Xenopus tadpole retinotectal projection – the
synapse between the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in the eye and the midbrain
optic tectum – has served as a popular model to study this question. But the
retinotectal projection is only one of several components of the vertebrate
visual system. Our recent work shows that color-dependent phototaxis in tadpoles
does not require the optic tectum, but does require the tegmentum, a region of
the midbrain that lies ventral to the optic tectum. We also found several color-
tuned neuronal populations in the tegmentum. Through additional anatomical and
electrophysiological studies, we identified a retinotegmental projection, a
direct projection from the RGCs to the midbrain tegmental neurons. This
projection appears to lack the developmental plasticity displayed by the
retinotectal projection, suggesting a more hard-wired circuit. A highly
conserved retinotegmental projection, termed the accessory optic system (AOS),
has been described across a wide range of adult vertebrates, from frogs to
humans. It is associated with optomotor and optokinetic responses – reflexive
body and eye movements, respectively, that stabilize vision as the organism
moves through space. It is likely that the retinotegmental projection we are
studying in the tadpole is, at least in part, the AOS. Through a combination of
electrophysiology-based approaches and circuit tracing, this work will provide a
detailed description of the development and differentiation of the Xenopus
tadpole retinotegmental projection and its role in processing visual
stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.