* 2212755
* Workshop on Graph Theory, Algebraic Combinatorics, and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Christino Tamon, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports U.S. participants to attend the workshop "Graph Theory,
Algebraic Combinatorics, and Mathematical Physics" from July 25 to August 19,
2022 at Centre de Recherches Mathematiques (CRM) in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
This travel grant is aimed at providing support for U.S. based mathematical
scientists who are early-career faculty, graduate students, and post-doctoral
scholars, allowing them to build connections with the international scientific
community. This will help in the training of the next generation of
mathematicians in algebraic combinatorics and graph theory working on
fundamental problems in quantum computing (a highly critical area whose growing
importance has far-reaching consequences).An important intellectual scientific
challenge of the past several decades is the quest to understand and harness the
power of quantum information and computation. It is known that a quantum-
assisted computation can perform sensitive tasks that are difficult for
classical computers. To achieve this scientific challenge, quantum information
science requires a broad participation ranging from physicists studying exotic
quantum systems to mathematicians exploring abstract structures which lead to
unexpected applications. The supported activity will foster and encourage the
scientific participation and interaction of researchers from interdisciplinary
mathematical areas to advance knowledge in quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of a quantum computer is a well-
known threat to cryptographic systems widely used in protecting sensitive
information for financial, medical, and national security applications. On the
other hand, the use of quantum technology for secure communication has also been
demonstrated to be effective. It is important that the U.S. maintains and
expands its current edge in this expanding and fast-moving scientific field.
This grant will support early-career and junior U.S. scientists working in
mathematics, physics, and computer science, to participate in an international
research meeting on quantum information science. The participation of these
scientists will build and strengthen the U.S. science personnel base in this
highly critical area. A special effort will be made to attract participation
from women, minorities and underrepresented groups, and from academics working
in primarily undergraduate institutions. Workshop webpage:
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2022/Graph22/index_e.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.