* 2212325
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Foundations of Robust Deep Learning via Data Geometry and Dyadic Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Kevin Moon, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 75,666.00

Deep learning is a subfield of machine learning that uses artificial neural
networks to learn patterns from data. Deep learning methods currently achieve
the best performance in important problems such as facial recognition, image
processing, speech recognition, and machine translation and have also been used
in scientific problems in space weather, molecular biology, chemistry, and the
health sciences. Despite this success, deep-learning methods are still widely
viewed as black boxes, where their decisions are difficult to interpret.
Furthermore, there is little mathematical understanding about how to design an
effective deep neural network. This project will advance this understanding by
investigating how the geometry of the data can be used to better understand and
improve deep-learning design strategies. These advances will lead to improved
performance in deep learning in scientific fields with large societal impact
such as medicine, public health, molecular biology, and chemistry. The research
project also involves the mentoring of doctoral students and the material
generated from the project will be incorporated into multiple courses on data
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team of researchers will
develop a comprehensive theoretical framework for harnessing data geometry,
graphs, and invariance to enhance performance and interpretability for a wide
scope of deep learning problems. This will include investigating the effects of
neural network transformations on the data geometry, which is captured by
applying manifold learning at different layers in the neural network. New
metrics will be designed to empirically test invariance relative to a symmetry
group at different layers. These metrics will be used to drive a data-
augmentation process that maximizes the learned invariance of the neural network
during training. Methods for detecting hidden invariances in data will also be
developed that can be used to analyze the neural network training process. By
investigating these problems, this project will provide deep-neural-network
design guidelines that will lead to a new generation of deep learning that moves
beyond heuristics and ensures that a neural network is designed to ensure
accuracy, robustness, and interpretability for the learning
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.