* 2212740
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Domestic Additive Manufacturing for Silicon Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* David Berney Needleman, LEAP PHOTOVOLTAICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 255,886.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate the feasibility of producing
high-efficiency, low-cost, crystalline silicon photovoltaic solar cells without
using silicon wafers. For the first time, additive manufacturing processes will
be applied to silicon in order to produce equivalent performance to silicon
wafers without the wasteful processes used in current manufacturing. If
successful, this additive approach can link the parts of the solar supply chain
that still exist in the United States—silicon refining and solar module
assembly, establishing a full domestic supply chain for this critical energy
technology. This supply chain can: (a) be built with off-the-shelf equipment at
a third the cost of building traditional silicon wafer and cell factories, (b)
cut the cost of photovoltaic solar cell manufacturing in half compared to
imported silicon wafer-based solar cells, and (c) reduce energy consumption in
solar cell manufacturing by 70% and reduce water consumption by 90%. This
combination of low factory and production costs can drive the growth needed in
the solar industry to support the nation’s decarbonization goals while creating
tens of thousands of domestic jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project seeks to demonstrate the feasibility of a novel architecture and
additive manufacturing process for crystalline silicon photovoltaic solar cells
that provide equivalent performance to traditional silicon wafer-based solar
cells at lower cost with a local supply chain. The steps in the process flow are
adapted from traditional solar cell processing or adjacent industries like
microelectronics, but they are being combined in new way to realize this solar
cell design. These steps will be co-optimized to produce high-efficiency cells
using a series of designed experiments. These processes typically fall into
three categories: (1) chemical or physical vapor deposition, (2) solution-based
coating, and (3) thermal annealing, with their own relevant process variables:
(a) time, temperature, pressure, gas flow rates, and magnetic power; (b)
solvent, solution concentration, coating gap, and coating speed; (c) temperature
vs. time. These process variables for each step will be correlated to physical
properties of the layers in the cell stack such as thickness, stoichiometry, and
performance of the finished cells to produce a prototype with performance that
is compelling to investors, partners, and customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.