* 2212157
* Experimental speciation: reinforcement in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Brian Hollis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2025
* USD 383,432.00

Speciation occurs when populations evolve barriers to reproduction.
Understanding how these barriers form is a longstanding challenge in
evolutionary biology. This is because recurrent migration is expected to erase
any emerging differences between populations. One way to complete speciation is
through a process called reinforcement. Reinforcement occurs where natural
selection favors the avoidance of hybridization when hybrid offsprings are less
fit. This project uses experimental evolution—studying evolutionary change as it
occurs—to track reproductive barriers between populations over time. The work
will examine whether relatively weak barriers to reproduction between
populations are strengthened or decay over time. Using these data, the
researchers will determine the scenarios under which reinforcement can occur. As
part of this project, high school, undergraduate, and graduate-level students
will receive science education and training. An outreach program operating at a
local middle school and scout troop will increase exposure to genetics and
promote interest in science amongst underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence for and against the evolution of reproductive
isolation by reinforcement comes largely from comparative approaches and
snapshot studies in natural populations. However, these methods often encounter
difficulties when trying to ascribe patterns of reproductive isolation to
specific evolutionary forces. This project will directly test the hypothesis
that reinforcing selection can overwhelm the homogenizing force of gene flow. To
test this hypothesis, the work will follow the evolution of reproductive
isolation in populations of Drosophila melanogaster that show some degree of
initial reproductive isolation. Some experimental populations will remain
allopatric, while others will experience gene flow. In these populations, the
strength of selection against hybridization will be manipulated. A time series
of measures of both competitive and non-competitive reproductive isolation from
these populations will reveal the answers to three questions. First, how often
and how consistently is reinforcement able to strengthen reproductive isolation?
Second, how strong must selection against hybrids be for this to occur? Third,
is pre-mating (sexual) or postmating-prezygotic (gametic) isolation more
evolutionarily labile?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Evolutionary Processes and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.