* 2212537
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Environment-Centric Analysis and Optimization for Higher-Order Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Olin Shivers, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2026
* USD 323,588.00

The project concerns the modular compilation of a class of
powerful,&lt;br/&gt;mathematically based programming languages -- "higher-order
functional&lt;br/&gt;programming languages." Owing to their expressive power,
these high-level&lt;br/&gt;languages are great for programmers, but difficult to
implement efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;The project's impacts are to make it possible
for programmers to write software&lt;br/&gt;that is more robust, more secure,
easier to reason about, and with fewer bugs,&lt;br/&gt;even in application
arenas where high performance is necessary. The project's&lt;br/&gt;novelties
are two: its use of an annotated intermediate representation,
called&lt;br/&gt;3CPS, that allows "facts" determined by program analysis and
"decisions"&lt;br/&gt;determined by optimization policies to be associated with
the program's&lt;br/&gt;representation; and a suite of higher-order control-flow
analyses designed to&lt;br/&gt;direct transformations on programs in the 3CPS
form. The goal of the work is to&lt;br/&gt;develop the architecture of a
compiler that has higher-order flow analysis at&lt;br/&gt;its center -- to
explore the transformations and optimizations that are enabled&lt;br/&gt;by this
combination of reasoning engine and code
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important classes of fact
annotations is explicit information&lt;br/&gt;about the environment structure
required to manage bindings of variables; this&lt;br/&gt;is designed to be
closely connected to the run-time machine resources needed&lt;br/&gt;for these
bindings (heap records, stack frames and registers). This
information&lt;br/&gt;is key to mapping the source language efficiently onto
these resources. The&lt;br/&gt;3CPS intermediate form is unusual as an
intermediate representation in that,&lt;br/&gt;while it has direct connections
to the target machine's hardware resources, it&lt;br/&gt;remains a higher-order,
lambda-calculus representation. In particular, such a&lt;br/&gt;design enables
specialized representations of environment structure, such
as&lt;br/&gt;displays; specializing function linkages on a per-call basis; and
the ability&lt;br/&gt;to bind variables and allocate functions in the registers
or on the stack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.