* 2212342
* Tunable Super-Planckian Near-field Radiative Heat Transfer with Thermochromic Metamaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Liping Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2025
* USD 357,317.00

Materials at finite temperature above zero Kelvin can emit propagating
electromagnetic waves over long distances related to conventional thermal
radiation with heat flux limited by blackbodies, as well as decaying waves in
close proximity where radiative heat flux could exceed the blackbody limit by
orders of magnitude when the distance is much smaller than the characteristic
thermal wavelength. This project studies tunable near-field radiative thermal
transport with thermochromic materials whose color changes with temperature. The
project could impact many potential energy applications including thermal
management of microelectronics and energy conversion in solid-state thermopower
generation. It will also pave the way to radiation-based near-field devices for
active heat control, thermal circuits and thermal computers. The research
outcomes will be disseminated through journal publications, conference
presentations and course teaching. The PI will train researchers and leaders for
the next generation of work force, emphasizing on broader participation of
underrepresented groups. Graduate students will learn the fundamentals and
skills of multiple disciplines. The Arizona State Fulton Undergraduate Research
Initiative program offers a great opportunity for undergraduate students to
participate in the research activities in the PI’s lab. The PI will engage local
K-12 students and reach out to local public and society through various programs
at ASU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to advance the
fundamental understanding in tunable near-field radiative thermal transport with
thermochromic metamaterials across nanometric vacuum gaps based on different
physical mechanisms with super-Planckian heat flux exceeding the blackbody
limit. Vanadium dioxide as one unique thermochromic material could experience
insulator-to-metal phase transition when its temperature increases beyond 68°C.
Theoretical calculations based on fluctuational electrodynamics incorporated
with thin-film uniaxial wave optics as well as numerical modeling based on
rigorous coupled-wave analysis will be implemented to predict the spectral and
total radiative heat flux with different thermochromic nanostructures. Advanced
nanofabrication methods including thin-film deposition, deep-UV lithography and
electron-beam lithography will be used to fabricate the designed thermochromic
nanostructures, while unique techniques such as temperature-dependent infrared
spectroscopy will be employed to characterize the radiative thermal properties
of fabricated samples. Novel near-field thermal metrology that could achieve
down to 100-nm vacuum gaps will be utilized for the experimental study of near-
field radiative heat transfer to understand how different physical mechanisms
enable the tunable heat flux upon phase transition of different thermochromic
nanostructures. Potential applications such as near-field radiative thermal
rectification and switching will be experimentally
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.