* 2212917
* SBIR Phase II:  Simplifying the use of recycled plastics in film extrusion
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Richard Marshall, COMPLETIONAI LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 981,780.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be to allow recycled plastics to be used more efficiently and
affordably than is currently possible. Regulatory and societal pressures are
forcing reconsideration of single use plastics, and manufacturers of plastic
film must use recycled plastic at higher quantities. However, it is difficult
for the manufacturers to affordably reincorporate single-use plastics due to the
low quality and unpredictable content of the material. Increasing yield of
usable plastics through use of the proposed technology is expected to reduce
waste, offering the potential to annually save 6.5 million metric tons of carbon
dioxide emissions in the US and Canada, and 28 million metric tons globally.
Also, the greater use of artificial intelligence in manufacturing is of
strategic advantage to the US, with the proposed technology also applicable to
metals, paper, or advanced materials. Furthermore, skills shortages are
impacting manufacturing and are likely to worsen due to a rapidly aging
workforce. A great deal of on-the-job expertise will be lost in the coming years
as a generation of experienced operators retires. The proposed solution can ease
this transition, acting as an expert decision system to carry the intelligence
forward and help maintain US manufacturing
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will apply artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities and
process control methods to plastic film extrusion, and subsequently to other
types of manufacturing. Currently hardware solutions exist for manufacturers,
though they can be expensive, difficult to use and maintain, and can require
specialized skills to use. By contrast, the proposed technology is a software-
based approach to the control of complex plastic film extrusion processes,
particularly in the context of widely variable input materials such as recycled
plastics. The AI software will be robust to changes in the production
environment and will account for process drift over time. These technology
capabilities are industrially novel and not known in the academic literature.
Phase I outcomes suggest that the technology can automatically control extrusion
processes to achieve optimal steady state production faster than is the
currently possible via human control. The AI-based expert system effectively
recreates the knowledge tacitly held by long-experienced factory operators. This
type of industrial automation has the potential to be value-generating for the
wider manufacturing sector. The proposed technology may be applicable to a wider
range of extrusion manufacturing processes, such as extrusion of metals, paper
or advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.