* 2212750
* Elucidating the Role of ON and OFF Visual Pathways in Object Segmentation for Escape Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Fabrizio Gabbiani, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/28/2027
* USD 800,000.00

The project will investigate how the nervous system generates specific responses
to visual stimuli associated with objects approaching on a collision course.
Reliable and precise responses to such stimuli is often critical to take evasive
actions and may be the difference between life and death in many situations. The
project will use the nervous system of grasshoppers and locusts for these
investigations as the neural processing underlying collision avoidance is
particularly well understood in these animals. The project will gather data
using a variety of experimental techniques and model the neural pathways
responsible for the visual detection of approaching objects leading to collision
avoidance under different simulated environmental conditions. A better
understanding of the biological mechanisms leading to the robust detection of
approaching objects may help design more robust and energy-efficient artificial
collision avoidance systems such as small drones or portable devices for blind
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of work, the large-scale visual
processing that results in visual object segmentation or identification remains
poorly understood. In grasshoppers, the postulated mechanisms of object
segmentation for collision avoidance and escape behavior rely on complex
processing within the extended dendritic tree of a single neuron resembling in
its morphology and synaptic organization that of a Purkinje cell in the
cerebellum. Synaptic inputs impinging on this neuron are segregated into ON and
OFF pathways with distinct anatomical properties allowing to investigate how
they combine to encode textured stimuli mixing both contrast polarities. Several
conductances involved in the processing of OFF inputs are ubiquitous in the
dendrites of a wide range of neuron types. Thus, understanding how these
conductances implement object segmentation will shed light on how they could
implement similar neural computations across the nervous system. These dendritic
conductances interact with Ca+2 and Ca+2-activated K+ conductances located close
to the spike initiation zone that switch the neuron's firing mode between tonic
and bursting. This project will shed light on how transitions between these two
firing modes contribute to neural computation, as has been postulated in other
sensory systems. The results are expected to shed light on how complex sensory
information contributes to the generation of escape behaviors by integrating
results at different levels of complexity, ranging from single conductances to
whole organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.