* 2212613
* ICBR: Capacity: Biological Collections: Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota (NCMA)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 07/31/2025
* USD 346,729.00

Algae have been a natural source of food, feeds and fertilizers for coastal
communities for millennia. Modern biotechnology uses of algae in human systems
have been rapidly expanding in scope and diversifying in application over the
past few decades, in no small part due to the maintenance and availability of
algae culture centers. The National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota
(NCMA) at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is a public resource whose
mission is to promote, support, and enable the use of algae for foundational
research, education, and commercial applications. For nearly four decades, the
NCMA has provided this unique resource for researchers, students at all levels,
educators and companies worldwide, all interested in working with microalgae to
investigate fundamental questions in biology, global processes and
biotechnology. This new research funding will continue to support the NCMA in
its mission, and importantly expand the value of its algae holdings by
supporting the compilation of new and existing data and information about each
of the algae strains it holds. Professionally curated microalgae culture
collections, from well-respected sources such as NCMA, are essential to support
biological research in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCMA is one
of a small number of culture collections focused on algal biodiversity, and the
only one in the U.S. with a primary focus on marine microalgae. The NCMA curates
~2,800 distinct microalgal and ~1600 macroalgal strains isolated from around the
world, with many of the algae in the NCMA Collection being unique and
representing an irreplaceable genetic resource. The specific scientific
objectives of this project are to 1) maximize curated biodiversity of marine
microalgae, and expand macroalgae strain holdings; 2) expand high-throughput
cryopreservation capabilities in order meet the increasing needs of a
diversified user base; 3) generate phenotypic trait data for NCMA strains,
namely photoheterotrophic growth capabilities and quantified toxin content; and
4) continue to expand our education/workforce portfolio. Studying curated algae
from the NCMA collection provides a genomic, physiological and/or evolutionary
compass; it essentially points external researchers in a direction that allows
them to develop the appropriate hypotheses, models or diagnostic tools to
investigate their questions in nature. Beyond curating algae, the NCMA curators
and researchers generate essential research data on the characterization of its
collection (e.g., growth rates and capabilities, biochemical characterization,
etc.) creating great value to the broader scientific and entrepreneurial
communities, and enabling rapid progress in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.