* 2212402
* SBIR Phase I:  Intraoperative monitoring device to detect bowel injuries during laparoscopic surgical procedures
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Devin Fell, SENTIRE MEDICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to make laparoscopic and robotic
assisted abdominal surgery safer for patients, and less costly for the
healthcare system. Though a somewhat rare complication, inadvertent bowel injury
during the more than 15 million laparoscopic procedures performed annually can
be catastrophic for patients resulting in extended hospitalization, multiple
corrective surgeries, lifelong medical complications, and, in more than 5% of
cases, death. In addition, the direct costs associated with this complication
can be substantial including intensive care convalescence and the potential for
litigation given the nature of damages suffered by patients. Intraoperative
detection of bowel injuries during surgery provides a simple, yet elegant
solution enabling immediate repair and avoidance of negative outcomes. This
projectâ€™s commercial potential includes availability in more than 49,000
operating suites and an addressable market of $750 million per annum. The
proposed innovation will significantly enhance patient safety, reduce costs
associated of corrective care, and generate revenue from U.S. based
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to enable intraoperative detection of bowel
injuries by identifying gases typically sequestered to the interior of the
gastrointestinal tract. To accomplish this, these target gases must be
sufficiently differentiable from background gases and other agents typically
present during laparoscopic or robotic surgery. Such background agents present a
meaningful technical challenge in that they present the potential for false
positive detection results. Characterization of all potentially present agents
will be completed such that they can be sufficiently differentiated from target
gastrointestinal gases. A high precision gas chromatography system and custom
fabricated chamber replicating surgical conditions including temperature,
pressure, humidity and gas flow rate will be used to precisely identify and
distinguish all potentially present gases. Once all potentially cross-reactive
gases are characterized, a combination of physical filtration and algorithmic
signal processing will be used to ensure proper differentiation/recognition of
gas species and avoidance of potential false positive
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.