* 2212590
* CNS Core: Medium: Distributed Runtime Dataplane Telemetry as an Adaptive Query Scheduling Problem: Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,088,131.00

The networks comprising the Internet must be monitored to ensure high quality,
reliable service to end users. Emerging network telemetry systems that rely on
modern data plane technologies (e.g., programmable switches) offer a high degree
of visibility into todays’ networks and promise to enable a new generation of
network security and network performance applications (e.g., detecting new
cyberattacks; supporting quality-of-experience requirements for video
streaming). These systems consider tasks that are defined as queries and
compiled onto a switch. The switch then performs packet processing at line rate
for only those packets that satisfy the given query. However, existing network
telemetry system are typically designed for static query and traffic workloads,
don’t scale with the number of queries or traffic rate, and assume that tasks
are simple (e.g., stateless, single switch). This project seeks to develop a
class of next-generation network telemetry systems that address these
challenges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The emergence of runtime programmable data
plane devices is leveraged by this project, which seeks to develop and
experimentally evaluate a scalable telemetry system that can accommodate traffic
and query dynamics and support adaptive telemetry applications over multiple
switches across a network. These devices allow for time-division-multiplexing of
limited switch resources which in turn facilitates fine-grained resource
management to cope with dynamics and achieve scalability. The novel scientific
contributions of this project include (i) a multi-objective approximation-based
query scheduling scheme to manage resources on a single switch with multiple
stages while controlling accuracy-latency-reporting load tradeoff; (ii) an
extension of the scheduling scheme to seamlessly support queries that require
traffic visibility across multiple switches; and (iii) support for adaptive
telemetry applications to facilitate their stateful and iterative execution, and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.