* 2212748
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Fire-Safe and Low-Cost Flow Batteries using New Membranes for Long-Duration Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Rong Jiang, ENERGAO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is derived from providing energy self-
sufficiency to residential buildings. Fire-safe and low-cost redox flow
batteries, combined with rooftop solar panels or backyard wind turbines, can
meet the increased electricity needs of American families without relying on the
national grid. During the daytime, solar arrays convert solar energy to chemical
energy in batteries. During evenings, batteries will power houses and charge
electric vehicles in family garages. Batteries play a critical role in
harvesting and storing clean electricity for residential uses. Compared with
lithium-ion batteries, the improved fire-safety profiles and reduced production
costs of flow batteries will give homeowners peace of mind and allow the wider
adoption of clean energy by society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR phase I
project proposes to develop novel proton-conductive polymeric membranes that
show reduced metal electrolyte crossovers and build the first 7 kW flow battery
system that meets the energy need of a single-family house. To this end, the
project will synthesize a group of phosphorylated polybenzimidazoles (PBIs) that
have a phosphoric acid side chain. Such phosphoric acid groups can form unique
zirconium phosphonate clusters that transport protons but deny the unwanted
migration of metal cations. PBIs provide mechanical support to the zirconium-
phosphate clusters. Zirconium and PBIs are bulk materials that cost
significantly less than commercial perfluorosulfonic acids. The second task of
this phase I project is to construct a 7 kW iron-titanium redox flow battery
system. The peak electricity demand for the average American single-family house
is around 7 kW. Such a battery will be connected to a rooftop solar system to
meet residential electricity demands. The team plans to study various cell
configuration designs. In particular, the project will focus on examining the
effects of solvent channels of bipolar plates on the performance of the stack.
In addition, other design parameters, such as pump flow rates and the choice of
sealant materials, will be thoroughly investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.