* 2212011
* Driving Quantum Systems with Classical Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Irena Knezevic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 357,323.00

The ability to control the movement of electrons in semiconductor devices lies
at the core of electronics, photonics, and phononics, which are basic-science
fields that give rise to technological advances in energy, communication,
sensing, information science, and security. Electrons are very small particles
found in every atom, and they obey the laws of quantum mechanics, which makes it
challenging to interact with them and control their motion in a highly
predictable fashion. The central question behind this project is how one can use
light and sound, both classical waves commonly encountered in daily lives, to
excite or drive electrons in modern semiconductors devices. The size of these
devices is a few nanometers, less than a thousandth of the thickness of a strand
of human hair. Owing to the device small size and inescapable imperfections, it
is much more challenging to understand how light and sound interact with
electrons in devices than it is to answer the same question in much larger
systems, such as bulk materials. However, the small device size may also lead to
the emergence of striking new phenomena with great technological impact. To that
end, state-of-the-art simulation software to analyze how electrons in nanoscale
devices interact with classical light and sound will be developed during this
project. Microscopic theory and accurate simulation tools benchmarked against
experiment, such as those that will be developed during the course of this
project, are invaluable for deepening the understanding of the world at the
nanoscale and for predicting new phenomena and functionalities, all at a
fraction of experimental cost. This project will benefit experimental groups in
industry and academia by helping design new devices. The codes will be
distributed as open source through GitHub to ensure widespread
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can classical waves, electromagnetic or acoustic,
be used to excite or drive quantum electronic systems in modern nanostructures?
This question cuts through electronics, photonics, and phononics, and has
technological repercussions ranging from energy to communication, sensing,
information science, and security. The answer requires a deep understanding of
the physical processes that characterize the interplay of charge with light and
sound in nanomaterials and nanostructures, and the answer differs greatly from
its analogue in bulk materials because the low dimensionality and small size of
these systems result in their sensitivity to boundaries and edges, disorder,
surrounding materials properties, and may also lead to the emergence of striking
new plasmonic, polaronic, and excitonic phenomena. To that end, the objective in
this project is to develop and deploy a comprehensive modeling approach,
employing state-of-the-art simulation techniques for classical electromagnetic
and elastic waves coupled with an efficient density-matrix technique for quantum
electronic transport in order to understand and harness the interplay of light,
sound, and charge at the nanoscale. The work will be organized into two thrusts,
each centered on one type of the classical wave. Under Thrust 1: Lightâ€“matter
interaction in nanomaterials, recent algorithmic advances in field-potential
finite-difference time-domain computational electromagnetics will be integrated
with those involving quantum transport simulation using the density matrix. In
this new self-consistent solver, quantum transport and classical electrodynamics
will be coupled self-consistently and at every time step. Under Thrust 2: Sound-
matter interaction in nanomaterials, recent computational advances in the
simulation of elastic-wave scattering in disordered media will be integrated
with those involving quantum electron transport simulation using the density
matrix. The new simulation will analyze systems in which surface acoustic waves
drive quantum electronic transport in light-emitting nanostructures. The codes
will be distributed as open source through GitHub, and will benefit
experimentalists designing new devices. Undergraduate researchers will also take
part in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.