* 2212800
* Collaborative Research: PlantSynBio: Deciphering the roles of genetic and biochemical redundancy and pathway regulation via refactoring the protective plant cuticle
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Erin Sparks, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2025
* USD 519,299.00

As stationary organisms that are faced with surviving constantly changing
environments, plants have evolved specialized features to protect against
environmental stresses. One of these features is an exterior protective barrier
on aerial plant surfaces called the cuticle. The cuticle acts as a physical
barrier between the plant and its environment, functioning to limit the loss of
water and gasses. Although many key genes that function in making the cuticle
have been identified, a holistic view of how the cuticle is built is missing.
This project will engineer two novel, parallel synthetic biology systems that
are normally devoid of a cuticle (yeast cells and plant roots) to build a
cuticle from scratch and decipher the complexities of the biochemical pathways
underlying this unique plant feature. Systematically determining how a cuticle
is built will lead to important applications such as the breeding of crop plants
with customized cuticles that may have enhanced tolerance to environmental
stresses, as well as cuticle-inspired chemicals for the biorenewables industry.
Moreover, this project will train the next generation of multi-disciplinary
scientists, and build teaching and research initiatives with the ultimate goal
of increasing the proportion of the scientific workforce who are from STEM-
underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary
project will build and test two synergistic synthetic biology chassis in systems
that do not naturally produce a cuticle (i.e., plant roots and the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae) to systematically refactor the transcriptional
regulatory network, and the metabolic pathways that assemble the protective,
hydrophobic cuticle barrier. These two synthetic chassis will be used to
comprehensively model and quantitatively understand the integrated mechanisms
that assemble a functional plant cuticle. The root chassis will be used to study
the coordinated activation of cuticle assembly by plant transcription factors.
This chassis will provide temporal transcriptional and metabolic data to enable
the development of dynamic predictive models that provide a holistic view of
cuticle metabolism and its associated regulation. A second chassis relies on
multiple engineered yeast plug-and-play systems expressing different genetic
complements capturing the gene redundancies within the pathway that will be
assessed for the production of synthetic cuticle constituents. The metabolic
data generated from these strains will be the inputs for kinetic modeling, which
will provide the first kinetic understanding of this complex pathway. The
coordinated development of the plant root and yeast chassis in combination with
the proposed computational framework will provide a novel platform for
discovery, and systematic analysis of cuticle
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.