* 2212236
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: MEDIUM: MASON: Memory at Scale on Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Peter Alvaro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Many of the essential services on which Americans depend---including finance,
education, and health---require processing large amounts of data that far
outstrip the capabilities of a single computer. Historically, to build such
services, system designers employ what is called a ``scale-out, shared-nothing
architecture,'' in which data is spread across an ensemble of computers, each of
which processes the data locally when it can, and coordinates its actions by
exchanging messages with other computers. However, as increasingly data-hungry
applications require these systems to process ever-larger inputs in shorter
amounts of time, these shared-nothing designs have begun to show their
weaknesses: the interfaces they provide are too difficult to evolve as
applications change; they assume that computers have roughly equivalent
capabilities, which is less and less true as processors become more diverse; and
they place undue burden on the application developer to decide exactly where
data should be placed and when it should move. The traditional alternative to
the shared-nothing architecture is "shared-everything", in which all computers
accessed the same shared memory resource. However, in the past, shared-
everything designs were dismissed as infeasible. We argue that several emerging
technological trends, including increased network speeds, new types of
persistent memory, and the heterogenization of computing make the conditions
ripe to revisit the alternative shared-everything approach. This project will
develop a tightly coupled co-design of novel operating system and network,
leveraging these trends, to realize a practical shared-everything architecture.
If the project succeeds, it will result in a radically different, and
dramatically simpler, programming model for building distributed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system, named MaSON(Memory at Scale
On Networks), will explore how to provide reliable, low-latency access to large
pools of remote, disaggregated memory from an increasingly distributed and
heterogeneous computing environment. In particular, it will explore fundamental
questions about: (i) the design of memory protocols over network fabrics, (ii)
the appropriate role of computation-enhanced networks, and (iii) providing
fault-tolerance and robustness for persistent memory. Programming models for
disaggregated, persistent memory will also be considered. The work will result
in a network/operating system co-design around a shared notion of long-lived
data references, supporting remote access to disaggregated memory. The project's
output is broadly applicable to industry, government and academia dealing with
large datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.