* 2212702
* CAS-Climate: A Novel Process-Driven Method for Flood Frequency Analysis Based on Mixed Distributions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Giuseppe Mascaro, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 356,095.00

Floods are among the most common and impactful natural hazards. In the U.S.,
these extreme events caused a total of $144.4 billion in damages and 2550
fatalities from 1991 to 2020. A crucial task to limit the impacts of flooding,
design infrastructure, and manage water resources is to increase the accuracy of
flood frequency estimates. These are currently generated through statistical
analyses of annual peak flows under the implicit assumption that flood events at
a given site are caused by the same physical mechanism. This assumption has been
challenged by observational evidence and demonstrated to lead to inaccurate
estimates. This project will address key limitations of current flood frequency
methods by designing a novel approach that incorporates the effect of multiple
physical mechanisms leading to flood generation into a statistical model. The
approach will be tested at more than 1000 stream gages covering a large range of
climatic conditions in the U.S. The knowledge generated by the project will (1)
contribute to improving national guidelines for flood estimation, (2) be
disseminated to regional stakeholders involved in flood management through
training activities, and (3) innovate curricula at Arizona State University. An
undergraduate and graduate students will be directly involved in the project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research hypothesis of this project is
that the accuracy of flood frequency analysis is improved by using mixed
probability distributions of peak-over-threshold (POT) flood series associated
with a set of dominant atmospheric and hydrologic processes. To investigate this
hypothesis, the dominant large-scale meteorological patterns (LSMPs) causing
flood events will be first identified from atmospheric reanalyses. Key
hydrologic processes and conditions occurring in the basins under different
flood-producing LSMPs will be obtained from the recent retrospective hydrologic
simulations of the National Water Model. Machine learning will be applied to
variables characterizing LSMPs and hydrologic processes to group flood events in
each basin into a set of dominant flood-generating mechanisms. The hypothesis
that the corresponding flood sub-samples are drawn from statistically
heterogeneous populations will be tested with a new regional framework based on
statistical tests, Monte Carlo simulations, and physical considerations. These
physical and statistical insights will be incorporated into a novel method for
flood frequency analysis based on mixed distributions of POT series. Performance
and uncertainty of the mixed POT model will be quantified and compared with
those of homogenous distributions fitted to annual peak flows, as in current
approaches, and to POT series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.