* 2212146
* Renewal: Overcoming Energy Loss in Organic Bulk Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 666,555.00

Non-technical Description. Solar technologies are increasingly providing energy
across the US at costs well below even that of fossil fuels. In short, solar
energy is delivering on its promise as a source of low cost, clean and renewable
energy. However, solar solutions have largely been based on silicon, which is
far from an optimal solution. New solutions must have the objective of making
solar power ubiquitous, helping to fulfill our ever-expanding energy needs.
These include solar power generating windows and building-integrated
photovoltaics as well as devices that operate at very low light levels to
scavenge waste illumination power. This is an urgent and fundamental
technological challenge. Recently, there have been dramatic increases in the
efficiency of potentially low-cost organic solar cells to over 19%, approaching
that of silicon cells. This project is directed at determining the ultimate
power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells. The investigators will study
new organic materials with state-of-the-art optical spectroscopy to understand
the power generating mechanisms that limit the efficiency of organic solar
cells. The principles derived from these studies can provide molecular design
rules and guide the improvement of organic solar cells towards their theoretical
limit of ~25% efficiency. The project supports training of a diverse workforce
through the education of graduate and undergraduate students in materials
design, synthesis, and characterization, coupled with device engineering and
scientific communication. The PIs will recruit and retain a diverse next
generation of students in STEM fields through diversity, equity and inclusion
efforts at the University of Michigan, including outreach to underrepresented
groups and hosting a Conference for Undergraduate Women in
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. The primary goal of this
project is to understand and improve organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices through
improved materials and device design strategies based on quantum mechanical
models. Dramatically reduced energy losses in the charge photogeneration process
may ultimately provide a pathway towards ultralow cost solar power in situations
where established, mature solar technologies are less effective. Beyond solar
energy harvesting, these systems open new avenues for engineering materials for
charge and energy transport at the atomistic level, and for their exploitation
in applications as light emission, energy and charge transfer over exceptional
distances, and may even result in extending electronic technology well beyond
its current limits. This project combines the investigators’ extensive expertise
in OPV materials, design and characterization with state-of-the-art and emerging
multidimensional spectroscopies to understand the energy loss mechanisms that
currently limit single junction organic solar cell device efficiencies. The
principles derived from these fundamental studies provide molecular design rules
to guide the improvement of cell efficiencies towards their thermodynamic limit
of ~25%. The work significantly expands the spectroscopic toolbox for probing
OPVs, providing transformative opportunities for understanding the mechanisms of
charge generation and concomitant energy losses. The research has the following
primary goals: (i) Gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms governing
charge generation and energy loss at organic heterojunctions (HJs) to increase
the solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency to near the thermodynamic
limit; (ii) Map the complete HJ charge photogeneration process using
multidimensional spectroscopy to probe the mechanisms of charge generation and
the origins of energy loss; (iii) Exploit ultrastrong coupling in unique light
harvesting architectures to realize exciton-polariton transfer with near-zero
energy loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.