* 2212906
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrathin endomicroscope
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Antonio Miguel Caravaca Aguirre, MODENDO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to empower brain scientists with a high-
resolution optical imaging instrument to reach currently inaccessible regions of
the brain with minimal damage. The instrument contains thin fiber optics probes
that enable access to very narrow cavities within the body or penetration of
tissue. Deep brain imaging, photo-stimulation, and photo-ablation are possible
applications, all of which could help understand brain function and potentially
unlock treatments for brain diseases. The imaging instrument to be developed in
this project may be amenable to scientific studies in animal models, addressing
the need of neuroscientists and imaging facilities. The proposed technology
could bring about innovations in biophotonics instrumentation as well as in the
ensuing biomedical applications. The project seeks to advance novel imaging
technologies with broad applicability addressing a new segment in the endoscopy
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses a critical need in scientific brain imaging studies
for endoscopes that are minimally invasive with a diameter in the order of 100
microns, which represents a cross-area about 10 times smaller than the thinnest
existing endoscopes. While current endoscopes are appropriate for insertion in
large cavities, their size produces excessive damage in brain imaging
applications. The objective is to develop a new class of fundamentally less
invasive techniques to investigate novel imaging probes, and to validate a
prototype instrument in animal models. It is anticipated that in-vivo imaging of
neurons with subcellular resolution at depth will become routine with minimal
tissue damage. This novel imaging approach implements wavefront shaping in
multimode fibers, using advanced machine learning and signal processing methods,
to generate arbitrary digitally-reprogrammable light patterns and 3D images. The
ultrathin endomicroscope (UTE) uses a spatial light modulator to first calibrate
the fiber and then scan light at high speed, compensating for the inherent modal
dispersion and intermodal coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.