* 2212265
* HCC Core: Medium: Making Meaning out of Crisis: Mixed-Methods Investigation into the Nature and Impact of Framing Processes During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Eric Baumer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,222,956.00

This research investigates the role in online media of framing processes, the
concepts and logical structures that individuals and communities develop to
understand major current events. It focuses on the COVID-19 pandemic, a global
health crisis that has been unique not only for its unprecedented magnitude and
severity, but also for the media environment in which people communicated about
it. Government organizations, news services, online groups, local communities,
and individual persons all interact as they seek to understand, orient toward,
and situate themselves in relation to events unfolding in real time. These
diverse participants continually frame and reframe events across multiple
communication platforms in ways that reinforce, undermine, subvert, fracture, or
even entirely replace one another. It is important to understand not only the
dynamics of these processes themselves but also how they relate with individual,
community, and societal beliefs and behaviors. Addressing global health events
requires understanding how individuals and communities interpret those events.
The work will contribute to communication and media studies, computational
linguistics, and social computing. The research findings will also inform the
development of educational modules designed to enrich students' understanding of
the role that technology can play in mediating our understanding of major
current events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To analyze framing as a process that occurs
within a diverse media ecology, this project synergistically combines
perspectives and methods from varied disciplines across four interconnected
phases. Phase 1 will apply qualitative methods from media studies, health
humanities, and science and technology studies to analyze dominant framings of
the pandemic, as well as how people understand their responses to and
participation in those framings. Phase 2 will place the methods and findings
from Phase 1 in dialog with computational techniques, both informing the
implementation details of those techniques and offering textual foci for further
qualitative analysis. Phase 3 will derive testable hypotheses from Phase 1 and
Phase 2 about how framing processes interact with people's beliefs and
behaviors, and it will develop innovative methods that can experimentally test
those hypotheses in real world settings. In Phase 4, reflexive engagement with
diverse stakeholders will enrich both researchers' and stakeholders'
understandings of their role in framing the pandemic within a diverse media
ecology. Analyses across all phases will generate findings that advance research
on how individuals, communities, and societies communicate within heterogeneous,
sometimes volatile networked media environments to form understandings that
guide both beliefs and behavior about major current
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.