* 2212345
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Automated energy-efficient sensor data winnowing using native analog processing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ramesh Harjani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 436,410.00

As computing becomes pervasive in all aspects of daily life, computing hardware
must allow for increasing interaction with the physical world. This interaction
takes the form of sensed signals that are analog in nature, e.g., a sensor may
output a voltage that can take on a continuous range of values. Traditional
mainstream computing digitizes this data, converting it to digital 0s and 1s for
efficient analysis and processing. However, as the amount of sensed analog data
is growing exponentially, digital processors will be faced with a data deluge
from external sensors. For these vast volumes of data, even the cost of
converting analog input data to digital signals, prior to any processing, can be
prohibitively expensive. Native analog processing (NAP) negates the need for
analog-to-digital conversion by working in the analog domain. NAP can be used to
implement data processing functions inexpensively, but can achieve only limited
accuracy; on the other hand, digital processing can achieve high accuracy, but
requires the overhead of analog-to-digital conversion. This project presents a
methodology for mixed-signal processing that hybridizes digital and analog
subcircuit implementations to achieve the best of both worlds. The effort
intends to actively engage with the semiconductor industry, and will train
graduate and undergraduate students in the area of semiconductor design, thus
alleviating the national skills shortage in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the first step, computing tasks are automatically partitioned into hybrid
analog/digital segments, with the goal of meeting system-level constraints on
throughput, power, and noise/error. The computations associated with a task are
abstractly represented by a dataflow graph (DFG). This representation is widely
used to model a variety of tasks, including those commonly used in digital
signal processing and machine learning. The nodes in the DFG are mapped to
analog or digital implementations, using cost functions that represent the cost
of implementation, as well as the cost of any required analog-to-digital or
digital-to-analog conversion. Next, the analog and digital circuitry is
optimized to build a silicon implementation at the layout level, based on
cutting-edge transistor technologies, which involve restrictive design rules
that impose limitations such as unidirectional routing and gridded layout. The
optimizations are facilitated by novel techniques for back-end analysis,
synthesis, and implementation developed in this project, including transistor
and interconnect optimizations, placement and routing techniques that are
specifically targeted to mixed-signal designs, and compact performance machine-
learning-based model generation that efficiently predicts circuit performance.
The project thus automatically translates the system-level DFG specification of
a computing task to an optimized mixed-signal silicon
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.