* 2212920
* SBIR Phase II:  A Rapid, Sensitive Pathogen Typing and Antibiotic Sensitivity Test for Bloodstream Infections (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Rachel Tinker-Kulberg, Kepley Biosystems Incorporated
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,025,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project seeks to develop an improved era of infectious disease management,
allowing rapid intervention for antibiotic therapy to stem the 30% mortality
rate and associated cost impact of sepsis. With some 49 million cases worldwide
and a 25-30% mortality rate, sepsis claims 11 million lives annually. Sepsis
cases have been increasing 8.7% per year. To address the full spectrum of
infectious diseases, innovations must deliver simple and affordable testing
capabilities similar to routine hospital admission blood analyses. The proposed
antifungal and antibacterial susceptibility test for the detection and treatment
of bloodstream infections could benefit patients by improving patient management
and hospital logistics. Sepsis is the most expensive healthcare challenge, with
an estimated financial impact of more than $62 billion per year. This
bloodstream infection screening assay could impact the entire continuum of care
– from initial hospital interactions through patient care and discharge – by
identifying infections early, optimizing treatment, and increasing survival.
Direct customer survey-based estimates and independent information sources
project a U.S. commercial opportunity of 226 million annual assays (36 million
hospital admissions, 40 million intensive care patients, 130 million emergency
walk-ins, and 20 million presurgical evaluations).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project could result in the development of a user-friendly and
affordable analytical tool for early detection of bloodstream infections that
differentiates bacterial and fungal pathogens associated with sepsis and
determine their antibiotic sensitivity in hours. Sepsis is a major public health
and economic concern that results in one human death every 2.8 seconds. If
bloodstream infections go undetected or untreated, patients can quickly escalate
into sepsis or septic shock with mortality chances increasing by 8% per hour
without appropriate antibiotic administration. Rapid and accurate detection of a
bloodstream infections prior to the onset of sepsis is critical to limit the
extent of tissue and organ damage, mortality, and associated hospital costs. The
proposed innovation includes the use of an FDA-approved reagent called Limulus
Amebocyte Lysate for clinical bloodstream infections and antifungal
antibacterial susceptibility testing to guide therapeutic interventions, and
routine surveillance of high-risk patient populations. The technical approach
for this Phase II encompasses proficiency studies that would validate high-
throughput detection of pathogens, as well as their antimicrobial sensitivity
and resistance profiles in clinical blood specimens. Additionally, assay
miniaturization and automation would be performed and are considered critical
for future in vitro diagnostic partnership adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.