* 2212904
* OPP-PRF: Benthic Iron Fluxes and Cycling in the Amundsen Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lisa Herbert, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,395.00

The Amundsen Sea, near the fastest melting Antarctic glaciers, hosts one of the
most productive polar ecosystems in the world. Phytoplankton serve as the base
of the food chain, and their growth also removes carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. Phytoplankton growth is fertilized in this area by nutrient iron,
which is only present at low concentrations in seawater. Prior studies have
shown the seabed sediments may provide iron to the Amundsen Sea ecosystem.
However, sediment sources of iron have never been studied here directly. This
project fills this gap by analyzing sediments from the Amundsen Sea and
investigating whether sediment iron fertilizes plankton growth. The results will
help scientists understand the basic ecosystem drivers and predict the effects
of climate change on this vibrant, vulnerable region. This project also
emphasizes inclusivity and openness to the public. The researchers will
establish a mentoring network for diverse polar scientists through the Polar
Impact Network and communicate their results to the public through the website
CryoConnect.org. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages samples already
collected from the Amundsen Sea (NBP22-02) to investigate sediment iron (Fe)
cycling and fluxes. The broad questions driving this research are 1) does
benthic Fe fertilize Antarctic coastal primary productivity, and 2) what are the
feedbacks between benthic Fe release and carbon cycling in the coastal
Antarctic? To answer these questions, the researchers will analyze pore water Fe
content and speciation and calculate fluxes of Fe across the sediment-water
interface. These results will be compared to sediment characteristics (e.g.,
organic carbon content, reactive Fe content, proximity to glacial sources) to
identify controls on benthic Fe release. This research dovetails with and
expands on the science goals of the “Accelerating Thwaites Ecosystem Impacts for
the Southern Ocean” (ARTEMIS) project through which the field samples were
collected. In turn, the findings of ARTEMIS regarding modeled and observed trace
metal dynamics, surface water productivity, and carbon cycling will inform the
conclusions of this project, allowing insight into the impact of benthic Fe in
the whole system. This project represents a unique opportunity for combined
study of the water column and sediment biogeochemistry which will be of great
value to the marine biogeochemistry community and will inform future sediment-
ocean studies in polar oceanography and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.