* 2212620
* Nineteenth Latin American Symposium on Mathematical Logic
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Antonio Montalban, Association For Symbolic Logic
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 27,000.00

This award supports the attendance of US-based researchers at the Nineteenth
Latin American Symposium on Mathematical Logic (the Simposio Latino Americano de
Lógica Matemática, or SLALM) at the Universidad de Costa Rica in San Jose, the
capital of Costa Rica, on July 26-30, 2022. The SLALM series meetings have been
held intermittently since the 1960's, usually every two to four years, always in
Latin America. These meetings have been instrumental in the growth of the
discipline of logic in the region during that time and in encouraging
cooperation between the logic communities in North and South America, as
researchers from the US and Canada frequently attend the SLALM. With the
expansion of this contact has come fruitful exchange: the very top ranks of
logicians in the U.S. include researchers born in Brazil and Uruguay, while
U.S.-born logicians have taken permanent jobs in countries such as Colombia, and
a substantial further number of researchers have traveled between the regions
for postdoctoral positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of as many as eighteen US-based logicians at the 2022 SLALM, with
an emphasis on students and junior researchers, and with preference for
researchers from groups underrepresented in mathematics. The award is
administered by the Association for Symbolic Logic, which has supported the
SLALM series since its inception. The 2022 SLALM includes plenary talks, four
mini-courses, and five thematic sessions: computability; model theory; non-
classical logics; philosophy of logic (with philosophical logic); and set
theory. The special sessions include prominent invited speakers and contributed
talks in which younger researchers will have the opportunity to present their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SLALM website:
https://paginas.cimpa.ucr.ac.cr/slalm/index.php/en/&lt;br/&gt;ASL website:
https://aslonline.org/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.