* 2212869
* SBIR Phase II:  Laparoscopic Device for Treatment of Varicocele and Related Conditions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Tushar Sharma, VIVIFI MEDICAL LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop of a safe and curative,
minimally invasive procedure leading to long-lasting outcomes for patients with
varicocele. Varicocele is the most common cause of male infertility and is also
associated with testicular pain, erectile disfunction, and low free
testosterone. Varicocele affects approximately 30 million men in the US alone
and is the direct cause of over 1.5 million infertile couples. Current methods
of treatment have low success rates, with only 50% of patients noticing &gt; 50%
improvement in sperm parameters and up to 37% of patients showing no change
after treatment. The treatment for varicocele has not changed since 1929 and
consists of ligation or occlusion of the internal spermatic vein, the primary
route of drainage for the testis. Even though surgical ligation procedures have
shown promising clinical efficacy, the technical difficulty in performing the
procedures and low success rates leave room for improvement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project seeks to leverage a highly effective procedure proposed to treat
varicocele. This procedure was proposed in the 1980s and was based on an
advanced understanding of hemodynamics responsible for pathophysiology of
varicocele. Through initial studies, this procedure showed groundbreaking
results and has been used in multiple independent studies to treat patients with
close to 100% success rates. Additionally, the complication rates are
significantly lower, with complete elimination of hydrocele formation,
recurrence rates of &lt; 0.2% and faster recovery times. However, this procedure
has not caught widespread adoption due to the high skill required to perform
this procedure. This SBIR project seeks to develop a technology that will lower
the barrier to perform the highly challenging procedure, thereby making the
procedure a reality for patients of varicocele and infertility. The resulting
device may afford patients the benefits of surgery, without the risk, ultimately
reducing overall cost of care associated with patients of
infertility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.