* 2212431
* NSF-BSF: HCC: Cultural Differences in Pedestrian-Autonomous Vehicle Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Wendy Ju, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,986.00

Pedestrians communicate and negotiate with drivers implicitly and explicitly
through their movement, as well as verbal communication, body language, and
gaze. Mismatches in perception, understanding and action between road users can
easily cause accidents. The advent of autonomy will necessitate a more explicit
understanding of the complex manner in which vehicles and pedestrians interact.
This research seeks to model how drivers implicitly communicate and coordinate
with pedestrians on the road, and to assess how these driving interactions
differ across cultures. The scientific contribution of this research will be new
models of driving interaction that characterize the implicit and explicit
communication and negotiation patterns that occur between road users. This
research is critical to enabling autonomous vehicles to sense, respond and adapt
to regional road interaction norms, and to improve safety and trust in
automation. This work benefits society by considering different cultures in the
development of advanced technologies in order to reduce risks associated with
poor design, cultural bias or unnecessary on-road
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific contribution of this research will
be new models of driving interaction that characterize the implicit and explicit
communication and negotiation patterns that occur between road users. The
project incorporates the collection and analysis of naturalistic data of
pedestrian-vehicle interactions in the US, Israel and Denmark, the use of
virtual reality simulation for experimental study using controlled scenarios
with which to elicit interactive behaviors between pedestrians and drivers and
the development a pedestrian-driver situation awareness model from the data
collected. The team will actively engage automotive industry and academic
researchers to validate models and to create a global database of pedestrian-
vehicle interaction behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.