* 2212199
* Collaborative Research: AGS-FIRP Track 2: Lake-Effect Electrification (LEE) and the Impacts of Wind Turbines on Electrification East of Lake Ontario
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Vanna Chmielewski, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 358,447.00

The Lake-Effect Electrification (LEE) Project will occur between September and
March 2022-23 focused on Lake Ontario and the downwind (east of the lake) region
of upstate New York. The frequent lake-effect snowstorms in this area produce
several thundersnow events each year, and this project will make the first ever
measurements of the electrical structure of lake-effect snow clouds and infer
how lightning within them is related to precipitation processes in the clouds.
During another recent NSF-funded project, the Ontario Winter Lake-effect Systems
(OWLeS) field campaign during the 2013-14 winter season, all lake-effect
lightning occurred inland and many flashes were associated with the Maple Ridge
Wind Farm, composed of approximately 200 turbines over 100 m tall. Lightning is
a significant cause of wind turbine damage (e.g., to the blades), increasing
wind energy generation costs. The study region is therefore an ideal natural
laboratory within which basic understanding of the electrical structure of
clouds can be advanced while also improving forecasts of such events and
understanding their impacts on energy infrastructure. This grant will involve
many undergraduate and graduate students in the collection and analysis of data,
developing measurement, instrumentation and data analysis skills while inspiring
their further education and interest in research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lake-Effect Electrification (LEE) Project is
focused over and east (the typical downwind/lee side) of Lake Ontario during the
cool season. Project LEE aims to document, for the first time, the total
lightning and electrical charge structures of lake-effect storms and the
associated storm environment using a lightning mapping array (LMA), a dual-
polarization X-band radar, and balloon soundings that will measure vertical
profiles of temperature, humidity, wind, electric field, and hydrometeor types.
Previous work has shown that the Great Lakes, especially Lake Ontario, initiate
lightning in a mix of precipitation types during lake-effect storms. Most of the
Lake Ontario lightning occurs during single, long-axis precipitation bands.
Several questions still remain, such as explaining the preponderance of positive
polarity lightning in some lake-effect and similar sea-effect storms (e.g.,
Japan), and why there has been a climatological shift in maximum lake-effect
lightning occurrence from over Lake Ontario to farther inland. This is likely
due to the recent wind farm construction in this area, but there are still many
unknowns on how these turbines produce lightning. Project LEE also affords the
opportunity to improve observations of convective-to-stratiform electrical
development due to the shallowness of lake-effect storms and the proximity of
these processes to the ground. Finally, lake-effect storm conditions represent
minimal thresholds for lightning initiation as many of these storms do not
produce lightning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.