* 2212582
* CPS Medium: Cooperative Driving in Heterogeneous Traffic of Manned and Unmanned Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Weihua Sheng, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 650,087.00

This Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) project will develop a theoretical framework
that facilitates safe cooperative driving in heterogeneous traffic of human-
operated and autonomously-operated vehicles and demonstrate its feasibility
through both simulation and physical experiments. This project will help improve
the safety of a transportation system currently being transformed by vehicles
with growing autonomous features. By introducing an add-on device, or copilot,
into legacy human-driven vehicles, this project will offer a smart driving
assistant that is aware of the driver's behaviors and can alert the driver when
the vehicle is at risk. When engaged in cooperative driving, the copilot will
provide advice that reduces the chance of collision with nearby vehicles. By
facilitating cooperative driving for both emerging autonomous vehicles and
legacy human-driven vehicles, this project will foster a positive attitude of
the public toward autonomous driving, therefore accelerating the adoption of
autonomous vehicles into the transportation system. The education and outreach
activities will raise more awareness of autonomous driving, Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and robotics to the younger generation, and stimulate
prospective students to pursue degrees and careers in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the challenging problem of
cooperative control of a cyber-physical-human system consisting of both human-
operated and autonomously-operated vehicles. First, by leveraging machine
learning technologies, this research will develop an integrated data-driven,
model-based approach to modeling vehicle driving behaviors with various levels
of human and machine control. New machine learning models of human driving
behaviors in the presence and absence of copilot's advice will be built, which
fuse both external risks and driver's behavior to infer vehicle's intended
maneuvers through a novel vehicle reaction model. Second, this research will
develop a unified decision framework for cooperative driving that leverages the
differences between humans and machines in sensing, analytics, and control to
produce real-time advice to autonomous vehicles and drivers for enhanced safety.
Such a framework can be extended to other classes of networked cyber-physical-
human systems, where intelligent advice to human operators can facilitate
collaboration and enhance system level performance and safety. Third, this
research will develop both simulated and physical testbeds for experimental
evaluation of the theoretical framework. Finally, this research will expand the
existing Cooperative Automation Research Mobility Applications platform to both
autonomous vehicles and legacy vehicles, which will allow researchers to study
new problems in future intelligent transportation systems that involve both
humans and machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.