* 2212894
* Stimuli-Responsive Membranes from Mesophase Templating
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Reza Foudazi, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 173,637.00

Water scarcity is a major issue facing the world today. As the world population
continues to grow, water resources become scarcer, particularly brackish water
in arid and semi-arid regions such as the southwestern U.S. Adequate access to
low-cost, energy-efficient, and environmentally sustainable methods for advanced
water treatment requires development and characterization of new membrane
technologies. Water treatment processes typically use several types of
membranes, including microfiltration, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration, and
reverse osmosis membranes. Ultrafiltration membranes play a key role in the
removal of suspended particles, viruses, and bacteria. Ultrafiltration membranes
are also among the most commonly employed separation techniques, with
applications in food processing, chemical manufacturing, and protein
purification. Despite their industrial relevance, ultrafiltration membranes are
produced by a method called non-solvent induced phase separation (NIPS), which
requires the use of large quantities of organic solvents. Membranes produced by
the NIPS process are also anisotropic with low surface porosity, leading to
increased fouling on the surface of the membrane. The overall goal of this
project is to develop ultrafiltration membranes through cost-effective green
chemistry, while simultaneously increasing their permeability, to reduce the
cost and energy of water treatment. Research and education are integrated in the
project through undergraduate research opportunities and the development of
research-related course materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fouling control,
particularly the control of biofouling, has been a major focus of wastewater and
water treatment research. However, many previously proposed methods to overcome
fouling are neither cost-effective nor extensible to different chemical
structures and polymers. Since filtration processes result in membrane fouling
that reduces the flux over the time, a surface washing process can be utilized
to clean the surface of a membrane. However, the low surface porosity of NIPS
membranes intensifies the fouling, which cannot completely be removed through
backwashing. Backwashing is also a major energy consumption step in filtration.
Ultrafiltration membranes with (i) improved permeability and decreased fouling,
without compromising the rejection rate, and (ii) stimuli-responsive behavior to
aid in surface washing are needed. The ability to produce these membranes in an
eco-friendly manner without the need to synthesize new or costly chemicals also
remains an outstanding technological challenge. The PI proposes to address these
challenges using an organic-solvent-free templating approach to produce
nanoporous polymers for ultrafiltration applications. Amphiphilic block
copolymer self-assembly in mixtures of water and an oil phase containing
monomers will be used as a template. Monomers in the oil phase, upon
polymerization, undergo a conformation-change response to temperature and pH
stimuli due to change in hydrophobicity. The pore size of such membranes can be
manipulated for controlling the molecular weight cut-off and anti-fouling
behavior. Because a higher density of nanometer-sized pores can be uniformly
incorporated into the polymers relative to existing ultrafiltration membrane
technology, the permeability of membranes produced from this method is also
expected to exceed that of commercial products without compromising the
rejection rate. Membrane structure will be characterized using polarized light
microscopy, small angle X-ray scattering, and treansmission electron microscopy.
Permeability, molecular weight cut-off, fouling, and solute rejection will be
examined through pressure-driven filtration experiments. The outcome of the
study will be foundational knowledge for making high-permeability
ultrafiltration membranes with stimuli-responsive pores through a green-
chemistry approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.