* 2212687
* SBIR Phase II: Development of a novel, highly efficient Descemet's Membrane Endothelial Keratoplasty preparation device expands the donor pool
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Katherine Solley, EYEDEA MEDICAL, INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project relates to the significant, unmet clinical and
commercial need of more than 25 million individuals waiting for a corneal
transplant to restore their vision. Corneal blindness leads to an increased risk
of physical harm, mental disorders, social isolation, and cognitive decline,
resulting in an over 15-year reduction in life expectancy. Fortunately, 95% of
corneal diseases can be treated via a transplant. Partial thickness corneal
transplants are innovative procedures that provide the best clinical outcomes
for over 90% of patients with corneal disorders; however, the difficulty of
safely and efficiently separating the layers of the cornea to prepare corneal
grafts and perform transplants has led to under-utilization of these procedures.
This project seeks to commercialize single-use, assistive devices for tissue
separation in corneal graft preparation and corneal transplant surgery with the
potential to improve the efficiency of eye banks and ophthalmologists, increase
access to corneal transplants, and improve the outcomes of these procedures.
These devices have a time- and capital-efficient path to improving patient
outcomes and entering the $340 million global market, annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project involves development of novel, first-in-class graft preparation and
assistive surgical devices that standardize, de-skill, and improve the viability
of the liquid bubble (LBT) and big bubble techniques (BBT) in corneal
transplantation. LBT is a graft preparation technique shown to prepare grafts in
minutes from all donor eyes; however, it is more difficult and rarely used by
eye banks. BBT is a surgical technique shown to provide efficient, precise
separation of layers of the cornea in transplant patients; however, it is
extremely challenging and leads to high rates of tissue perforation, with even
experienced surgeons reporting 5â€“39% failure rates. This project leverages a
technology for controlled separation of tissue layers to overcome the major
barriers of LBT and BBT and enable adoption of partial thickness corneal
transplant procedures. This proposal will test the hypotheses that this
technology can provide high quality grafts that fit into existing clinical
workflows and can enable safe, efficient, and standardized separation of corneal
layers without complications. These studies, in collaboration with leading eye
banks/corneal specialists, will advance device designs to ensure functionality,
usability, manufacturability, and efficacy in human donor
eyes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.