* 2212736
* MPS-Ascend: Understanding Khovanov Homology Through Configuration Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gabriel Montoya-Vega, Montoya-Vega, Gabriel Jaime
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Montoya-Vega is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Montoya-Vega supports the research project entitled "MPS-
Ascend: Understanding Khovanov Homology Through Configuration Spaces", under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
City University of New York (CUNY) Graduate Center, and the sponsoring scientist
is Dr. Yongwu Rong at Queens College, CUNY.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is to study the construction of link invariants using configuration
spaces with the goal of providing a topological construction of the Khovanov
homology. PI Montoya-Vega will incorporate the Khovanov-type homology theories
developed by Dr. Rong. The categorifications of graph polynomials such as the
chromatic polynomial, the Tutte polynomial, and the Penrose polynomial, are
expected to play a key role. In addition to the research goals, as a first-
generation Latino mathematician, the PI benefits from an insight to the
challenges faced by students and early career researchers from underrepresented
groups. Through conference organization and active encouragement as well as
mentoring, as well as by providing a successful role model, he aims to broaden
participation in mathematical and physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.