* 2212881
* MPS-Ascend: Eigenvector Statistics of the Adjacency Operator of Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Theo McKenzie, McKenzie, Theo R
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Theo McKenzie is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. McKenzie supports the research project entitled "MPS-Ascend:
Eigenvector Statistics of the Adjacency Operator of Graphs", under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Hong-Tzer
Yau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to study the structure of
eigenvectors of operators on graphs. The PI will work in three research
directions: deduce eigenvector and eigenvalue statistics such as the number of
nodal domains of random and semi-random graphs using the combinatorial structure
of the graph to prove eigenvector delocalization; bound the number of
eigenvalues near the edge of the spectrum for operators on graphs and manifolds
using PI's prior research; and generalize known results in quantum ergodicity to
graph families with arbitrary limits to further elucidate the connection between
eigenvector statistics of a graph family and those of the infinite limit. PI's
broadening participation activities are two-fold. One, the PI will leverage his
experience as a lead instructor at the associate degree program at San Quentin
State Prison, to teach and introduce a more advanced curriculum in the college
programs at prisons in Massachusetts, that have a high population of racial
minorities. This project aims to directly help those who are incarcerated learn
higher level math and thereby gain agency. Second, using his own experience as a
Black mathematician, create a community of postdocs and graduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds at Harvard. This group will interact with each
other and work on personal development activities thereby creating a welcoming
environment for researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.