* 2212068
* Melting of compressed iron-alloys using a multi-technique approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jennifer Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2025
* USD 389,009.00

Accurate estimates of the temperature range of Earth’s core are essential for
understanding major processes like inner core crystallization, magnetic field
generation, and heat flow through the core-mantle boundary, as well as the
compositions, phase relations, and dynamics of complex multiscale structures in
Earth's lowermost mantle. With its location several thousand kilometers below
the Earth's surface, determining its exact composition and temperature profile
is a challenge. Laboratory experiments, theory, seismic observations are used to
infer core characteristics. Seismological and cosmochemical observations
indicate that Earth's core consists of a solid inner region surrounded by a
liquid outer core, with iron as the main compositional constituent, but a
lighter element is needed in combination with iron to explain the density of the
core. This project explores the possibility of nickel or silicon as elements of
the the core. Outreach activities and benefits to society include the strong
engagement of the PI and involved graduate student in Caltech’s Seismological
Laboratory’s Earthquake Fellows Program, a partnership with the Dr. Lucy Jones
Center for Science and Society. This program is part of a multi-pronged program
with the goal of bringing geophysical science to the wider community in Southern
California, while creating an opportunity for communities that are historically
marginalized and underrepresented in the sciences to develop STEM
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have suggested silicon as a candidate
light element for the core of the Earth to explain the density deficit if one
assumes a core that is purely made of iron. However, the effect of silicon on
the melting temperatures of core materials and the thermal profile of the core
is poorly understood due to disagreements among melt detection techniques,
uncertainties in sample pressure evolution during heating, and sparsity of
studies investigating the combined effects of nickel and silicon on the phase
diagram of iron. This project takes the multi-technique approach developed by
this team of researchers for detecting melting of iron-alloys at high pressures
that combines results from two independent in-situ probes: synchrotron Mössbauer
spectroscopy, sensitive to dynamics of solid-bound iron, and x-ray diffraction,
sensitive to long-range crystalline order. They will apply the new multi-
technique method of melt detection to Fe, Fe-Ni, and Fe-Ni-Si at pressures
equivalent to those in Earth’s core, placing tighter constraints on the
temperature of Earth’s core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.