* 2212928
* LEAPS-MPS: Advancement of Functional Data Inference with Applications to Neuroimaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Honglang Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 243,215.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current brain imaging
technologies advance our understanding of brain functionality and disorders such
as autism spectrum disorder, Parkinson's disease, traumatic brain injury, and
Alzheimer's disease. The research will push this important work forward to
understand how a brain disorder develops with possible interaction with genetic
variants. The research will provide training opportunities for students from the
investigator's institution at all levels, including undergraduate, master, and
Ph.D. students in mathematics and statistics. The training activities will help
the participants to be prepared to continue their careers in industry and
academia. The research will also promote broadening participation and increase
the scientific workforce from underrepresented groups. In addition, the research
will enhance the research infrastructure at the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to develop functional data
analysis tools to understand the interaction between dynamic brain development
and genetics and genomics. The investigator will exploit statistical inference
methods in functional data classification and regression to identify the
progression of some cognitive disorders. Four specific aims of the research will
be investigated. The first aim is to study supervised projection based on the
heterogeneity in mean and covariance for robust functional data classifiers. The
second aim is to investigate parsimonious semiparametric reconstruction of
individual spatial-temporal surfaces. The third aim is to study the correct
incorporation of within-subject correlation for more efficient inference and
testing for concurrent functional linear models. The last aim is to implement
the methods through R packages to enhance scientific and technological
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.