* 2212240
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: A Comprehensive Modeling Framework for Cross-Layer Benchmarking of In-Memory Computing Fabrics:  From Devices to Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Kai Ni, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 428,186.00

This project will develop a framework for rapid and accurate design-space
explorations of application-level workloads assuming technology-enabled in-
memory computing (IMC), which is at present being investigated for a range of
application spaces (AI/machine learning, bioinformatics, graph processing,
etc.). IMC is of great interest as more and more compute workloads must process
ever growing amounts of data. Frequently, the energy and latency associated with
data transfer from a computer’s memory to a processor can overwhelm the cost of
the processing itself. As such, it is highly desirable to co-locate processing
and memory. Work in the project will result a publicly available, curated
framework that leverages both existing device models and design tools, and that
incorporates new device models and design tools to properly evaluate the IMC
design space with at-scale, application-level workloads. A modeling and
evaluation infrastructure will be developed to address the above
design/evaluation challenges as there is an obvious need to explore a vast
design space. Investigators in this project will also work with K-8 teachers to
augment existing STEM curricula with material that exposes students to
fundamental concepts and skills in computer science. This is especially relevant
as computer science concepts are now assessed on state-wide standardized tests.
Students from under-represented groups will be recruited and mentored via REU
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the IMC design space, device-level
modeling, circuit/architectural-level modeling, device non-ideality (e.g.,
variation) analysis, and ways to integrate heterogeneous architectural solutions
that target specific application-level workloads must all be studied. In the IMC
space, (i) the number of candidate technologies is large and ever-changing, (ii)
multiple candidate IMC circuits and architectures – e.g., computing at the array
periphery (CAP), content addressable memories (CAMs) and crossbars – exist,
(iii) IMC solutions may be more susceptible to device variations/non-idealities,
and this impact must be captured at the application level, (iv) emerging
technology-enabled IMC solutions may be used with existing architectural
solutions and/or in a variety of heterogenous designs, and (v) there are
effectively an infinite number of application-level mappings/potential
algorithmic changes that one might consider. With respect to device models,
there is a deliberate focus on ferroelectric devices – i.e., front-end-of-line
silicon ferroelectric field effect transistors, back-end-of-line metal-oxide
ferroelectric field effect transistors, and multi-gate ferroelectric field
effect transistors – owing to ever-growing interest in this technology as well
as the need to consider monolithic 3D processing/memory systems. For IMC
circuits/architectures, this project will expand and develop modeling/evaluation
tools for two different “flavors” of computing in memory – (i) CAMs (that can
report memory entries that best match a given query) and (ii) CAP. For CAMs,
representative efforts include projecting figures of merit for binary, ternary,
multi-level, and analog CAM arrays (read/write energy and latency, etc.) designs
implemented with different non-volatile memories, for different matching
functions. Determining optimal CAM array sizes and other design parameters will
also be considered. Evaluation of CAP designs for different NVMs will also be
developed. For applications, solutions based on IMC fabrics for a subset of
applications from MLPerf will be evaluated. MLPerf represents a consortium of AI
leaders who have derived relevant workloads for vision, language,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.