* 2212123
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Adaptation of Dendrimer-peptide Conjugates for Cancer Immunotherapy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Petr Kral, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,997.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Immunotherapy, utilization of a patientâ€™s own
immune system to treat diseases, has revolutionized cancer treatment. Most of
the immunotherapeutic drugs that are being used in the clinic are based on
biologics, such as antibodies (proteins that bind to specific antigens only),
that boost immune surveillance against tumor cells. However, such antibody-based
drugs are expensive and often result in disappointing clinical outcomes,
particularly when used alone. The use of peptides (macromolecules made from a
chain of 20-30 amino acids) would be a promising alternative; however, their
weaker binding than the corresponding antibodies has been recognized as a major
weakness. Recently, the collaborative team proposing this work have demonstrated
that small ball-shaped polymers (size of 1/10,000 of human hair thickness),
called poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers, can be engineered to dramatically
improve the binding strength of the peptides up to a million times. In this
proposal, the team hypothesizes that dendrimers attached with computationally
optimized peptides can boost up the immune system to attack tumor cells, thereby
maximizing their immunotherapeutic effect. Upon successful completion of this
project, the team will contribute to developing a new technology that would be
compatible with various immunotherapeutic peptides. Integrated with the research
effort, this project includes various educational activities that recruit
graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school students. These
activities will not only help advanced degree students be actively involved in
cutting-edge science but also stimulate STEM interests of pre-college students,
which will have profound impact on our nation to maintain the position as the
world leader of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research activities is to
integrate computational and experimental methods to engineer a nanoparticle
platform based on dendrimer-peptide conjugates for enhanced cancer
immunotherapy. The collaborative team has demonstrated that poly(amidoamine)
(PAMAM) dendrimers are excellent mediators for multivalent binding effects, as
observed by dramatically enhanced binding avidities of small molecules,
antibodies, and peptides. This nanoengineering approach for binding enhancement
could be directly applicable for improving cancer immunotherapy that relies on
efficient blocking of binding between immune and tumor cells. Given that strong
binding to the target immune checkpoint proteins, such as programmed death-
ligand 1 (PD-L1), programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1), and cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), is necessary to effectively induce
the checkpoint blockade, all the FDA-approved immune checkpoint inhibitors
(ICIs) to date are based on antibodies with strong binding affinities.
Unfortunately, such antibody-based therapeutics are expensive and often result
in disappointing clinical outcomes, particularly when used alone. The team
hypothesizes that dendrimer conjugation with computationally optimized peptides
that target multiple immune checkpoint receptors on T cells would substantially
improve the binding strength of otherwise weakly binding peptides, which in turn
would maximize their immunotherapeutic efficiency. The use of peptides would be
advantageous, as they are cost-effective and amenable to various engineering
strategies, in contrast to whole antibodies. The proposed dendrimer-peptide
conjugate (DPC) systems, consisting of engineered PAMAM dendrimers
functionalized with peptides, are relatively simple in comparison to other
commonly used nanoparticle drug delivery systems. Yet, the DPC systems are
unique and innovative in that: i) peptides can be adapted and optimized via a
high-throughput computation; ii) dendrimers multimerize peptides to exploit
strong multivalent binding effects (avidity); iii) folded peptides can be
stabilized on the dendrimer surface, further contributing for binding
enhancement; and iv) this approach is compatible with virtually any peptides,
providing a modular platform for various combinations. Upon successful
completion of this project, we will have obtained fundamental understanding in
peptide design/synthesis, polymer engineering, and binding kinetics and
biological behaviors of the DPCs. The project will broaden participation of
underrepresented minorities and women in STEM research at various educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.