* 2212386
* HCC: Small: Leadership Emergence for Synchronous Human-Autonomy Teaming
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2026
* Roseanne Foti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2026
* USD 608,000.00

Machines are increasingly autonomous, capable of performing many complex tasks
with little or no supervision. However, they still often need to work on teams
with humans in many real-world applications, where humans provide diverse,
redundant, and complementary skills that make the systems more resilient. Thus,
being able to build autonomous machines that can team well with humans will
become increasingly important in emerging applications such as driverless cars
and medical diagnosis. The research in this project moves toward allowing
machines to collaborate as humans do in large organizations, especially in terms
of leading, following, and synchronizing with others to complete critical tasks
in both routine and emergency situations. Ultimately, the project will enhance
the abilities of intelligent machines to work with humans to improve business
operations and serve the public in a robust and reliable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to define the emergent nature of
leadership and cognitive synchronization for integrating autonomy into multi-
agent organizations. The project team will ground the work in implicit
leadership theory, which predicts that leading and following dynamics in human
teams tend to result in granting leadership to the most competent and
trustworthy member regardless of a pre-defined authority structure. To leverage
this theory, the researchers will develop methods to support cognitive
synchronization across diverse tasks according to skill-, rule-, and knowledge-
based behaviors that classify human cognition and underlie assessments of trust.
Reinforcement learning approaches will be developed for selecting interaction
methods and improving interaction choices to promote long-term, productive
collaboration. These methods will be evaluated in computer simulations and field
experiments with unmanned vehicles and human teammates in the context of search
and rescue missions. The design principles and algorithms will be applicable to
many domains involving command and control with humans in the loop, such as
disaster response, air traffic control, and patient flow
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.