* 2212798
* I-Corps:  Noninvasive Wound Healing Using Pulsating Electromagnetic Fields (PEMFs)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Linghong Li, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of minimally invasive wound-healing technology. Hospital and nursing
home acquired injuries, especially venous stasis ulcers and pressure sores, can
negatively impact a patient’s mental, physical, social, and emotional well-
being, in addition to being concerning to immediate family and healthcare
providers. Treatment of chronic ulcers in the elderly is mostly palliative,
involving application of bandages or dressings, and wounds can require months to
years to heal. To date, most potential therapies utilizing vascular or
endothelial mitogenic growth factors have not reached the clinically relevant
criteria of wound regeneration or closure. Based upon feasibility studies, the
Pulsating Electromagnetic Fields (PEMFs) offer the prospect of healing
recalcitrant soft tissue wounds, such as chronic bed sores, in a minimally
invasive manner. Better understanding of PEMF-induced healing may provide the
critical information necessary for understanding the mechanism of action (MOA)
and designing appropriate experiments, thus providing an avenue for successful
regulatory filings and use as an effective clinical treatment for wound healing.
The ability to efficiently stimulate maximal, sustained healing in targeted
tissues remains a goal of importance to the field of regenerative medicine and
provides a clear opportunity for PEMF therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of an effective, low-cost, low-frequency
pulsed electromagnetic field (LF-PEMF) generating healing device for home care
and nursing home professionals to use in the treatment of chronic ulcers in the
elderly. The LF-PEMF may only require a prescription and a simple patient
training session. Different PEMF modalities have been investigated as potential
therapeutic tools for promoting tissue repair, including sinusoidal alternating,
pulsed electromagnetic, pulsating electric, and rotating magnetic fields. Neww
blood vessel growth (a.k.a. angiogenesis) can be stimulated by exposing in vitro
cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells to PEMFs. Physiological activity
of exposure to PEMF depends upon the physical parameters of current intensity,
magnetic field strength, pulse frequency, and exposure duration. The application
of novel LF-PEMFs “tuned” to initiating/sustaining angiogenesis may result in
the ability to clinically treat soft tissue wounds, including chronic skin
ulcers. This technology builds upon existing Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-cleared LF-PEMF devices, currently used to promote bone growth in
recalcitrant fractures and suggests applications for the use of novel waveform
patterns to support soft tissue regeneration, specifically by promoting
regeneration through cellular stress response signaling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.