* 2212032
* III:Medium:Computation and Communication Efficient Distributed Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ming Yan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

With the explosion of large-scale machine learning tasks and the increasing
availability of computational resources, distributed learning has become the
cornerstone for extracting information and knowledge from big data. Nodes in
distributed learning need to communicate information. Thus, distributed learning
faces challenges around computational efficiency similar to conventional machine
learning. But it also faces the additional challenge of communication
efficiency. These efficiency problems have greatly hindered the applications of
distributed learning in large-scale machine learning tasks and complex computing
environments, such as resource-limited edge computing. In this project, we
embrace new challenges and opportunities to comprehensively study the
computation and communication efficiency in distributed learning. The project’s
novelties are providing new perspectives for developing and deploying efficient
and scalable distributed learning algorithms in large-scale computing clusters
with limited communication protocols and network bandwidth. Nowadays, as big
data is ubiquitous, the project's impacts are to benefit many real-world
applications from various disciplines such as computer science, social sciences
and others areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tackle the major
drawbacks in existing distributed learning algorithms from the efficiency
perspective and greatly promote the efficiency and scalability of large-scale
distributed learning. To achieve this goal, we systematically investigate two
distributed learning paradigms, centralized and decentralized learning, as well
as two major efficiency obstacles, computation and communication efficiency. To
address these paradigms and obstacles, the project has three dedicated designed
research directions. Each direction will dramatically extend the science through
not only providing rigorous theoretical guarantees, but also comprehensive
empirical studies in practical systems. The core intellectual is a comprehensive
investigation on science and the design of novel methodologies to deepen our
understanding on the efficiency, scalability, and practical usages of
distributed learning systems and algorithms. The outcomes of this project will
be: (1) New efficient and scalable distributed learning algorithms with state-
of-the-art computation and communication efficiency, as well as predictive
accuracy; (2) Theoretical analysis such as convergence rate and communication
complexity; and (3) Open-source implementations of all key algorithms, systems,
and frameworks. The proposed research will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in pursuing their thesis or honor's projects. Discoveries and research
findings of this project will be tightly integrated into several current and new
courses. Instructional content will be created to enable fast distribution of
our results to a wide audience, and tools will be built to help machine learning
knowledge awareness and adoption. The findings of this project will be timely
disseminated via multiple means such as a distributed learning repository,
journal and conference publications, special purpose tutorials and workshops co-
held at prominent conferences, and industrial participation such as
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.