* 2212919
* SBIR Phase II:  Predictive Tools for Characterizing Carbon Sequestration in Mined Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Tamara Diedrich, MINERALOGIC LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 998,806.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to fully realize the potential for
weathering of mine waste to remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. By
helping mining companies in this effort, this project will positively impact
human health and welfare while potentially producing a competitive advantage to
the domestic mining industry. The project implementation been designed to
maximize positive broader impacts including developing a future workforce and
improving public scientific literacy through deliberate public communications on
geochemical weathering, carbon emissions, and climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the characterization of carbon
mineralization potential of mined materials by incorporation of a novel
framework for conceptualizing silicate mineral weathering and a custom test
apparatus for direct measurement of carbon mineralization rates. A working
prototype geochemical model was developed in SBIR Phase I to simulate enhanced
rock weathering of representative mine waste. The prototype predictive model
reflects the unique chemical and surface characteristics of mine waste through
incorporation of novel kinetic modules and opportunistic parameterization
methods. While this product represents an advance over existing geochemical
reactive transport codes, it is most effective as a screening tool. In order to
advance from screening for carbon mineralization potential to optimization of
carbon mineralization strategies, this Phase II project will develop an
innovative test apparatus and related methodologies for carbon mineralization
characterization. The design of this test method flows from preliminary
application of the Phase I predictive model and the results feed back into
refined parameters that are needed to meet industry requirements for design
basis precision. The test apparatus and model will be deployed to demonstrate
the utility of this new service to the mining industry and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.