* 2212959
* MPS-Ascend: Disentangling the Complexities of Galaxy Evolution Using Genetically Modified Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Natalie Sanchez, Sanchez, Natalie Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Natalie N. Sanchez is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Sanchez supports her
research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Disentangling the Complexities of Galaxy
Evolution Using Genetically Modified Galaxies", under the mentorship of a
sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is Carnegie
Observatories, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Andrew
Benson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of observations have shown that large scale
gas outflows driven by energetic processes are critical in galaxy evolution.
Such flows inhibit and regulate star formation. Stellar feedback from supernova
and stellar winds is an important source of energy for driving outflows as are
winds from Super Massive Black Holes (SMBH). Amidst the complicated backdrop of
galaxy formation–such as ongoing major and minor mergers, inflowing gas
filaments, cooling gas flows, and feedback processes–unraveling the cause and
effect of physical processes proves a challenge. The PI will use numerical
simulations to create "Genetically Modified" (GM) galaxies: simulations based on
nearly identical initial conditions with slightly changed galaxy accretion
histories. The controlled experiments of the GM technique isolate the impact of
different assembly histories, SMBH feedback implementation, and star formation
histories to disentangle the complicated dynamical processes that drive galaxy
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with Community Colleges in Pasadena and
the Cal Bridge Program, the PI will create and run a two-week, intensive coding
summer school each year that includes teaching python coding skills, practical
research experience with multiple forms of astrophysical data, and lectures on
STEM-focused careers. The goal of this program is to increase the support for
and retention of historically marginalized students in STEM-
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.