* 2212614
* SBIR Phase I:  Adapting uncrewed aquaculture management to control sea lamprey and to protect wild salmonid fisheries of the Great Lakes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2023
* Robert Huber, RADMANTIS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on improved methods for detecting and
suppressing sea lampreys in the Great Lakes, a pest species that currently
requires relentless, sustained, and costly control efforts at ecosystem scale.
The project initiates the development of small, relocatable, field-deployed
devices, capable of performing a range of assessment and selective control
functions. Success in this effort will introduce an important new tool to
bolster environmental health outcomes at an ecosystem level, and benefit
commercial fisheries estimated at $7B annually. By replacing chemical and manual
control of exotic invaders, the project contributes to the preservation of
ecosystem integrity and function, biodiversity, and environmental quality of the
Great Lakes, a vital natural resource providing water security for more than 35
million people in the region. With worldwide damage from aquatic invaders
exceeding $300 billion annually, innovations driving advances in ecosystem
protection and restoration will have wide appeal and application wherever
habitats require protection. Broadening the available tool set empowers managers
and local communities to act against exotic invaders at the level where causes
and consequences are most acutely felt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project performs a feasibility study of existing technologies from aquaculture
workflows for adaptation to the uncrewed control of sea lampreys in the field.
The essential features of such a device are inherently similar to recently
emerged solutions for automated fish management in robotic aquaculture systems.
Existing models for detection and classification are expected to transfer well
to a class as morphologically distinct as lampreys. The primary challenges to
this project most likely arise from the unique biology and sensory ecology of a
species whose responses to the physical device used here are completely unknown.
A set of artificial stream experiments aims to entrain lampreys into devices
placed into their path. How might lamprey react to a device optimized for the
specific needs of imaging, classification, and selective removal? Informed by
detailed knowledge of lamprey chemosensory ecology, the work also examines the
efficacy of pheromonal cues for channeling lamprey movement through the
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.