* 2212728
* STTR Phase I:  Electronic Measurement of Capillary Refill Time to Improve Outcomes from Sepsis
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Scott Filer, PROMEDIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,750.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a novel external system for rapidly
diagnosing sepsis by measuring capillary refill time (CRT). Independent clinical
studies have demonstrated the utility of CRT for detecting sepsis. Current
methods for monitoring capillary refill times rely on physical examinations that
are both prone to human error and inconsistency. The company aims to develop an
automated diagnostic and monitoring device for objectively and repeatably
quantifying capillary refill time for use in a clinical setting. If successful,
the technology may have widespread potential use in emergency departments,
clinics, ambulances, or at home.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project develops a new finger-sensor
interface for monitoring CRT that ensures contact between the finger and sensor
across a range of finger sizes and validate the system in human use. The
objectives are to ensure human factors engineering to enable use in a broad
range of patients by a wide range of caregivers. A novel algorithm to improve
sensor performance and provide user feedback on noise or aberrant signals will
also be integrated. The system will be tested in a group of patients at risk for
sepsis to demonstrate the device reliably and accurately measures the CRT across
a wide variety of patient demographics and the device is easily usable by a wide
range of caregivers including physicians and family members without extensive
training. A successful Phase I outcome is a system enabling the consistent
ability to collect high-quality measures of CRT in patients at risk for sepsis
and to provide the user with ongoing measures of signal
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.