* 2212983
* MPS-Ascend: Identifying the Fingerprints of Gravitational Wave Source Formation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Alexandria Tucker, Tucker, Alexandria
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Alexandria Tucker is awarded an NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a
program of research and activities related to broadening participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. This
fellowship to Dr. Tucker supports her research project entitled "MPS-Ascend:
Identifying the Fingerprints of Gravitational Wave Source Formation", under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Nicolas Yunes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tucker will formulate a probability
distribution of the orbital eccentricity of binaries as they enter the
sensitivity band of ground-based detectors and create generic gravitational-wave
models that include spin-precession and orbital eccentricity. Along with the
research, Tucker has planned four outreach activities, all of which are aimed at
educating and increasing the interest of the general public about extreme
gravity, with an eye toward diversity and under-represented minorities. These
include a survey of the climate for women and members of underrepresented
groups, an outreach event aimed at changing scientific attitudes in Latin
American elementary school students in the local Champaign-Urbana area, the
creation of artwork to promote the diversity of ethnicities and genders in
science and enhancing a gravitational physics virtual relativity simulation
through artwork that combines scientific accuracy with
aesthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.