* 2212065
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Taming Deep Unsupervised Representation Learning in Imaging: Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Matthew Hirn, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2025
* USD 583,642.00

Deep neural networks are driving significant breakthroughs across engineering
and scientific applications. Their success is often predicated on the
availability of large and high-quality data sets. However, for many inverse
problems or classification problems such as in computed tomography (CT),
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM),
obtaining paired training data can be extremely difficult or expensive. The
training data may also be limited or highly corrupted. While recent progress
addresses these challenges via methods such as deep image prior or self-
supervised learning, the training procedures therein are often ad hoc and the
underlying mechanisms behind the approaches are far from well-understood, which
are due to the lack of precise mathematical modeling and the lack of
understanding of learned representations. To deal with these challenges, this
project aims to develop robust unsupervised deep learning methods with rigorous
guarantees in settings with limited and corrupted data by incorporating physical
models and constraints that capture the intrinsic data structures and
invariances effectively. The utility of the developed methods will be
demonstrated on a variety of imaging applications, and the resulting findings
and software will be widely disseminated. Furthermore, this project will develop
a new educational program involving yearly virtual workshops with global
participation and targeted K-12 outreach in southeast Michigan to enable
improved participation in machine learning and computing programs, especially
from underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop robust, unsupervised deep representation learning methods with rigorous
guarantees for application in inverse problems or classification problems in
medical, industrial, and scientific imaging. The focus will be on learning deep
models from limited and/or corrupted unpaired data. Deep representations will be
designed and learned to capture the intrinsic structures and low-dimensionality
of the data by leveraging ideas from traditional shallow learning methods (e.g.,
dictionary/transform learning). By understanding image characteristics captured
during different stages of deep representation learning, physical models,
priors, and constraints will be incorporated that enable deep networks to be
learned efficiently from corrupted data. The deep representations will also be
designed to be invariant to typical symmetry ambiguities such as translations
and rotations. Based upon such principled modeling, efficient and robust
optimization methods will be developed with theoretical guarantees for learning
the intrinsic structures of the data, and the developed methods will be applied
to a variety of imaging problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.