* 2212050
* CNS Core: Medium: Field-Nets: Field-to-Edge Connectivity for Joint Communication and Sensing in Next-Generation Intelligent Agricultural Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mehmet Vuran, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 700,000.00

Eighty percent of the 24 million Americans who do not have high-speed Internet
live in rural areas. This digital divide is aggravated by a lack of economic
incentives in low-population-density areas for adequate infrastructure that
next-generation networking solutions require, leading to a need for novel rural
broadband connectivity solutions. Novel interdisciplinary approaches are
necessary to bridge this gap. This project investigates the potential for a
game-changer in this equation motivated by the recent advances in the Internet
of Things (IoT) and their increasing need in agricultural fields. To this end,
an interdisciplinary team of experts in millimeter-wave communications,
metamaterial and metasurface-inspired antenna array design, dynamic spectrum
access, and radio access networks in collaboration with experts in agricultural
robotics and sensor-based plant phenotyping aim to provide connectivity to rural
farm fields and increase national competence to bring new technologies to rural
America rapidly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent improvements in agricultural
sensing modalities, vision-based agricultural decision-making, and utilization
of autonomous vehicles in fields will significantly increase the demand for
connectivity in fields. Agricultural networks need to be adaptive to the highly
dynamic impacts of crops during their growth stages, and the unique blockage and
scattering characteristics of typical vertical infrastructure (grain bins,
farmhouses, irrigation systems, feedlots). The project provides an end-to-end
Field-Net architecture that judiciously leverages interdependent research
challenges through novel technological innovations. The project (i)
characterizes rural mobile channels at the millimeter wave (mmWave) spectrum to
push the state-of-the-art beyond conventional rural cellular settings and
spectral limits. (ii) Deep learning techniques are developed to manage the
increasing spectrum demands of future agricultural networks autonomously. (iii)
Tightly integrating the mmWave and spectrum management solutions, an automated
and safe network slicing system is devised so that the diverse demands of
emerging agricultural use cases can be met at the field premises. Collaborating
with agricultural science experts, the solutions are evaluated under realistic
vertical and mobile infrastructures with crop dynamics. The project addresses
the unique needs of the Midwest and other rural regions, which benefit from
advanced rural connectivity by fostering economic growth. Aligned with the UNL
School of Computing broadening participation in computing (BPC) plan, the team
aggressively pursues to improve participation by minorities and females,
primarily through the Building Recruiting And Inclusion for Diversity (BRAID)
activities and project findings, software, data, and progress are disseminated
on the project website. The project provides a national model for other
agricultural fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.