* 2212099
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: High-performance Network Stacks for the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Adam Belay, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Edge computing is instrumental to the growth of many sectors of modern digital
economies, ranging from enterprise IT and communication, to smart cities,
manufacturing, and healthcare. By bringing resources closer to end users in the
form of regional or micro-datacenters (uDCs), edge computing enables new
applications with extreme low-latency and high-bandwidth demands. This project
considers the design of the end-host networking stack for edge servers.
Maximizing utilization of the limited uDC resources is therefore critical for
both cost and performance reasons, motivating us to revisit the software and
hardware layers that are used in the edge today. This project will follow a
software/hardware co-design approach. The project will focus on reducing the
overhead of resource scheduling and state management functions, revamping the
way these functions are distributed across the stack. The ultimate objective is
to minimize the CPU time wasted performing these functions, conversely
maximizing the compute resources available to handle application logic.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the right innovation to overcome current obstacles,
edge computing will enable new classes of applications that the current paradigm
of utility computing in the Cloud is ill-suited for. These include applications
that are highly sensitive to latency (e.g., 5G, situation-awareness
applications, augmented reality, autonomous vehicles, and online gaming) or have
heavy bandwidth demands (e.g., camera networks and video analytics). It is
therefore expected that edge computing will follow the trajectory of Cloud
computing and grow to a multi-billion-dollar industry within the next five to
seven years. The project’s outcomes have the potential to transform the way
modern societies operate and use this critically important and rapidly growing
piece of internet infrastructure. The project aims to dramatically improve edge
performance and cost efficiency, allowing providers to maximize the utility of
scarce edge resources and developers to perform computationally demanding tasks
that were previously infeasible. The research developed in this project will be
integrated into undergraduate, graduate, and online
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.