* 2212390
* CNS Core: Medium: Design and Deployment of Bespoke Congestion Control Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Internet services are critical for US industry and government, the economy,
health, education and social interaction. However, Internet services are not
always timely or efficient, because Internet networks sometimes get congested.
When Internet services transmit data, they are faced with a challenging
question: how fast should they send? If they send too fast, the network will
drop their data, leading to poor application performance like lost video frames
or slow webpage load times. But, if they send too slowly, their data will arrive
at the user slowly leading to poor application performance anyway. To make this
challenging decision, applications use algorithms called Congestion Control
Algorithms (CCAs) to determine the right sending rate: not too fast, and not too
slow. This project is exploring new CCAs that are customized to applications;
for example, applications involving video will be different than those that do
not. If successful, applications performance over the Internet will be greatly
enhanced. However, when several different CCAs are deployed over the Internet,
they may compete with each other, and performance of some or all applications
may suffer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to enable application
developers develop new, customized CCAs that provide better application
experiences while still sharing the network equitably when different services
are running at the same time. To this end, the project will design a new ultra-
low latency bCCA tailored to online video game services using cross-layer
optimizations that integrate bitrate adaptation with congestion control. It will
perform large-scale measurement studies of the deployment of existing bCCAs,
using novel machine learning approaches to identify those bCCAs that are already
in use on the Internet. The project will empirically test whether new bCCAs and
existing bCCAs share Internet bandwidth fairly. Finally, it will provide
recommendations and guidelines for the design of future CCAs that can achieve
application-performance objectives while also avoiding unfriendly behavior to
competing Internet connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.