* 2212323
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding and Mitigating the Security Risks of AutoML
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ting Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,503.00

Automated machine learning (AutoML) represents a new machine learning paradigm
that automates the pipeline from raw data to deployable models, enabling a much
wider range of people to use machine learning techniques. However, each stage of
this pipeline is subject to malicious attacks, which can lead to inaccurate or
vulnerable models. This projectâ€™s goal is to understand how both the
technologies underlying AutoML and the ways it is adopted change security risks
around machine learning and how possible defenses to them change when using
AutoML. The success of this project will not only improve the security of AutoML
but also promote more principled practices of building and operating machine
learning systems in general, while contributing to knowledge in the areas of
security, machine learning, and human-computer interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main sub-goals: accounting for the
full spectrum of security risks that arise around AutoML; understanding the
fundamental factors that drive such risks; and designing for machine learning
practitioners without extensive expertise. To accomplish these goals, the team
will (i) better understand current practices around AutoML through user studies
and interviews; (ii) empirically and analytically explore the security
vulnerabilities of AutoML-generated models through assessing these models on
widely used datasets; (iii) analyze the results of the first two activities to
develop a comprehensive accounting of underlying factors such as standardization
of algorithmic choices in the technology or over-reliance on automated metrics
by users; and (iv) developing new principles, methodologies, and tools to
mitigate the aforementioned risks. The team will also integrate the work into a
number of college courses and conduct public outreach to raise awareness of the
role machine learning plays in everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.