* 2212779
* Insights into biomolecular reactivity and structure for virus inactivation prediction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yinyin Ye, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,989.00

The emergence and spread of new viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 and its variants has
heightened the need to assess the efficacy of virus inactivation by
disinfectants including chemical oxidants such as chlorine and chlorine dioxide.
Culture-based approaches are the current gold standard methods to track the
levels of infective viruses before and after disinfection. However, many viruses
are not culturable, or are too dangerous to be cultured, and thus their
mechanisms of inactivation by chemical oxidants are not well understood. The
overarching goal of this project is to investigate and unravel the fundamental
reactions and structural changes of viral proteins that occur during virus
inactivation by chemical oxidants such as chlorine and chlorine dioxide. To
advance this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) propose to integrate high-
throughput and high-sensitivity proteomic analysis, structural analysis, and
data mining to test the hypothesis that virus inactivation by oxidants is driven
by the decay of viral proteins, and the decay rate constants of viral peptides
is a function of solvent accessibility of susceptible amino acid residues in the
peptide sequences. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through the development of a mechanistic understanding of virus
susceptibility to disinfectants that could provide guidance to the public and
water utilities regarding the selection of the most efficient chemical oxidants
and disinfectant dosages to inactivate waterborne viruses while minimizing the
formation of toxic disinfection byproducts. Additional benefits to society will
be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of a
graduate student at the University at Buffalo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A virus
particle consists of a single molecule of genome, which is surrounded by a
protein capsid, and/or lipid envelope. The viral genome and proteins carry
various biological functions that are essential for virus infection. Previous
studies of virus inactivation by UV and chemical oxidants suggest that the
degradation of viral biomacromolecules, particularly the genome and proteins,
correspond to the loss of virus infectivity. However, a fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms of virus inactivation by chemical oxidants has
remained elusive. To address this critical knowledge gap, the Principal
Investigator (PI) of this project proposes to integrate high-throughput and
high-sensitivity proteomic analysis, structural analysis, and data mining to
investigate and unravel the mechanisms of oxidation of viral proteins by
chemical disinfectants. The specific objectives of the research are to: (1)
Characterize viral protein degradation by chemical oxidants and identify
structural features of viral peptides that drive virus inactivation using
chlorine and chlorine dioxide as model disinfectants; (2) Evaluate the impacts
of oxidative modifications and peptide cleavages on the conformational change of
viral proteins; and (3) Evaluate the impacts of lipid permeability to oxidant
molecules on the extents and rates of inactivation of enveloped waterborne
viruses. The successful completion of this research has the potential for
transformative impact through the development and validation of a new model that
could predict the decay kinetics of viral proteins when viruses are treated by
oxidants and help identify the biomolecular features of viral proteins that
control virus susceptibility or resistance to disinfectants. To implement the
education and outreach activities of the project, the PI plans to incorporate
the findings from this research into undergraduate and graduate courses at the
University at Buffalo (UB). In addition, the PI proposes to leverage the UB
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Summer Research
Internship Program to recruit two undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups that will work on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.