* 2212926
* LEAPS-MPS: Innovative Approaches to the Structural Characterization of Biomolecular Ions by Mass Spectrometry and Infrared Action Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Thomas, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,990.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Daniel Thomas and his students at the University of Rhode Island (URI) will
study the folding properties of peptides and ribonucleic acid (RNA) chains by
cooling them in helium nanodroplets (temperature of -272.7 degrees Celsius) and
elucidating their structure by monitoring the absorption of infrared light. To
support the full participation of underrepresented groups, Prof. Thomas and his
students will also provide mentorship and research opportunities to local high
school students through the ACS Project SEED program and implement department-
wide initiatives to assess academic climate and identify factors associated with
student success. In collaboration with the Rhode Island Museum of Science and
Art (RIMOSA), they will provide scientific outreach programs at local middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research group directed by Professor Thomas
will use the combination of electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI–MS)
and helium nanodroplet isolation infrared (HENDI IR) action spectroscopy to
unravel the complex free energy landscape of isolated biomolecular ions. The
rapid cooling of molecules captured in helium nanodroplets enables kinetic
trapping of conformer populations, allowing for quantitative analysis of the
conformer free energy landscape beyond the global minimum structure. The
foundational experiments in this project will identify the advantages and
limitations of this approach and ultimately facilitate the study of dynamic
systems featuring “flat” free energy landscapes that pose challenges for
traditional methods, for example intrinsically disordered regions of peptides
and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.