* 2212237
* Modeling the Impact of Care Interventions on Patients with Complex Medical and Social Needs
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Hari Jagannatha Balasubramanian, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2025
* USD 502,159.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of national health and welfare by
studying the impact of care interventions for patients who experience
significant medical, behavioral health, and social challenges. Although
representing 1-5 percent of the population, such patients often experience
extreme patterns of healthcare utilization and can account for 25-50 percent of
national healthcare costs. Holistic, person-centered care interventions, often
led by a multidisciplinary team consisting of nurses, community health workers
and social workers, have emerged as a strategy to engage with and help improve
the health and wellbeing of such patients. This project studies several open
questions, including longitudinal patterns of healthcare use among such
patients, the role of specific combinations of medical and social factors, and
the impact of the time spent by the care team on patient outcomes. The project
comprises a collaboration between the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and
the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers, an organization with significant
experience in care interventions for patients with complex medical and social
needs. The accompanying dissemination plan will introduce results to
practitioners in the domain through conferences, undergraduate and graduate
students through research projects and courses, and the general audience through
non-fiction essays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary contribution of this
research is the adaptation of stochastic methodologies to patient-level
longitudinal data that spans multiple parts of health and social services
systems, including such data from Camden Coalition’s multi-year randomized
controlled trial (RCT). The project has two aims. In Aim 1, the goal is to
create stochastic models of event progression to model the sequence of timing of
key events (e.g., intervention enrollment, post-discharge primary care visit,
hospital readmissions, social milestones) on the patient’s timeline. The
sequence and timing models will be used in conjunction with search algorithms
that identify subgroups in the covariate space (defined by patient demographics,
medical conditions and social needs) where intervention and control groups in
the RCT differ significantly. In Aim 2, the project will create a multi-period
stochastic decision process that integrates staffing and prioritization
decisions with a risk estimation function to evaluate how patient outcomes such
as hospital readmissions are impacted. Thus, the project aims to bring together
a unique mix of data-driven stochastic, optimization and statistical learning
methodologies informed by longitudinal data to a vital yet under-explored domain
of healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.