* 2212162
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic mucins with tunable structures and programmable interfacial behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 374,681.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Most people cringe when they hear the word
mucus, repulsed by the image of gooey slime, but what they may not realize is
that mucus is one of the most interesting and diverse materials found in the
natural world. Every animal uses mucus to fill a wide range of needs. The common
garden snail, for example, secretes one type of mucus that facilitates
locomotion, another that helps them stick to walls, and a third mucus, found on
the back, that protects it from environmental threats. Despite its prevalence in
the natural world, very little is understood about how mucus changes properties
to behave, in one case, as an adhesive and, in another, as a lubricant. If these
properties can be understood and reproduced in a synthetic material, it could
have applications ranging from eye drops to coatings for medical implants. This
project supports fundamental research to understand the lubricity and adhesion
of synthetic mucin polymers – human-made materials that mimic the structures and
properties of natural mucus. By understanding the effects of polymer length,
composition, and the presence of additives, such as calcium salts, on the
lubricity and adhesion, it would be possible to design useful synthetic mucins
that mimic the properties of natural mucins. This project will provide
significant educational opportunities for students to explore the wonders of
materials research and the fascinating science behind everyday objects that
populate our world. Integrated outreach activities are focused on engaging
students from high school to undergraduate levels, and broadening participation
in STEM amongst students from traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project aims to create a new class of biomimetic polymers – synthetic mucins –
that emulate the structures and, in turn, the properties of the glycosylated
polypeptides that are the primary components of mucus. The research involves
investigating systematically the relationship between synthetic mucin structure
and rheological, mechanical, and tribological properties. Specifically, the
three research objectives are to study the properties of (i) homopolymers
composed solely of glycosylated monomeric units, (ii) random copolymers
containing glycosylated monomers and thiol-containing monomers that can form
interchain cross-links, and (iii) triblock copolymers that contain glycosylated
monomers, thiol-containing monomers, and monomers capable of forming specific
interactions with surfaces. In addition to developing new synthetic methods and
polymerization protocols to create the monomers and polymers, respectively,
nanotribological methods and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations will be applied to
measure and understand the behavior of these new materials. The broader impacts
of this project are aimed to promote STEM and to create a STEM-capable workforce
by expanding access to STEM opportunities to traditionally underrepresented
groups. Specific broader impact activities will be (i) an internship program in
materials science for high-school students, (ii) student exchanges between CUNY
and the University of Pennsylvania, and (iii) booths at science outreach days
intended to inform the public on the impact of materials science research on
everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.