* 2212129
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Algorithms for Geometric Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Michael Goodrich, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 386,937.00

This project studies geometric graphs. These are geometric structures that
realize the relationships of a combinatorial graph, that is, a set of elements
called “nodes” or “vertices” and a set of pairwise relationships between them,
such as would be determined by a social network or road network. Geometric
graphs arise in a wide range of applications, including physics, data
visualization, computational biology, and data forensics. Any such graph can be
realized in a geometric space, so that the nodes of the graph are points in the
space and relationships between nodes are represented by line segments or curves
connecting pairs of nodes. These geometric realizations of combinatorial graphs
can then be measured in terms of how well they achieve various parameters, such
as area, edge length, angle separation, etc. Indeed, the research area of graph
drawing is exclusively focused on algorithms for producing good (faithful and
representative) geometric realizations of graphs. Improved methods for dealing
with geometric graphs can benefit any application, such as data visualization or
automobile navigation, that generates or uses geometric
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are broadly organized
around the following two themes: (1) Algorithms for producing geometric
realizations of graphs. This theme is directed at algorithms and complexity
bounds for producing geometric realizations of graphs, including considerations
of complexity measures such as area, edge length, edge bends, edge crossings,
etc. (2) Algorithms on geometric graphs. This theme is directed at algorithms
that take as input geometric graphs, such as road networks, with the goal of
achieving complexity bounds that are improved over those possible for general
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.