* 2212284
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human-Pinniped Relationships &amp; Marine Historical Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Hope Loiselle, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 24,205.00

This project aims to better understand the forces guiding long-term histories of
human-marine animal interactions and the extent to which marine populations were
resilient to human hunting pressure prior to industrialization. Taking a
historical ecological approach to investigate the complex, intertwined cultural
and ecological histories of the Japanese sea lion (Zalophus japonicus)
throughout the late Holocene up to the extinction of this species in the
mid-20th century, this study will explore the resilience of a now-extinct marine
mammal species to climate change, human harvesting, and habitat disruption, as
well as the reciprocal implications of this, i.e. how humans were impacted by
these variations in marine productivity and prey populations. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would
enhance public understanding of science and the scientific method broadly
disseminating its findings. Results of this research will be shared in both
public and academic venues and help promote the importance of ongoing marine
mammal conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses
archaeological, genetic, and isotopic data to examine how maritime hunter-
gatherers and marine mammals were entangled in complex ecological relationships
preceding the extinction of the Japanese sea lion. Ancient DNA from 120 samples
over 12 archaeological sites is being sequenced to track changing sea lion
populations through the late Holocene. The PIs are also conducting stable
isotope analysis on the same sea lion samples to gain insight into changing
marine ecosystems as they may have affected sea lions and people. The study
improves the understanding of the human role in ecological change, and vice
versa, providing comparative data for studies of human-marine ecology and
maritime archaeology and history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.