* 2212707
* SGR:  Validating the Optimal Design of Concentric Ring Electrodes on Phantom Data
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Oleksandr Makeyev, Dine College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions increases the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover may prove to be a model for similar
engagement at other small community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to validate the physical prototypes of optimal tripolar concentric ring
electrode (CRE) configuration on real life phantom model data. Moreover, it
seeks to investigate possible adverse effects of salt bridge shortening between
the recording surfaces of physical CREs on Laplacian estimation. Study of this
emerging, noninvasive electrophysiological diagnostic technology has the
potential to advance knowledge and improve the accuracy of Laplacian estimation
in systems such as electroencephalograms (EEG) and electrocardiograms (EKG). The
project aims to improve the diagnostic yield of signals using optimal CREs for
conditions that disproportionately affect Native American populations.
Furthermore, the project strengthens the capacity of the Mathematics for
Engineering Applications lab at Din√© College, while providing opportunities for
tribal college students to participate in cutting edge collaborative
international research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.