* 2212296
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Innovating Volumetric Video Streaming with Motion Forecasting, Intelligent Upsampling, and QoE Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Bo Han, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2026
* USD 212,781.00

Volumetric video is an emerging type of multimedia content. Unlike traditional
videos and 360-degree videos that are two-dimensional (2D), every frame in a
volumetric video consists of a three-dimensional (3D) scene or object
represented by a 3D model such as a point cloud or a polygon mesh. The 3D nature
of volumetric video enables viewers to move with six degrees of freedom, leading
to a truly immersive viewing experience. However, compared to conventional
videos, streaming volumetric videos over the Internet faces unique challenges: a
lack of precise motion tracking, extremely high bandwidth consumption, a lack of
quality-of-experience (QoE) models, and complex interactions among network,
computation, and motion. This project proposes a holistic research agenda
addressing the above challenges through four core approaches: multi-dimension,
multi-modality motion sensing and prediction; deep-learning-based content
upsampling; comprehensive QoE modeling; and resource/motion adaptation. The
project aims at demonstrable systems and networking research with a synergy
among multimedia systems, networking, wireless sensing, machine learning,
computer vision, and graphics. The research team will develop prototypes and
evaluate them in real-world settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internet video
streaming is playing a key role in today's world, especially during the COVID-19
pandemic. As a key enabler of immersive telepresence, volumetric content will
become popular in the near future. The techniques developed from this project
will significantly reduce network resource usage and improve the user experience
for volumetric content delivery over the Internet. This will benefit both
producers and consumers of volumetric videos, as well as boost their
applications in various domains such as education, telehealth, manufacturing,
and entertainment, ultimately leading to a high impact on societies and
economies. The project will also offer new education components, and provide a
platform for various Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC)
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.