* 2212690
* Collaborative Research: Track 2: Disrupting Engineering Trauma
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Whitney Gaskins, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2025
* USD 249,303.00

This collaborative research project will explore racialized mental health
experiences in engineering and apply innovative approaches to promote racial
equity in the discipline. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that
students, especially the traditionally excluded, have negative experiences that
result in high levels of distress that is not clearly visible but can have
significant impacts within their collegiate experiences. The proposal addresses
three interests of the BPE program: 1) Understand the systemic barriers that
prevent traditionally underserved communities from pursuing and succeeding in
engineering, 2) Develop innovative methods and projects to significantly impact
the recruitment and retention of engineering students, faculty, and employees
from traditionally underserved communities, and 3) Design and transform culture
to make diversity, equity, and inclusion a priority in the engineering
enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the research is to make clear
that engineering education, when performed traditionally, can serve as a
stressor that is sufficient to (1) cause/initiate subclinical or clinical levels
of distress and dysfunction or (2) maintain or exacerbate pre-existing stress
reactions. The project guiding research questions include: What are the baseline
levels of stress and distress for Black, Latin, and Indigenous (BLI) engineering
students, based on their self-identification of critical life events and How do
the racialized experiences of BLI students uniquely contribute to their symptoms
of distress? To address these questions we will use validated tools from
psychology to assess the baseline stress, distress, and traumas of engineering
students and follow-up with in-depth interviews with undergraduate BLI students
to thematically analyze participants' distressing and traumatizing experiences
in engineering education. The intellectual merit of the project includes 1)
defining racialized stress, distress, and trauma in engineering, which will
expand the engineering and STEM communities' knowledge of the ways default
educational practices increase each of these in students; 2) Articulating the
intersectional experiences related to mental health that occur within
engineering education. 3) Expand the use of existing theories and practice for
understanding racialized stress, distress, and trauma, to foster positive mental
health and wellbeing for BLI engineering students. The broader impacts of the
project includes 1) Produce a model of BLI engineering students'
characterization of trauma related to their engineering education to define and
develop measures of stress and trauma in engineering, 2) Identify strategies to
reduce educational experiences that lead to traumatic responses for BLI
students, and 3) Develop and update engineering education pedagogy by helping
engineering faculty recognize how their behaviors or interactions with students
may contribute to students' repeated over-exposure to stress that could lead to
traumatic responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.