* 2212324
* NSF-BSF: Computation-Guided Advanced Fabrication of Silicide Nanostructures with Novel Magnetic Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Ranjit Pati, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2026
* USD 592,502.00

This grant supports US-Israel collaborative research that contributes to new
knowledge related to the manufacturing of silicon technology compatible
nanomagnets, which is important for basic science, national prosperity and
national security. Silicon technology compatible nanomagnets are needed for
spintronics, which enable low-power, high-density data storage and processing
critical for next-generation nano- and micro-electronic devices. This impacts a
wide variety of technological applications in commercial and defense industries.
A bottom-up approach based on controlled self-assembly of nanoislands on a
silicon substrate is used to fabricate transition metal silicide nanostructures.
The processing-structure-property relationships are systematically investigated
to tailor the magnetic properties of the nanosilicides. The fundamental
knowledge generated by the project contributes to the discovery and development
of novel magnetic nanomaterials for future silicon-based technology. Further,
the magnetic transition metal silicides provide new alternatives to rare earth
magnets to ease national security and environmental threat posed by rare earth
elements. In addition, bottom-up fabrication has the potential for scale-up to
cost-effective high-throughput mass production that is compatible with current
industrial silicon semiconductor processes. The project involves four principal
investigators with complementary expertise in computation and experiment. It
establishes collaboration in the areas of advanced nanofabrication and
nanomagnetism between US and Israeli researchers, helps connect broader research
and education communities from the two countries and positively impacts the
participation of women and underrepresented minority groups in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seamlessly integrates computation with
experiment. Computation research involves first-principles density functional
theory calculations and micromagnetic simulations bridged by atomistic spin
model simulations. Experimental research involves controlled material synthesis,
growth of self-assembled epitaxial silicide nanoislands on a silicon substrate,
in-situ/ex-situ structural and compositional characterization and magnetic
property measurement. This integrated multiscale approach is used to study self-
assembled nanosilicides on Si substrates produced by epitaxial deposition and
heat treatment of elemental iron and cobalt as well as their commercially
available magnetic alloys, such as Permalloy (NiFe) and Permendur (FeCo). The
research aims to explore new magnetic phenomena in nanosilicides, understand the
mechanisms for the dependence of magnetic properties on the structure,
morphology and spatial arrangement of silicide nanoisland assemblies, identify
optimum structures and realize them via computation-guided nanomaterials
processing. The project provides insights into developing new nanomagnets by
design for potential applications in next-generation Si-based spintronics and
other nanodevices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.