* 2212830
* Prediction of Thermal Transport in Nonmetallic Materials at Ultra-high Temperatures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Tianli Feng, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2025
* USD 358,014.00

The development of many cutting-edge technologies requires an ultra-high-
temperature working environment. For example, the next-generation gas turbines
need to be able to work at 1300 degrees Celsius, to boost efficiency and save
energy. The next-generation hypersonic passenger aircraft and re-entry vehicles
need to withstand 1000-3000 degrees Celsius at the leading edges without
material loss. The next-generation nuclear fission plant and other thermal power
plants are desired to work at higher temperatures for higher energy-conversion
efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions. The development of future fusion
plants requires even higher temperatures. All these technologies require
effective management of heat flow at ultra-high temperatures. However, the
fundamental thermal transport processes in materials at ultra-high temperatures
remain unclear. It is therefore necessary to develop theories to gain a deep
understanding and conduct simulations to accurately predict thermal transport at
ultra-high temperatures in order to realize technology revolutions. This project
addresses a critical issue in thermal transport: state-of-the-art theories
significantly underpredict the thermal conductivity of most crystals at room
temperature and further worsen as the temperature
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to unveil the
fundamental thermal transport mechanisms and accurately predict the thermal
conductivity of nonmetallic materials from low to ultra-high temperatures. The
proposal envisions three major foci: (i) incorporate the fully temperature-
dependent interatomic interaction into the predictions and validate the proof-
of-concept finding that such effort can generally solve the universal thermal
conductivity under-prediction problem at high temperatures; (ii) develop
formalisms for five-heat carrier interaction processes, which can be important
at high temperatures; (iii) develop a method that can fully predict the photon
contribution to thermal transport in solids through accurate prediction of the
dielectric function. The project will enable five-heat carrier interaction
predictions, which will be potentially transformative because they are intrinsic
thermal transport mechanisms in all solids and have been elusive to scientists
for decades. It will answer two pressing questions: In general solids, at what
temperatures is the five-heat carrier interaction important? At low
temperatures, in which systems is the five-heat carrier interaction important?
This project will also rigorously predict and validate the thermal radiation
contribution to thermal conductivity at high
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.