* 2212878
* CPS: Medium: Connected Federated Farms: Privacy-Preserving Cyber Infrastructure for Collaborative Smart Farming
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yiannis Ampatzidis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,188,351.00

With the advancements in sensing technologies, agricultural farm management has
transformed into a data-enabled process. Data collected at farms enabled
artificial intelligence (AI) frameworks to develop models capable of predicting
traits such as crop yields and health conditions, allowing for data-informed
decision-making. However, in the current state of practice, these smart farms
are siloed, developing AI models solely based on data obtained from a farm,
ignoring the data generated in other farms. This lack of collaboration among
farms results in limited generalization capability of models and directly
impacts farm management decisions. While pooling data from a network of farms
into a centralized server to generate more robust models is possible, most
farmers are reluctant to share their data due to data privacy concerns.
Therefore, this project aims to develop a novel holistic framework that allows
for collaboration between farms, preserves privacy, and encourages simultaneous
collaboration and personalization in the data-driven modeling of agricultural
farms. The constructed models are used in farm decision-making and management.
This framework will alleviate farmers’ data privacy concerns, resulting in
further adoption of smart farming technologies. Therefore, the project may
result in the more prevalent use of digital tools by farms, improving management
decisions and increasing farm productivity. Eventually, the acceptance and use
of digital solutions will enhance food quality and decrease the environmental
footprint. Several educational and outreach efforts for the integration of
research into undergraduate and graduate courses and broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups are
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a federated
analytics framework for high-dimensional and big data common in smart
agricultural farms. The project will design a novel federated robust tensor-
based modeling paradigm that enables exploiting the spatiotemporal structure of
smart farm datasets. When the proposed approach is used, each farm creates a
local model that is then transmitted to an aggregator, which creates an
aggregated model. The aggregated model is then broadcast to each farm to
generate a personalized model that supports local decision-making. The low-
dimensional embedding of the tensor model allows for reduced model communication
between the farms and the aggregator. Differential privacy approaches will be
investigated to enhance the privacy-preservation properties of the proposed
framework. The developed AI-enhanced connected multi-farm system will be tested
in citrus as a case study. The proposed framework can contribute to other areas,
such as modeling and monitoring multi-farm renewable energy systems and multi-
facility advanced manufacturing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.