* 2212977
* SBIR Phase I:  Sentiomed Injectable 14-day Biodegradable Glucose Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Orsini, SENTIOMED, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,940.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to commercialize a novel and affordable
glucose monitoring system that measures glucose intermittently or continuously
without wires, electronics, or physical attachments. The project system targets
the 25million non-insulin dependent Type 2 Diabetics (NIDT2D), who do not
measure their glucose levels daily or as recommended by their healthcare
provider due to the inconvenience, embarrassment, and pain of fingersticks.
NIDT2D in hospitals, long-term care facilities and those living in medically
underserved areas could also benefit from this system. The system combines a
biodegradable sensor that is injected once every two weeks and an external
reader/transmitter, that when placed over the sensor, reads, and transmits the
glucose level to a smart device. The data is stored and/or transmitted to
caregivers and providers. The system enables the NIDT2D to measure their glucose
often, even continuously, to better understand how diet and exercise affects
their glucose levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a biodegradable,
biocompatible hydrogel sensor that can be self-injected beneath the skin
surface. This sensor will be engineered to have a 14-day useful life before
biodegrading into harmless components that are removed by the bodyâ€™s natural
processes. The hydrogels will be tuned to respond to different ultrasound
frequencies so a newly injected hydrogel does not interfere with an old one that
has not fully finished its decay cycle. Fabrication will be done with chemical
components that have a long track record of successful use in the body.
Specifically, an innovative process is employed to imbed phenyl boronic acid
groups into a modified hyaluronic acid backbone. The hydrogel must also fit
through a fine-bore needle without impairing its functionality. At least two
approaches will be studied: a small diameter hydrogel string and a liquid gel
that forms into a hydrogel once beneath the skin. Testing of the hydrogel will
be done in vitro and will include biodegradability, injectability, and
preliminary toxicology tests. Ultrasound detection and readout will use modified
off-the-shelf devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.