* 2212965
* Mechanical control of the electronic properties of 2D ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Alexei Gruverman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,000.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt; Ferroelectric materials are characterized by
a separation and arrangement of negative vs positive charges that can be
instantaneously flipped by applying of an electric field. Those oppositely
aligned, or polarized, states can be stored and read as the 1s and 0s of binary
data, with the states remaining stable even when a power source has been cut.
This provides a basis for use of these materials in nonvolatile memory
applications as well as in a number of other advanced electronic devices.
Typically, this property is found in the bulk crystals, ceramics and thin films.
Recently, theoretical modeling predicted that two-dimensional (2D) layered
materials consisting of the atomic planes bonded by weak forces could also
exhibit polarized states. However, electrical flipping of the electrical charges
in these materials is extremely difficult as application of the electrical bias
gives rise to a high current that simply burns the sample. This project explores
mechanical stress as a novel method to modulate the electronic charges and the
associated changes in electrical resistance. A tiny conducting probe is used to
apply local pressure to the sample and to detect the resulting polarization as
well as the change in the sample conductance at the nanoscale level. The project
enhances the research, education, and outreach missions of the University of
Nebraska by bringing students of all races, genders and backgrounds into
science, technology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt; Realizing advanced electronic devices based on two-
dimensional (2D) ferroelectrics depends on the ability to deterministically
control their polarization state. High electrical conductance of these materials
precludes using conventional electric methods for testing and manipulating the
polarization response. The overarching objective of this research is to
investigate the tunability of the electronic properties of 2D ferroelectrics via
deterministic voltage-free control of polarization. The proposed research
focuses on three closely related components: (1) experimentally investigating
the flexoelectric behavior of 2D ferroelectrics; (2) investigating the
polarization reversal in 2D materials by mechanical means; (3) evaluating the
role of strain and strain gradient in modulation of their polarization-coupled
electronic properties. Scanning probe microscopy techniques will be used to
explore an interplay between the local transport properties and
flexoelectrically-enabled nanoscale domain engineering. Utilizing the
flexoelectric effect represents a new paradigm for controlling the polarization-
coupled electronic behavior, which is applicable to any 2D ferroelectric
material irrespective of its electronic properties. The most important outcome
of this research is to develop conceptually novel electronic devices where
dynamic mechanical stimulation allows modulation of a variety of the functional
properties coupled to polarization, such as electromechanical response, two-
dimensional conductivity and photovoltaic effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.