* 2212643
* I-Corps: Wastewater Treatment Using Anaerobic Membranes Bioreactor with Electrolyte Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Travis Walker, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology designed and developed for a world where droughts are
an everyday reality, while it also offers a promising sustainability effort, as
well as a smart hedge against rising costs and future shortages. The technology
when scaled can provide water for irrigation, washing, and flushing in rural and
remote areas with no access to central sewage systems as well as in small
communities. The customer discovery activities will test the hypothesis that
this technology can be used in real time by producing high quality grey water
that can be reused for different purposes. Results from the project could help
recovery of water resources by finding ways to reuse the treated
wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of wastewater stream configuration with considerably enhanced
permeate flux, as it reduced the deposition of extracellular polymeric
substances on the surface of the membrane, leading to a reduction in membrane
fouling. Moreover, this technology for wastewater treatment with the purpose of
water recovery and reuse, employs optimized operational conditions, application
of antifouling membranes, and electrically based strategies. The system consists
of enhancement and optimization of membrane filtration, anaerobic digestion
performance, and economic feasibility offering a promising sustainability
effort, as well as a smart hedge against rising costs and future
shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.