* 2212195
* Creep-Based Nanomanufacturing of Crystalline Metals and Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Golden Kumar, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2025
* USD 240,353.00

Nanostructures of metallic materials are critical for meeting the growing
demands in catalysis, energy storage, sensors, filtration, and drug-delivery.
Manufacturing of metal nanostructures largely relies on expensive lithography
and thin film deposition techniques. Molding is a high-throughput fabrication
process for nanostructures, but the large crystal grains in metals hinder their
flow at nanoscale. This grant supports fundamental research in high temperature
plastic deformation of crystalline metals to advance molding-based scalable
nanomanufacturing. The research enables fabrication of high aspect-ratio
nanostructures of many metallic alloys including high surface-area porous metal
nanostructures which are highly desirable for energy conversion and storage and
biomedical applications. The manufacturing research in metal nanostructures
benefits the economy and society by advancing technologies in energy, healthcare
and other industrial sectors thus advancing US competitiveness and prosperity.
The project provides education and hands-on training to students at all levels
and prepares them for the growing industry in advanced manufacturing. The
outreach activities in this project are designed to particularly inspire
students with disabilities for careers in science and engineering fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructures are routinely fabricated by templated
molding of soft polymers and other glassy materials in their stable viscous
state. A similar approach is however not directly applicable to crystalline
metals due to their highly reactive liquid state and rigid microstructural
features in the solid state. This project investigates creep-based plastic
deformation of crystalline metals and alloys for controllable molding at
different length scales. Creep in metals is generally considered detrimental for
structural applications, but recent studies indicate its potential for
controllable nanoforming. Molding experiments with systematic variation in
processing conditions and feedstock material enable decoupling of different
creep mechanisms and their role in governing nanoscale metal molding. The
project studies size-dependent mechanisms, e.g., dislocation-mediated
plasticity, Nabarro-Herring creep, and Coble creep, in thermomechanical
nanomolding of metals and alloys and flow mechanisms in template filling as a
function of mold size, processing time and atmosphere. The knowledge gained from
molding of homogeneous materials is applied to multi-phase and porous metal
alloys, including high-entropy and eutectic alloys. Quantitative descriptions of
creep induced flow advances the understanding of atomic diffusion in complex
alloys and porous structures. Besides novel manufacturing science, the project
has the potential to contribute new fundamental knowledge in metallurgy and
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.