* 2212723
* Collaborative Research: Damage Assessment of Coastal Structures Subject to Waterborne Debris Impact under Extreme Wind and Wave Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hansong Tang, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 245,616.00

With rising sea-levels and more frequent weather-related extreme events, coastal
civil infrastructure and communities are becoming more flood-prone and
consequently subject to an elevated risk of damage and destruction. Among the
various flood-related risks, flood-borne debris can be destructive to coastal
infrastructure (e.g., buildings, houses, and bridges). Such debris (e.g. trees,
cars, and ships) are carried by floods and waves, often in combination with
extreme wind gusts. Currently, there is a significant gap in understanding and
modeling the key physical processes associated with flood-borne debris. This
project will provide a science-based approach to understand and predict the
flood-borne debris damages to structures under extreme flood flow and wind
conditions. The research will also be complemented by an educational component
that includes workshops, curriculum development, and training demonstrations.
The educational program will be designed to have positive and measurable impact
on a broad spectrum of students (ranging from high school to graduate students),
foster an increased participation among minority and underrepresented groups,
and inform students of the novel research and diverse cultures of the three
participating institutions, i.e., Columbia University, SUNY at Stony Brook, and
CUNY City College. This award will contribute to the National Science Foundation
(NSF) role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP).

The overarching goal of this research is to understand and quantify the critical
mechanics processes involved in water-wind-debris-structure interactions,
including debris drifting by extreme flow and wind conditions, debris collision
with the structure, and the resulting damages. A multidisciplinary approach
employing computational fluid dynamics, computational solid mechanics, and
laboratory experiments will be used to achieve this goal. Specific research
tasks include: (1) innovative experiments deploying “smart debris” to
investigate wind and transport effects of flood-borne debris and their
impact/damage to structures, (2) new computational methods and software for an
integrated simulation of debris drifting, impingement, and damage to structures,
and (3) novel physics-based fragility curves, at the system level, for
structural failure risk assessment due to debris impacts. In the long term, this
research can lead to enhanced designs and mitigation strategies for structures
susceptible to the impact of flood and debris, advancing the well-being of the
public through development of resilient coastlines and communities. Project data
will be archived and made publicly available in campus data repositories and in
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.