* 2212160
* CNS Core: Small: Causal Reasoning for Data-Driven Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sanjay Rao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

A critical part of providing high quality services over the Internet is
optimizing the performance of the underlying networks. With the rise of data
analytics and machine learning, network providers have been able to steadily
improve the user experience. However, as anyone who has waited a long time for a
webpage or video to load knows, there remains a need for ever-better network
service. This project tackles this challenge and breaks new ground by applying a
different form of machine learning to networking that could potentially offer
significant benefits. Here, the goal is answering what-if questions -- i.e.,
given recorded data of an existing deployed system, what would be the
performance impact if we changed the design of the system (e.g., deployed a new
video streaming algorithm)? Answering what-if questions of this nature is known
as causal reasoning, which considers the effect of events that did not occur
while the data was being recorded. Widely used machine learning (ML) tools
(e.g., off-the-shelf neural networks) are inadequate for causal reasoning since
they merely capture correlations in collected data. This limits them to
predictions that pertain to how a deployed system with an existing design
performs in the future, and they incur biases when faced with "what-if"
questions. Other approaches such as Randomized Control Trials may be disruptive
to the performance of live users. This project aims to significantly increase
the user experience of Internet services, while making these services cheaper to
operate (cost savings that can be passed on to consumers), by allowing operators
to ask what-if questions about new networking algorithms on passively collected
networked data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together network
systems, machine learning, and causal inference. More specifically, this project
will develop: (i) Causal dependency graphs for real-world networking case
studies, and approaches for causal adjustments that consider the ease of
measurement in networking, estimator variance, and accuracy of predictions; (ii)
Novel approaches to infer latent variables through network models, and through
instrumentation to collect additional data that can serve as proxies for these
latent variables in a manner that does not impact live users; and (iii)
Techniques to bridge ML techniques for inferring latent variables and modeling
the proposed changes, with unique challenges posed by incorporating network
models. The ideas in this project can be more generally applied in many
networking and machine learning domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.