* 2212221
* STTR Phase I:  Aptamer Biosensors with the Longevity and Technology Compatibility Required for Continuous Biosensing Devices Beyond Glucose
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Andrew Cothrel, KILELE HEALTH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,899.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve clinical outcomes for patients
with wearable biosensor needs. This project will develop wearable continuous
glucose biosensor platforms to address a broad set of disease and wellness
applications, such as measuring additional molecules relevant to diabetes
management, improving management of cardiovascular diseases, and therapeutic
drug monitoring to customize dosages. In addition to impacting human health
(particularly for chronic diseases) in the United States, the commercial market
is significant and valued at approximately $120 B/year. Furthermore, these
biosensors will provide data directly to patients to inform their decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will address the limitations which have prevented continuous diagnostic
monitoring platforms from adding clinical utility beyond sensing glucose with
enzymatic sensors. Unlike enzymatic glucose sensors, electrochemical aptamer
sensors are rapidly adaptable to measuring other molecules in the body with high
specificity and sensitivity. However, aptamer sensors currently degrade rapidly
in live animals (&lt;6-12 hours) and must be inserted through a highly-invasive
incision. This STTR Phase I project will demonstrate robust and longer-lasting
functioning of aptamer biosensors in a real biofluid environment. It will use a
software-enabled method in which only one electrode is inserted, making the
resulting device truly minimally invasive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.