* 2212675
* SBIR Phase I:  Super High Performance No-Code Platform
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Richard Sater, 4thought Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to democratize participation in the expansive growth
of blockchain-enabled financial markets that increasingly require the ability to
read, analyze, or write smart contracts at scale. Enterprises that lack the
programming capabilities to perform these tasks well will become increasingly
disadvantaged as smart contracts continue to proliferate. Ranging from simple
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) that convey ownership to complex, self-executing
agreements that automate future payments, smart contracts are at the heart of
the commercial utility and perceived value of a blockchain. Growing numbers of
financial institutions are seeking to advance their Web3 capabilities, even at
premium prices. As algorithmic trading has demonstrated, automating analysis and
execution can provide enormous commercial upside, yet it also can result in
large losses if designed improperly or left unchecked. Pioneering a solution
that enables enterprises without advanced programmers to reap the benefits of
analyzing and writing smart contracts while managing the associated risks
requires deep technologyâ€” specifically a novel visual programming language
designed to manage big-data sets involving millions of smart contracts on public
blockchains using simple no-code commands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
1 project proposes to build a unique blockchain application interface that will
enable users to scan and read smart contracts and immediately leverage the
extracted data to design, build, and test trading algorithms that incorporate
digital assets. This interface will ultimately enable users to analyze and write
smart contracts at scale without the need to code. The project will set the
foundation for the inexpensive development of Web3 capabilities by thousands of
enterprises that do not have access to advanced programmers. The project will
also produce a computerized tool that does the following two key tasks: 1.
continuously scan publicly-accessible smart contracts in real time, and 2.
derive indicators from these scanned contracts that likely are meaningful,
initially for the purposes of analyzing and trading financial assets. The
blockchain application interface to be created will enable users without
programming capabilities to automate trading using live smart contract data for
the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.