* 2212960
* LEAPS-MPS: Utilizing Interband Transitions in Metallic Nanoparticles for Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Son Nguyen, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,214.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Professor Son Nguyen and the research group at the
University of California at Merced intend to investigate how metallic, nanometer
size particles absorb photons and accelerate chemical reactions. Through varying
photon energy, observing the corresponding chemical products, and correlating
the photoexcited state of the particles to the rate of product formation, the
researchers intend to reveal the working mechanism of the particles. Successful
implementation of the proposed work may provide some fundamental rules for
preparing green materials for future chemical synthesis. The Nguyen group
intends to assist under-represented students succeed in STEM fields by providing
professional preparation and hands-on research experience in nanoscience and
sustainable energy. These training activities are well suited to the missions of
the University of California at Merced, including serving the Hispanic community
and supporting first-generation college and economically disadvantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Nguyen group intends to
reveal the catalytic mechanism induced by interband transitions to seek a new
reaction mechanism and potential application of metallic nanoparticles via two
main goals: i) establishing the catalytic mechanism and activities of hot holes
for Suzuki coupling reactions and ii) expanding the catalysis of hot holes for
other coupling reactions. Mesoporous nanoparticles will be utilized to solve the
challenging spectral overlap of plasmon resonance and interband transitions. The
plasmon resonance of the porous nanoparticles is shifted from the visible to
near infrared region, allowing the Nguyen group to interrogate the
photocatalysis induced by interband transitions in the visible region without
spectral interference of the plasmon resonance. Control experiments with non-
porous nanoparticle counterparts, in which interband transitions and plasmon
resonance are spectrally overlapped, will allow the Nguyen group to
differentiate the catalytic contribution from each photoexcitation regime.
Several model reactions, including C-C and C-N couplings, will be studied to
highlight the catalytic role and application of interband transitions. This
project has the potential to stimulate research in nanomaterial-based
photocatalysis and expedite the application of photochemistry for practical
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.