* 2212546
* FET: Medium: Neural network computation and learning in well-mixed and spatially-organized molecular systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 584,131.00

The principles of neural computation, developed mostly over the past 50 years,
have led to profoundly improved understanding of how brains process information
and have served as the foundation for modern machine learning techniques. Only
recently has it begun to be appreciated the extent to which these principles of
neural computation apply more broadly and can be found operating within non-
neural systems. In particular, the implications and potential of neural
computing principles for designing advanced synthetic molecular systems are only
beginning to be explored. Key principles include the power of high-dimensional
pattern recognition using linear threshold units and winner-take-all
competition, learning from experience to sculpt network connection strengths,
the generation of complex patterns from the resonance of network dynamics, and
the interplay between spatial structure and computing capabilities. Molecular
programming using DNA nanotechnology now has sufficiently developed methods to
design systems that explore and exploit these neural computing principles. This
research will pioneer three new types of DNA neural networks: those capable of
unsupervised learning of complex patterns in their environment, those capable of
complex spatial pattern formation as reaction-diffusion systems, and those
capable of exploiting the molecular-scale spatial organization of DNA
nanostructures to perform more efficient computation in certain regimes of
operation. In the long term, the incorporation of neural computation principles
into future molecular systems will open doors to new applications ranging from
biomedicine to materials science. In the medium term, an important impact of
this project will be the future careers of the postdocs and graduate students
who will benefit from the research experience and mentoring, whether they move
on to academia, industry, or entrepreneurship. In the short term, the
researchers will incorporate their scientific understanding into online software
tools, continue to integrate research with education, provide undergraduates
with mentored summer research, enhance the interdisciplinary research
environment, and involve more women in science. They will also increase public
engagement with science by presenting at public events, interviewing for popular
science magazines, and creating artworks to illustrate their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research goals for the development of
the three new types of DNA neural networks are as follows. First, learning is
arguably the most desirable property of synthetic molecular circuits. This
project builds on the researchers’ current work demonstrating supervised
learning and expands it to the broader category of unsupervised learning. A
limitation of supervised learning is that a “teacher” must provide training
examples that indicate what should be learned. Unsupervised learning addresses
this limitation by exposing the molecular circuits to only what they encounter
but not how they should respond; this new capability would be necessary for
molecular robotic systems that operate autonomously, as cells do, within a
molecular milieu. Second, reaction-diffusion pattern formation has been studied
since Alan Turing’s seminal work on morphogenesis, both for its relevance to
biological patterning and as an intrinsic physical mechanism of self-
organization. However, the complexity of reaction-diffusion patterns has been
limited. The researchers will leverage recent breakthroughs in deep learning
techniques to design complex reaction-diffusion networks by example. They will
use the differentiable programming approach, combined with the recent advances
in the synthesis of large DNA neural networks and reliable DNA hydrogels as a
spatial substrate for reaction-diffusion experiments. Finally, the researchers
will perform a theoretical study that applies their expertise in DNA origami
tiles and surface-localized chemical reaction networks to introduce a novel
computing architecture for DNA neural networks. This architecture provides a new
trade-off between design complexity and molecular operation that may scale
better than prior approaches as the network size
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.