* 2212958
* Formulating a theoretical scaling for dispersion in MHD turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jane Pratt, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 0.00

One of the most fundamental aspects of turbulent flows is dispersion â€“ a measure
of how particles spread out. In electrically neutral fluids such as air and
water, dispersion determines how moisture, particulates, or chemicals mix into
the atmosphere or oceans. Other fluids, like liquid metals and plasmas, can
carry an electrical charge. Their movement is fundamentally changed by the
presence of magnetic fields and is described by magnetohydrodynamics. Dispersion
in magnetohydrodynamic fluids determines the properties of space weather as
plasma spreads in the interstellar medium, how chemicals from the core of a star
are mixed into its outer layers, and how particles are trapped in the liquid
metal blankets of reactors. The goal of this project is to provide a clear
understanding of how magnetohydrodynamic dispersion differs from dispersion in
the hydrodynamic case observed in air or water. This project will include summer
research students, a computational physics outreach program using scientific
visualizations and computer renderings, and technical training for the
scientific/industrial work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
leverage modern ideas and theoretical techniques to modify and extend the theory
of dispersion, developed by Richardson in 1926 for hydrodynamic fluids, to the
setting of magnetohydrodynamic fluids. Testing our new prediction will require
simulations that are particularly intensive; these simulations will be performed
on some of the largest supercomputers in the world. The simulation data will
allow our theoretical results to probe questions of foundational importance for
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. These include how a turbulent flow develops a
preferred direction of movement, and how different parts of the flow interact
energetically. The results of our theoretical and computational investigation
will allow engineers to design more efficient reactors, and astronomers to
better predict the space weather that impacts life on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.