* 2212978
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld Devices for Practical Simultaneous Translation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Drew Penney, LEXEL SYNERGETICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 255,994.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project on a handheld simultaneous translator advances the state-of-the-art
technologies in natural language processing and machine learning acceleration.
Beyond technical contributions, the novel translator will likely have a
significant impact on a wide range of domains, such as military personnel
deployed in foreign countries, businesspeople participating in multilingual
meetings, medical service providers, law enforcement, customer support services,
diplomats and political representatives, local governmental entities providing
services to citizens in the preferred language, and international tourists. As
such, the project will have broader impacts in increasing economic
competitiveness, advancing health and welfare, and improving military
capabilities of the United State. Furthermore, the project helps to enhance
equity in education and STEM literacy by enabling better access to educational
resources to people of diverse backgrounds, especially immigrants, women, and
underrepresented minorities in some countries/regions, who were previously
disadvantaged due to limited prior educational access or limited access to
foreign language courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the research and development of
innovative algorithmic optimizations and a purpose-built translation device to
enable fast, accurate and low-power inference for simultaneous translation. The
overall approach is to exploit the unspoken but implied connections among
language elements at various levels to guide the learning model. Specific
techniques are investigated at the phoneme-level, work-level, and sentence-
level. Collectively, these innovations aim to reduce the computation complexity
of simultaneous translation by orders of magnitude while increasing translation
accuracy. A systematic and comprehensive methodology is also being established
that allows fast implementation of the inference hardware via high-level
synthesis and reports detailed statistics on translation accuracy, latency,
power, and area to facilitate a thorough evaluation of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.