* 2212629
* III: Small: Large-Scale High Dimensional Dense Vector Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dong Deng, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,557.00

Real-world objects such as images and documents often contain rich metadata
information. In addition, the rapid development of machine learning, especially
deep learning, in recent years make it possible to extract meaningful
relationships between real-world objects and encode them in numerical
representations. In this way, the semantics of objects can be conveniently
processed by computers. The numerical representations of semantics plays an
important role in many data science and artificial intelligence applications,
such as face recognition, image retrieval, video understanding, recommender
systems, text analysis, and knowledge-base management. In these applications,
the numerical representations of real-world objects and their associated
metadata are usually jointly queried. While metadata management and
representation management are investigated extensively independently, jointly
managing metadata and representations is under-investigated making it difficult
to do in practice. Unfortunately, due to the large data volume and the notorious
"curse-of-dimensionality" phenomenon that makes all high-dimensional data
objects appear far apart, metadata and representation joint management are
challenging. To support the ability of applications to work with both
traditional and numerical representations of data, this project will study how
to leverage the synergy between them. If successful, this project will advance
the development of science and technology by providing new knowledge about data
management. Moreover, despite being widely used, metadata and representations
are still largely managed by individual application developers. Without careful
implementation, the performance can hardly meet the needs of a wide variety of
potential users. This project will deliver an end-to-end data system to
alleviate the burden on machine learning practitioners and application
developers of managing the representations and metadata created by their
programs by themselves. In addition, this projectÂ includes curriculum
development and student training at Rutgers University to amplify the impact of
the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale high dimensional dense vectors are
ubiquitous nowadays due to the rapid development of representation learning
(e.g., the learned feature vectors from well-established machine-learning
systems such as word2vec, doc2vec, node2vec, graph2vec, item2vec, etc.). They
play an important role in many applications in areas such as data mining,
natural language processing, computer vision, information retrieval, and
recommendations. However, large-scale high dimensional dense vectors are
notorious for being hard to query efficiently due to the well-known "curse of
dimensionality" phenomenon. Existing research on high dimensional dense vector
management mainly focuses on approximate nearest-neighbor search (ANNS).
However, a few widely used, compute-intensive dense vector queries are under-
examined by the research community and not well supported by existing systems.
This project will study three of them: multi-modal ANNS, parallel vector
similarity join, and rank estimation. Specifically, multi-modal ANNS are queries
involving both dense vectors (e.g., vector representations of product images or
documents) and their structured attributes (e.g., product price or last edit
time). Given a collection of dense vectors, the vector similarity join connects
every vector with its nearest neighbors. To deal with the huge computational
cost of this operation, this project will study lock-free, massively parallel
algorithms on CPUs and GPUs. Rank estimation approximates the inherent
dimensionality of a data vector (e.g., vector representations of items in
recommendation or documents in information retrieval) in a set of data vectors
ordered by their distance to a relevant vector (e.g., a user purchased the item
or a keyword query related to the document). Such a scheme is useful in machine-
learning model evaluation. The long-term goal of this project is to build an
end-to-end system to make large-scale dense vector management transparent to
machine-learning practitioners and application
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.