* 2212573
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Real-Time Liquid Wireless Networking for Data-Intensive Rural Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Daji Qiao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Rural broadband is a foundation for a strong rural economy and quality of life,
and many rural applications require real-time data-intensive communications.
Wireless networks are essential building blocks of rural broadband; however,
rural wireless is subject to environmental factors such as weather, terrain,
foliage, and crop types and densities, and rural wireless networks need to
provide coverage to much larger areas with less density than urban networks. To
support real-time data-intensive rural applications, this project will
investigate Real-Time Liquid Wireless Networking (RT-LWN). The RT-LWN framework
is expected to become a foundational component of rural broadband solutions, and
the enabled real-time data-intensive rural applications such as agriculture
automation and immersive online education are expected to have a transformative
impact on rural industries and communities. This project will generate first-of-
its-kind real-world measurement data and models of rural access and backhaul
links, and they will be of broad use by the research and education communities.
This project will create exciting opportunities for broadening participation in
computing, and it will help enrich undergraduate and graduate research and
education as well as K-12 outreach. Project results will be broadly
disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the RT-LWN framework, application data
are encoded using fountain codes and then delivered across wireless access and
backhaul networks with probabilistic real-time packet delivery guarantees. The
liquidity of fountain-encoded data, together with a field-deployable approach to
probabilistic real-time communication guarantees across wireless access and
backhaul, enables efficient, real-time delivery of each source block while fully
leveraging the aggregate capacity of heterogeneous wireless networks in the
presence of fast-varying dynamics and uncertainties. The RT-LWN framework
effectively integrates fountain-encoded liquid data with the design of
predictable wireless networking. In particular, with predictable control of
communication reliability, timeliness, and throughput at the link, network, and
liquid transport layers, RT-LWN enables “predictability by design”, and it
tackles the resiliency and performance challenges of rural wireless at the same
time, to enable transformative real-time data-intensive applications. RT-LWN
embeds liquid data networking into a rural wireless network architecture
featuring 1) novel, effective integration of the liquid transport layer into
end-points, 2) functional decomposition across the liquid transport layer and
lower layers based on the end-to-end principle, and 3) field-deployable,
holistic designs for addressing complex, fast-varying wireless dynamics and
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.