* 2212882
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact, low-maintenance water treatment plant
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Marcin Sawczuk, FIRST WATER TECHNOLOGY CO.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,849.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a low footprint
drinking water treatment plant (WTP) suited to facilitate much-needed upgrades
to the nation’s water infrastructure. Today’s drinking water treatment systems
are suffering from high volumes of generated waste (~100,000 tons sludge per
typical plant per year) and high maintenance requirements and costs (4x/year
week-long clarifier decommissioning for cleaning). The aging infrastructure of
many of the nation’s water treatment plants has left millions of Americans with
inadequate drinking water. This situation, paired with the aging and shrinking
water operator workforce, translates into a growing threat of water supply
interruptions and noncompliance. Owing to its small footprint and low energy and
maintenance demands, the proposed technology would deliver an easily
implementable solution that could be adopted by communities and water systems
around the world, even in remote areas. Successfully developed, the WTP will
offer a unique economic opportunity to meet critical global sustainable
development goals and promote human health and welfare. This technology will
lower the barriers to upgrading the nation’s water infrastructure, creating jobs
through the introduction of long-delayed upgrades through plant
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elements of the innovation under
development for the proposed water treatment plant include a self-modulating
feedback/feedforward controller driving automated coagulant dosing, which is
paired with a high-efficiency hydraulic flocculator that leverages turbulent
flow to promote floc formation while remaining free of failure-prone moving
parts; a self-cleaning clarifier fitted with settling plates and a sludge
blanket system for efficient contaminant removal; a stacked sand filter that
decreases the hydraulic loading rate for a given flow and bed volume, resulting
in improved stability of the deposited particles (i.e., reduced shear and
particle breakthrough); and a continuous sludge dewatering and treatment system
that decreases the volume of produced sludge while also providing a continuous
waste stream for further processing. While early efforts have established a
proof-of-concept demonstrating operations at 50% less energy demand than
conventional systems, continued research and development to improve system
performance and autonomy are needed. In line with this effort, the Phase I
effort will focus on: 1) development of an automated control system for precise
coagulant dosing; 2) design modification to minimize waste stream volume; and 3)
design and construction of a pilot plant with 15 gallons per minute capacity,
suitable to meet the water treatment needs of communities of ~300
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.