* 2212278
* STTR Phase I:  Innovative dispersion technology for the sustainable repurposing of off-spec and recycled carbon fiber into low-cost, defect-free, nonwoven fabrics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Uday Vaidya, ENDEAVOR COMPOSITES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The Broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to intercepting landfill-destined carbon fiber â€“ designated as off-
spec fibers - and repurpose it into sustainable nonwoven fabrics. Off-spec
carbon fiber constitutes 30% of carbon fiber production. These sustainable
fabrics will be categorized based on their performance characteristics into
multiple tiers that are suitable for different scales of applications. In
addition, this project will explore the hybridization of natural fiber and off-
spec carbon fiber for increased sustainability. The results of this project may
serve as a baseline for industry to adopt these fabrics into their composites to
create lighter automotive vehicles with lower emissions. The advanced composites
made from the resulting fabrics may introduce new, high-performance materials
that can be used for the development of medical devices, lightweight unmanned
aircrafts, and electronic enclosures with applications in the automotive,
aerospace, sporting, and marine industries, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed innovation to produce nonwoven fabrics from off-spec carbon fiber is
based on the fundamental studies of their physical and chemical properties and
their responses to mechanical agitation and suspension in an aqueous solutions.
This effort focuses on dispersing mechanisms for the wet laid process. This
technology may lead to a mathematical model that can receive inputs about fibers
properties and predict a mixing regime that will provide dispersion conditions
for an optimal nonwoven fabric. Such models can be supported with thorough,
standardized, quality control and mechanical testing. This project objectives
are to establish process to fabricate mats using off-spec materials, including
trims, and recycled fibers and to optimize operations for mats made from
different combinations of blended carbon fiber tiers. Mixtures of different
fractional percentages and types of on- and off-spec carbon fibers will be used,
and models will be adjusted to reflect optimal operational settings. Finally,
the team will compare the performance of tailored mixed-material carbon fiber
mats against those produced using only carbon fibers to expand products
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.