* 2212767
* SBIR Phase I:  Smartphone-Based Machine Learning and Computer Vision for Cost-Effective Verification of Forest Carbon Offsets
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Patrick Leung, EARTHSHOT Labs PBC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to make the gathering of tree
measurements and other field-based nature observations dramatically easier. The
project involves building a mobile app that uses computer vision and augmented
reality to make measuring trees much easier than using the tape measures of
today, in fact it will be as simple as scanning a barcode. This will result in
much more nature imagery and other training data for use with ecological models,
which will yield a better understanding of how ecosystems will change in the
coming years. One important prediction this project will help with is forest
growth which is very useful for generating carbon offsets that can finance the
regeneration of large amounts of land. Better ecological models can also help
communities prepare for changes in climate, sea level, soil quality and other
ecological shifts in the coming decades. Millions of people will be potentially
affected by climate change and its accompanying shifts in ecosystems, so arming
communities and governments with better insights about these impacts will be
critical. Furthermore, catalyzing many millions of hectares of nature
regeneration projects will help mitigate the worst effects of climate change and
other ecological challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves the unique combination of computer vision with augmented reality in
order to quickly and accurately measure trees. There are multiple computer
vision neural networks being developed for the app. One of them uses bark and
tree imagery in order to classify the tree species, an important feature needed
for ecological models. Another model analyzes surrounding scenery and quickly
identifies the closest tree trunk. The app then uses the phone’s augmented
reality capabilities to gauge the distance and orientation of the phone from the
trunk and combines these two to yield a diameter at breast height measurement.
The research plan involves collecting data from specific regions in Panama and
Brazil in conjunction with active nature restoration projects and gathering a
critical mass of leaf and bark imagery so that species in those areas can be
classified accurately. The scope will then increase to additional regions and
later, measurements such as birdsong and other biodiversity markers. Over time
the app could become a platform for many such nature observations, and it is
expected to evolve to become more game-like to attract large numbers of people
having fun experiences together and advancing the cause of nature
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.