* 2212640
* Balancing Social and Ecological Information to Collectively Manage Dynamic Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Chelsea Cook, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/28/2026
* USD 753,407.00

Animals, whether behaviorally or physiologically, manage daily and seasonal
environmental fluctuations, such as temperature changes, by using receptors on
their bodies. For social animals, individuals often work together in a group to
manage these fluctuations much more effectively, such as through huddling, yet
little is known about exactly how animals accomplish this. Honeybees, for
example, are an excellent model system to study social temperature regulation
because they engage in a cooling behavior called fanning, in which a group of
bees fan their wings to circulate air in the colony. If they do not cool
effectively, the colony can die. This project will identify the mechanisms that
honeybees use to sense environmental fluctuations, how their brains change in
response to this information, how they communicate this information to each
other, and how entire colonies regulate temperature when information changes.
Physiological and genetic testing techniques will be used to understand both
individual and collective behavior, especially in changing environments. The
project will engage the public 1) by developing a local prison beekeeping
program to provide tangible workforce skills for inmates, 2) by working with the
ROSE Project, which focuses on introducing underrepresented middle school
students and parents to STEM research, 3) by presenting at local beekeeping and
ecology meetings, and 4) by training and supporting undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral scientists in these cutting-edge research and outreach
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms must be able to behaviorally and
physiologically manage daily and seasonal fluctuations in climate. Sensory
reception and integration of information is critical to maintain homeostasis
during typical thermal shifts across days or seasons. Collective behavioral
responses to changing temperatures require effective reception and integration
of both social and ecological information. Although we know why animals
thermoregulate, it is less clear how animals integrate social information to be
able to thermoregulate effectively. Honeybees must maintain 34°C in their
colony, or risk death of their developing brood. In the summer, honeybees engage
in a cooling behavior called fanning, in which they fan their wings to circulate
air to cool the colony. Fanner honeybees utilize both information from their
nestmates and information from their ecological environment to collectively
thermoregulate. The fanning response shifts when the social and thermal
information changes; however, the ways in which individuals or groups perceive,
integrate, or communicate about these changes to behave collectively is unknown.
This proposal will identify these mechanisms by addressing four aims: 1)
Determine how the social interactions shape the fanning response; 2) Uncover the
neural gene networks associated with the fanning response; 3) Define TRP channel
involvement in the fanning response; and 4) Evaluate colony-level fanning
response in a changing environment. This research will provide critical
knowledge about how complex animal systems manage dynamic environments, identify
gene and sensory pathways that mediate effective responses, and generate
hypotheses about how animal groups may manage global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.