* 2212981
* Self-limited etching for atomic scale surface engineering of metals: understanding and design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 348,878.00

All solids are terminated by a surface. To control the composition and structure
of a surface, chemically selective and spatially accurate modification processes
with atomic-level precision are required. This is particularly true for the
semiconductor industry where device feature sizes have entered the single-digit
nanometer scale. To enable the fabrication of future nanodevices, this project
seeks to develop methods to selectively and directionally etch industrially
significant metals. Traditionally, metal etching and patterning has been
performed by expositing the surface to an acid. However, such an approach cannot
be used for nanofabrication because of its poor selectivity, non-directionality,
and poor etch-depth control. Plasma etch processes constitute a significant
improvement in directional control, but these processes can suffer from metal
redeposition. Atomic layer etching (ALE) offers a promising alternative. ALE is
a two-step self-limiting cyclic process where the metal surface is first
modified by a plasma process and then is exposed to a precursor that selectively
etches the modified surface. While having the potential to address all the
aforementioned drawbacks of etch processes, a thorough understanding of the
plasma and surface reaction mechanisms for important metals such as Ni and Cu is
needed. This proposal seeks to fill this knowledge gap with a comprehensive
computational chemistry approach. The project integrates research and training
of Ph.D. and undergraduate students at the frontier of theoretical modeling and
surface engineering process design and discovery. These students will be well
prepared by the broad training on electronic structure calculations, algorithms
of artificial intelligence and data science, surface chemistry experiments, and
understanding of experimental data, capabilities, and
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computational/experimental research
program focuses on developing atomic layer etch (ALE) processes for the layer-
by-layer removal of metal films. The reactive ALE process to be modelled starts
with a metal surface modification step under plasma conditions to convert
surface metal atoms to a surface compound that, when exposed to an etching
agent, forms volatile metal-complexes that desorb, exposing the etched metal
surface. The modification step will be modelled using molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations with neural network potentials (NNPs), considering realistic initial
kinetic energy for the trajectories. The NNP parameters will be identified using
a training data set generated using density functional theory (DFT) based
calculations. The results of plasma modification machine-learning MD simulations
will be verified with surface modification experiments in an Inductively Coupled
Plasma (ICP) chamber. For the etching reaction step, a thermodynamic database of
energy will first be constructed as a function of etchant, substrate, modifiers,
and process conditions. The thermodynamic database will be used to propose
feasible etching chemistries. For experimentally validated cases, a detailed
computational mechanistic exploration of reaction elementary steps for the
etching reaction will determine the size of kinetic barriers for key low-energy
pathways. Collectively, this methodology will result in an enhanced
understanding of self-limiting surface reactions as well as the definition of
optimal reactants to accurately engineer metallic surfaces. Educational and
outreach activities supported by this program include partnering with the UCLA
Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED) to identify top
underrepresented minority (URM) students to work on this program (undergraduate
student in the first year and high-school student in the second year). Informal
science communication will be performed using the educational portals, such as
Atomic Scale Design Network (ASDN.net) and NanoHUB (nanohub.org). The research
team will create educational pages that bring forth the novel concepts and ideas
in the field of atomic scale surface engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.