* 2212442
* OAC Core: Toward a Rigorous and Reliable Scientific Deep Learning Framework for Forward, Inverse, and UQ Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tan Bui-Thanh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

While Deep Learning, a subset of machine learning, has proved to be state-of-
the-art approach in many fields of computer&lt;br/&gt;sciences, it is still in
its infancy in computational science and engineering communities. Unlike
computational applied math methods in which solution accuracy and reliability
are guaranteed, deep learning---in its present state---is often far from
providing accurate&lt;br/&gt;predictions for engineering and science
applications. For machine learning methods that serve as a basis for
design,control, discovery, and decision-making, their solutions must be equipped
with the degree of confidence. However, quantifying the uncertainty in machine
learning solution remains challenging and an open problem. Thus, there is a
critical need to develop reliable, robust, and model-aware deep learning methods
to tackle complex, natural, engineered, and science systems in order to continue
the pace of scientific discoveries and to promote the progress of science. This
project is of immediate practical utility in both machine learning and
computational engineering and sciences communities. It aims at solving real-
world data-driven problems, which can lead to original scientific discoveries
and promote the progress of science. The project open-sourced software developed
on top of TensorFlow, Jax, and FEniCS/FireDrake is accessible to a diverse
community of computer and computational science and engineering researchers,
scientists, faculty, and students. Proposed research will be directly
incorporated into the Introduction to machine learning course offered by the PI
annually at the University of Texas at Austin. Students from the project
contributes to the pipeline of advanced scientists to maintain US
competitiveness and leadership in sciences and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the PI's research
program is to develop scalable uncertainty quantification, optimization,
mathematical, and parallel computational methods for scientific machine
learning. The objective of this project is to: 1) equip deep learning with the
underlying mathematical models to improve generalization error, especially for
low data regime, 2) achieve comparable accuracy with traditional forward/inverse
computational methods while taking a fraction of the cost; and 3) quantify the
uncertainty in deep learning for forward/inverse solutions. To that end, the
project develops 1) rigorous adaptive architecture design methods, 2)
interpretable model-constrained methods to encode mathematical models into deep
neural networks for solving forward and inverse problems and science and
engineering, and 3) model-constrained statistical approaches for quantifying the
uncertainty in neural network predictions. Practical forward and inverse seismic
wave propagation---a problem in NSF portfolio---is chosen as the demanding
testbed for the developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.