* 2212097
* RI: Small: Local and Forward-Oriented Deep Learning for Decentralized and Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Inouye, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 614,843.00

The field of deep learning enables computers to create complex models to perform
challenging tasks previously limited to humans. It has been the key to modern
successes in artificial intelligence (AI) including automatic object
identification in images, machine translation, and autonomous cars. However,
current deep learning models require data to be collected in one centralized
location and globally optimized by powerful computers. This significantly limits
deep learning in the decentralized and dynamic environments common to future AI
applications critical for national defense and economic pre-eminence. These
future AI applications will be deployed over multiple heterogeneous wireless
devices that have limited computational and communication capabilities (e.g., a
surveillance camera, a weather sensor, or an aerial drone). This work will
develop novel deep learning methods that execute in these decentralized
environments, adapt to changing conditions, and recover from communication
failures. To broaden STEM participation, this project will also develop virtual
machine learning labs to engage high school students. Ultimately, this work will
take a key step towards the next generation of decentralized and dynamic AI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop approaches to optimize a
sequence of invertible functions that iteratively deconstruct data patterns, an
approach called destructive learning. Specifically, this work will advance
knowledge on both the foundational and practical aspects of local and forward-
oriented destructive learning. The first objective will generalize the iterative
algorithms from the investigatorâ€™s prior work and provide the foundation for
forward-only algorithms. These forward-only algorithms do not require a
centralized computational environment and can locally optimize AI components
even under imperfect communication between devices. The second objective will
develop more practical destructive learning algorithms that combine the
strengths of forward-only and global centralized learning. The final objective
will implement and evaluate forward-oriented algorithms on simulated and real
device networks to demonstrate the feasibility of this new deep learning
approach. These objectives work together in creating a foundation for a novel
alternative to end-to-end learning across devices that does not require global
synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.