* 2212682
* SBIR Phase I:  Generation of directly active monoclonal antibodies to CD19 for the treatment of B-cell malignancies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Rachel Welt, WELT BIO-MOLECULAR PHARMACEUTICAL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project relates to novel monoclonal antibody (mAb)
therapies for the treatment of B-cell cancers (leukemias and lymphomas). Current
drugs for these cancers cause severe side effects, and patients overwhelmingly
relapse. The reagents proposed here could be the first mAbs to directly induce
potent therapeutic effect in these diseases and are designed to be more tumor-
specific than current therapies. Thus, the reagents offer the potential of a
cure while minimizing the likelihood of side effects. Well-tolerated and
effective therapeutics are a known unmet need for these malignancies.
Additionally, these directly active mAbs could provide more affordable options
than the engineered antibodies that have recently been approved. Research on
these mAbs will elucidate the relationship between structural elements of
receptors and their function. The success of these mAbs will validate a novel
drug-target discovery platform, which will be applied in developing antibodies
to treat other cancers and autoimmune diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project applies a drug discovery
platform, focused on developing mAbs to membrane receptors responsible for
driving oncogenic signaling and malignant phenotypes. These novel antibodies may
induce direct biologic effects by interrupting cell-growth/survival pathways.
One of the key players in controlling multiple activation pathways involved in
cell survival and proliferation is CD19, which is ubiquitously expressed on
B-cells and its dysregulation leads to B-cell malignancies. Though CD19 has been
used as a B-cell-specific drug target, no therapies exist that directly impact
the signaling function of this receptor. This work has the potential to generate
mAbs to two selected epitopes on CD19. mAbs that are specific and directly
active will be further developed for clinical use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.