* 2212545
* PFI-TT:  Development of Fire-Safe and Low-Cost Flow Batteries for the Storage of Residential Solar Energy
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Yong Gao, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is derived from improving the resilience
of millions of homes against power outages. In recent years, an increasing
number of extreme weather events has caused a surge in natural disasters such as
wildfires and hurricanes, many of which knocked the power grid down—leaving
thousands of families without electricity for days or weeks. A strategy to
address the vulnerability of the national grid is to improve the energy self-
sufficiency of houses and other residential complexes, for example, by combining
roof-top solar arrays with long-duration energy storage systems. Lithium-ion
batteries are usually the devices of choice for storing solar energy.
Unfortunately, fire safety risks and high production costs have limited the
adoption of lithium-ion batteries in residential areas. At present, only about
20% of home-solar owners have installed energy-storage devices. This PFI-TT
project aims to develop fire-safe and low-cost iron-chromium redox flow
batteries that can be widely used in residential areas. The batteries developed
in this project may be about ~30% cheaper than lithium-ion batteries and do not
contain self-igniting fire hazards inside the cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project has two research and development goals. The first goal is to
synthesize and test the novel perfluorophosphonic acid-zirconium polymer
membranes that transport protons but reduce unwanted metal electrolyte
crossovers. Such membranes may help address the electrolyte crossover challenge
that has prevented the development and commercialization of novel iron-chromium
redox flow batteries. The fabrication of fluoropolymers will be carried out by
copolymerizing hexafluoropropylene with a novel perfluorobutene monomer that is
synthesized in the laboratory. The second goal is the design, construction, and
evaluation of a small iron-chromium redox flow battery stack at 7 kW, which can
be sold to a residential solar owner to support existing rooftop solar panels.
The cell design parameters such as the dimension of single cells, gaskets, and
flow channels will be systematically investigated to optimize the performance of
the battery stack. If this PFI-TT project is successful, this research may lead
to the commercialization of fire-safe and low-cost iron-chromium batteries for
residential energy storage and discovery of new proton-conductive fluoropolymers
that can be widely used in fuel cells, electrolyzers, chlor-alkali cells, and
other types of flow batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.