* 2212437
* CIF: Medium: Coding Theory for DNA Storage: Synthesis, Retention, and Reconstruction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

New information-storage technologies are needed to accommodate the growing
deluge of data being collected and generated by modern society. In the past
decade, several experiments have demonstrated that deoxyribonucleic acid
(abbreviated DNA) – the molecule that carries the genetic information of living
organisms – is a potentially viable storage medium. DNA-based storage would have
many attractive features: unprecedented data density, a recording format that
will not become obsolete, archival durability over thousands of years, and easy
data replication. On the other hand, DNA storage requires fundamentally new
methods for encoding data into DNA sequences to make the storage process
efficient and reliable. The aim of the project is two-fold: (1) to understand
the mathematical limits on the efficiency, reliability, and information density
of DNA-based storage, and (2) to develop novel data-encoding and decoding
algorithms to help achieve those limits. The project will provide a stimulating
research opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students, encouraging
teamwork across university boundaries and collaboration across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on coding methods that
address critical problems in the key stages of the DNA storage process:
efficient synthesis of DNA sequences, stable retention of stored sequences, and
reliable data retrieval and reconstruction. Specific objectives are: (1)
establish fundamental information-theoretic limits on the storage capacity of
DNA using mathematical abstractions of the DNA recording process, (2) develop
source coding techniques to minimize the time needed to encode data into
synthesized arrays of DNA sequences, (3) design coding algorithms to efficiently
enforce constraints on the allowed nucleotide patterns in synthesized DNA
sequences to ensure their long-term retention, and (4) develop reconstruction
algorithms and error-correcting codes that can recover a set of DNA sequences
from an unordered collection of copies that may be corrupted by insertions,
deletions, and substitutions of nucleotides. The project develops tools to
address classical problems in coding theory and information theory that underlie
many aspects of the research. These include the construction of optimal codes
for finite-state communication channels with symbol costs, the design of optimal
short-length codes that correct multiple insertion and deletion errors, the
development of efficient coding techniques that asymptotically approach the
capacity of a communication channel with deletion errors, and the analysis of
algorithms and codes that enable reconstruction of a sequence from multiple
noisy observations, either exactly or within a small list of candidate
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.