* 2212352
* Collaborative Research: HCC: MEDIUM: Body as Intervention: Toward Closed-Loop, Embodied Behavioral Health Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Pedro Lopes, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 412,423.00

There has been a drastic increase in stress and anxiety in the U.S., leading to
a mental health pandemic. The need for effective mental health interventions is
more urgent now than ever. By monitoring users' symptoms and their context
(e.g., when someone is having an anxiety attack or experiencing cravings when
passing by a bar) through wearables and IoT (Internet of Things) devices, mobile
health (mHealth) technologies have the potential to transform mental health
care. Despite the advanced monitoring capability, most existing mHealth
interventions are digitization of traditional health interventions that do not
deliver in-the-moment precision interventions in response to users' symptoms. As
such, they inherit the limitations of their predecessors: the reliance on human
motivation and the need for active engagement to be effective, resulting in
limited adherence. To address this problem, the investigators will develop a
class of novel solutions – sensory interventions – that can be effective without
disrupting the users or requiring their active engagement. Sensory interventions
are real-time closed-loop systems that directly act on the users’ bodies or
immediate environment in response to users behavioral or physiological signals.
Unlike existing solutions, sensory interventions combine applied engineering,
signal processing, and machine learning to trigger interventions autonomously
without user effort. The project will create three types of closed-loop wearable
and IoT systems that use different modalities (vibration, airflow, and touch) to
deliver sensory interventions in mental health contexts, such as cravings,
workplace stress, and social stress. Ultimately, this project will enable
mHealth interventions to be as rich, diverse, and personalized as mHealth
monitoring solutions. This project will produce open-source software, hardware
designs, and datasets. Collaborations with Cornell Tech Precision Health
Initiative and with the University of Chicago Medicine and their clinical and
industry partners will accelerate the dissemination of research through clinical
evaluations and commercialization.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most existing mHealth
behavioral health interventions, although coupled with advanced sensing systems
to detect health needs, require conscious cognitive processing of information
and active participation from users to be effective. This project will introduce
and develop the concept of sensory interventions, a novel class of mHealth
interventions that require little or no cognitive awareness to be effective.
This project will investigate sensory interventions in four stages: (i)
investigate and map modalities of external (electromechanical) stimuli to
actuate neurological responses that produce a neurophysiological effect (ii)
design and develop devices that enable these sensory interventions within the
constraints of mHealth, (iii) determine physiological signals that are
associated with target behaviors and integrate sensing systems, signal
processing, and machine learning with sensory interventions to achieve closed-
loop systems that automatically triggers intervention, and (iv) evaluate the
efficacy, usability, and acceptability of the closed-loop systems (both in-lab
and in situ). Throughout this process, the investigators will evaluate and
characterize how sensory interventions impact three common stress-induced mental
health challenges: substance cravings, workplace stress, and social stress. To
intervene in substance cravings, the investigators will leverage heart rate
biofeedback, develop a smartwatch-based system to deliver biofeedback using
vibrotactors, and evaluate how such vibrotactile actuation mitigates alcohol and
nicotine cravings. To intervene in workplace stress, the investigators will
leverage breathing regulations, develop a fan-based system that alters the
perception of airflow around the nose, and evaluate how such airflow entrains
slow, guided breathing in the workplace. To intervene in social stress, the
investigators will leverage affective touch, develop an arm-worn device that
activates affective touch neurons, and evaluate how affective touch helps
regulate social stress. Collectively, this research will enable a new class of
mHealth interventions that are responsive to users’ health context in real-time
and can be effective irrespective of users cognitive capacity or
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.