* 2212318
* CIF: III: Medium: MoDL+: Analytical Foundations for Deep Learning and Inference over Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 758,223.00

Deep learning, based on deep neural networks (DNNs), has demonstrated superior
power in solving many difficult real-world problems, such as image
classification, strategy-game playing, speech recognition, and medical image
analysis, and is poised to revolutionize science and engineering, bringing broad
benefits to society at large. Building on the success of DNNs, recent years have
seen a flurry of research activities focused on developing graph neural networks
(GNNs) in order to tackle important problems on graph-structured data. This
award will address fundamental theoretical problems with deep GNNs, shedding
light on their power and limitations and leading to new well-grounded GNN
architectures. Guided by theory, the team of researchers will develop deep
graph-learning algorithms for solving practical problems in 5G/NextG networks
and power grids. The insights gained from this research will benefit diverse
research domains, and aid in managing and securing physical and digital
infrastructure. The award will also support undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented minority groups in
research and educational activities as well as organization of K-12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will advance a theory-guided and
application-driven paradigm for tackling challenging fundamental research
questions in deep graph learning, with a particular emphasis on applications to
5G/NextG wireless networks and power (micro)grid systems. The award will make
connections between the theory of partial differential equations (PDEs) and deep
graph-guided learning by establishing continuum limits for deep graph neural
networks, utilizing PDE-guided deep graph neural networks, and using a novel
Morse theory approach to understand the generalization power of GNNs. It will
also advance innovative sensitivity-regularized deep-learning approaches, and
provide an in-depth empirical study of the representation power of GNNs compared
to standard DNNs, demystifying the role of graphs in deep learning. The project
will help lay the needed theoretical foundation to guide the design of theory-
guided deep graph learning algorithms to solve practical problems in 5G/NextG
networks and power grids in a principled manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.