* 2212938
* LEAPS-MPS: Stochastic Frameworks for Control of a Class of Aberrant Signaling Pathways in Esophageal Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Souvik Roy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,766.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Esophageal cancer is one of the
leading causes of cancer mortality in the USA, with a poor survival rate. Late
diagnosis is a primary reason for this since esophageal cancer does not present
early symptoms. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop fast and effective
targeted therapies for esophageal cancer, improving drug tolerance and clinical
outcomes. Evidence from limited clinical studies has shown that cell signaling
pathways present significantly altered genetic expressions in esophageal cancer
cells and have been found to correlate with poor prognosis and disease
progression. Moreover, compared with other solid tumor malignancies, esophageal
cancer presents many more stochastic heterogeneities and diverse origins, which
have been found to be major factors of drug resistance. Thus, due to the cost
and time limitations of clinical trials, it is of paramount importance to
develop computational frameworks that can accurately represent the stochastic
behavior of signaling pathways and provide a rapid and cost-effective evaluation
of combination therapies to control esophageal cancer. This project aims to
elucidate the aforementioned questions by new mathematical modeling of the
dynamical behavior of a class of signaling pathways in esophageal cancer and
associated treatment strategies. The framework can also be adapted for the rapid
evaluation of treatments in other cancer types and chronic diseases. The project
will be conducted at the University of Texas at Arlington, a Hispanic-Serving
institution. The project will bolster students from underrepresented groups in
research and provide training opportunities through project-based learning
modules and a new graduate course in computational mathematical biology.
Finally, this project will lay the foundation for the investigator's long-term
goal to develop a Center for Integrative Math-Bio and Experimental Research
(CIMBEX). The center will promote integrative mathematical biology and
experimental research environment for students from underrepresented groups and
bolster student retention in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
define and validate a novel stochastic mathematical framework for analyzing and
controlling the dynamical behavior of a key stochastic signaling pathway in
esophageal cancer, known as epidermal growth factor receptor, for a better
understanding of associated monitoring and treatment strategies. The specific
research objectives are to (1) develop and analyze a controlled hybrid switching
diffusion process, in a Fokker-Planck setting, that accounts for heterogeneity-
induced stochasticity in the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway
dynamics, and (2) build a new gradient-free optimal control algorithm, based on
Pontryagin's maximum principle, that provides qualitatively accurate and
computationally efficient numerical simulations of treatment outcomes using
combination therapies, validated by esophageal cancer signaling data from
laboratory experiments. The outcomes of this project will be the development of
a new modeling and control framework for dynamical processes, the promotion of
interdisciplinary research with biologists, and research and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups. While the focus is on cancer mechanisms, the project aims to define a
mathematical framework that applies equally well to other chronic diseases,
where stochasticity plays an important role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.