* 2212306
* CCF: FET: Medium: A bio-electronic processor for molecular information systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Luis Ceze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 605,037.00

This award develops a novel biological cell-like system for accessing and
processing information in molecular data systems. Specifically, the
investigators will build new technologies that enable customized gene expression
in an electronic system and perform information processing in molecular form.
The goals of the project explore new methods of hybrid electronic-molecular
engineering that leverage progress in molecular mechanisms, DNA sequencing
technology, and electronics. In developing a novel approach to electrically-
actuated gene expression, the project presents a path towards building
integrated hybrid systems that draw on the strengths of electronics (size,
precision, control) and molecular components (density, parallelism, efficiency),
enabling new computing applications. Beyond computing, the project has the
potential to enable new methods of characterizing and controlling synthetic
genetic systems with impact in the life sciences, bioengineering, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical objectives include 1) an electronically
programmable cell-free gene expression system (“eChromatin”) that will automate
dynamic sourcing of biological reagents needed to operate biochemical processes
within molecular information systems; and 2) new methods of processing
information stored in molecular form, such as DNA data random access and
content-based similarity search using a new CRISPR-Cas9 addressing scheme and
nanopore sequencing for fast and highly multiplexed access of molecular data.
The eChromatin system design consists of a switchable electrode array in a flow
cell patterned with unique DNA components that can be electronically exposed or
sequestered, enabling dynamic gene expression analogous to the remodeling of
natural chromatin-DNA complexes. The Cas9-based data access strategy is designed
to have significant advantages over previous work in DNA data storage, including
1) decreased time-to-decoding by eliminating PCR prep and cycle time, 2)
increased multiplexability, 3) increased storage densities, and 4) increased
energy efficiencies due to replacing PCR heating and cooling steps with
isothermal reactions. The investigators will then integrate these approaches in
a demonstration of automated end-to-end protocols within large-scale DNA data
pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.