* 2212951
* Structure and Mechanism of the Red beta Recombineering Enzyme
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Charles Bell, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,041,417.00

This project will study a process by which bacteria can be re-engineered for
useful purposes such as conversion of carbon dioxide into biofuels to mitigate
climate change, remediation of toxic waste, and killing cancer cells. Bacterial
re-engineering involves DNA recombination whereby new DNA sequences are added to
bacterial cells and incorporated into their genomes by a protein called
recombinase. The recombinase binds to the input DNA and pairs it with the host
bacterial genome for incorporation during replication. In order to work
efficiently, the recombinase must interact with single-stranded DNA binding
protein (SSB), which is part of the bacterial replication machinery. This
project will study how the recombinase binds to SSB, by visualizing the complex
at atomic resolution and by measuring the strength and speed of the
interactions. New knowledge about the interactions, and the corresponding
ability to manipulate them, will help increase the efficiency of DNA
recombination and expand the utility of genome engineering in different types of
bacteria for new applications. The project will also train future scientists,
with particular emphasis on high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
focuses on the Red-beta protein from bacteriophage lambda that is part of a DNA
recombination system used for replication and repair of DNA breaks. Red-beta
catalyzes single-stranded DNA annealing (SSA), and its activity has been
harnessed for powerful methods of bacterial genome engineering. In these methods
Red-beta binds to transformed synthetic DNA and anneals it to the existing
bacterial genome as it is undergoing replication. This process requires
interaction between Red-beta and SSB protein, which binds and protects the
lagging strand of the replication fork. This project will use x-ray
crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy to determine three-dimensional
structures of the Red-beta-SSB complex, and other biophysical methods to
determine the energetics of the binding interaction. The resulting knowledge
will be used to fine-tune the Red-beta-SSB interaction and to make it compatible
in a wider range of bacterial hosts. The project will also provide laboratory
research training to students at all levels, with particular emphasis on high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.