* 2212075
* Investigating recurrent cooption of mitochondrial cytochrome c maturation systems in Archaeplastida
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeffrey Mower, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2025
* USD 528,654.00

Convergent evolution is the independent origin of the same feature in different
species. Often, the adaptive benefit of a convergent feature is apparent, such
as the convergent evolution of powered flight in birds, bats and insects.
However, not all cases of convergent evolution have an obvious advantage. For
example, the post-translational modification of c-type cytochromes is essential
for their proper function as part of the mitochondrial electron transport chain,
which produces and regulates energy flow in cells. Two distinct biochemical
pathways are used to achieve this modification, and many species have
convergently switched between these two distinct pathways. Yet, both pathways
achieve the same goal, so the evolutionary advantage of this pathway switch is
unknown. This project will investigate the numerous convergent pathway switches
in plants and green algae. The project will use a combination of molecular
biology, genetic engineering, plant growth and development assays, and
computational biology to assess the mechanisms and evolutionary importance of
this pathway switch. Project participants will receive advanced training in
genomics research. Research results will be disseminated through journal
articles and conference presentations. Outreach experiences will include public
presentations, demonstrations, and hands-on activities that educate the public
on plant science research and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use transgenic approaches and functional assays to assess mitochondrial
localization, evaluate knock out/down lines, and restore function via
transformation rescue of a key enzyme. The expectation, based on comparative
genomics, is that the gain of this enzyme has enabled the convergent pathway
switch in diverse plants and algae. The project will also use transgenics to
create an artificial system switch in a model plant. These transgenic plants
will be assessed using metabolomics, functional assays, and high-throughput
phenotyping to evaluate the potential adaptive or detrimental effects of this
switch. Phylogenetics and comparative genomics will be used to evaluate the
macroevolutionary patterns of cytochrome c maturation across plants and
eukaryotes by exploring the number of pathway switches during eukaryotic
evolution, evaluating whether other alternate pathways exist to facilitate the
switch, and assessing the role of horizontal transfer in spreading alternative
pathways among eukaryotes. The results will broaden understanding of the
processes and influences that promote convergent evolution under a scenario
where there is no obvious adaptive benefit, which contrasts with other well-
known examples of parallel evolution for which the adaptive benefit is
obvious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was co-reviewed and will be co-
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and by the Evolutionary Processes Cluster of the Division
of Environmental Biology. Funding was also provided by the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.