* 2212989
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an AI PCB Prototyping Service called FlashPCB
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Castner, GRAVEL CAPITAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to create an artificial
intelligence-powered printed circuit board assembly (PCBA) service that
facilitates innovation and economic growth in the United States. Prototyping
PCBAs is a key element in the innovation process for all electronics from
consumer goods to medical devices, but current PCBA prototyping services are
limited by manual steps and supply chain shortages. The artificial intelligence
innovation of this project will save the customers time through strategic
automation, shortening innovation timelines, and bringing new products to market
faster. Currently, China and other Asian countries are still dominating the PCBA
market share, serving many customers from the United States. There is an
opportunity to provide high-quality, cost-competitive manufacturing in the
United States to better serve the market and meet the rising demand for PCBAs.
Additionally, investment in domestic manufacturing will strengthen electronic
manufacturing capabilities, reduce dependence on foreign markets, and protect
intellectual property. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation of this
project is the development of two artificial intelligence algorithms that work
together to determine the optimal selection of components to be mounted on a
customerâ€™s printed circuit board. The first algorithm reads the design file and
identifies the properties of the components that the user has specified for
their design. The second algorithm takes these properties as its input and
selects in stock parts for the components in the design which will then be
mounted onto the printed circuit board. This is a cost and time saving
innovation that uses state of the art artificial intelligence algorithms and
encodes electrical engineering principles. The key objectives for this project
are to understand the types and combinations of components that our customers
are likely to use in their designs, to define and test the algorithm for
component property identification, and to define and test the algorithm which
will choose the optimal components used for the manufacture of
PCBAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.