* 2212232
* SHF: FET: Medium: Designing and Synthesizing a Quantum Circuit Compiler
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Aws Albarghouthi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Quantum computers can enable advances in quantum physics, chemistry, material
design, optimization, machine learning, and beyond. Today, scientists and
engineers around the world are racing to build larger, more-reliable quantum
computers and demonstrate their effectiveness at evaluating increasingly complex
quantum programs (circuits). Unfortunately, although computationally powerful,
quantum computers are fundamentally noisy, and mitigating noise is the primary
hurdle in unlocking the true potential of quantum computers. This project
focuses on the circuit compiler, which optimizes a quantum circuit and maps the
circuit to a physical quantum computer. Given the small size of current and
future quantum computers and the noisiness of their computation, careful
compilation is essential to produce accurate and reliable results on quantum
computers. This project's novelties are twofold- the use of synthesis frameworks
to automatically generate parts of the quantum compiler and adaptive runtime
that tailor quantum circuits to enable higher reliability. The project's impacts
are the development of compiler tools that a broad community of researchers can
leverage to program, benchmark, and optimize quantum computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the state of quantum hardware is in
flux, there are many physical realizations of quantum computers, and physicists
constantly experiment with novel devices and architectures. For every new
physical substrate and every modification of a computer, one needs to modify or
rewrite major compiler pieces to run experiments. This project aims to create a
framework to automatically synthesize a quantum circuit optimizer, mapper, and
runtime system as per the hardware constraints. It focuses on three thrusts: (1)
automatic discovery and verification of circuit transformations to reduce
circuit size; (2) synthesis of circuit mappers tailored to hardware-specific
constraints and noise characteristics to increase the fidelity of quantum
circuits; and (3) an efficient runtime framework that adapts the quantum
circuits to the changes in hardware characteristics. This project develops novel
circuit optimization methods by leveraging a rich set of tools designed for
conventional program synthesis and optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.