* 2212077
* OSIB: African lungfish CtxA, a toxin for skin defense during estivation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Irene Salinas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 809,483.00

Organismal adaptations to extreme environmental changes often involve drastic
changes at mucosal barrier tissues. African lungfish can survive long drought
periods via a physiological process called estivation. Estivation involves
drastic remodeling of the skin and shedding of epidermal layers to form a
cocoon. Previous work by our group demonstrated that the lungfish cocoon is a
living tissue that contains many immune cells that trap bacteria, defending the
lungfish body from pathogen invasion during a vulnerable, dormant state. Forming
the cocoon, therefore involves self-inflicting mucosal inflammation but the
molecular mechanisms underlaying cocoon formation are not understood. This
proposal investigates a novel molecule called Protop-CtxA which is a toxin
encoded in the lungfish genome. This toxin appears to have been acquired via
horizontal gene transfer from bacteria or viruses. Protop-CtxA expression is
highly up-regulated in the lungfish skin and cocoon upon estivation. We
hypothesize that this molecule is sufficient to break down skin integrity in
estivating lungfish and form in this way the cocoon. The goal of this work is to
investigate which cells produce Protop-CtxA in free-swimming and estivating
lungfish and to determine the inflammatory, antimicrobial and insecticidal
functions of Protop-CtxA. The proposed work will advance our knowledge on
extreme physiological adaptations of vertebrate animals and may result in many
pharmaceutical and agricultural applications due to the bioactivity of this
toxin. Broader impacts include outreach activities such as a lungfish exhibit in
the Albuquerque Natural History Museum in Spanish and English and a radio
podcast for the Children Hour at KUNM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
African lungfish (Protopterus sp.) lives in both water and land. Under
unfavorable environmental conditions, lungfish enter estivation, a dormant state
that can last for months or years and that involves the formation of a mucus
cocoon that surrounds the animal body. We recently discovered that the lungfish
cocoon is not just a dry mucus layer but is formed by many living cells
including large numbers of granulocytes that transmigrate from the skin when
layer after layer of epidermis is shed during the induction of estivation.
Cocoon formation is associated with an extreme pro-inflammatory state with high
expression levels of canonical pro-inflammatory cytokines and antimicrobial
peptides and a large influx of granulocytes from circulation. How the cocoon is
formed and mucosal inflammation instigated is not well understood. This proposal
focuses on a novel toxin-like molecule discovered in the recently sequenced
lungfish genome. This toxin, similar to Vibrio cholera toxin (CtxA), is
phylogenetically related to box jellies and other invertebrate toxins. We
hypothesize that Protop-CtxA was acquired via horizontal gene transfer from
prokaryotes to lungfish during evolutionary history. Preliminary results
indicate that Protop-CtxA, is very important during lungfish estivation and that
dermal stem cells express it at the steady state. Using microscopy,
transcriptomics, flow cytometry, in vitro antimicrobial and insecticidal assays
and in vivo estivation experiments, the biological function of this toxin will
be determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Symbiosis, Infection, and Immunity, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.