* 2212179
* CCF:SHF:Medium: Automated End-to-End Synthesis for Programmable Analog &amp; Mixed-Signal Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Hasler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 621,600.00

Automated digital-design tools have enabled a wide range of digital innovations,
and automating mixed-signal and analog design tools have the potential for an
equally wide range of electronic innovations. Todayâ€™s analog system design
processes are impeding the development of new integrated circuits (ICs)
processing due to the required manual effort. The emerging demand for low-power
high-efficiency analog and mixed-signal-computing (e.g. machine learning)
further is only increasing the bottlenecks imposed by the state of the art in
analog system design. The success of this project would drastically decrease the
design time, design cost, and design uncertainty of large-scale analog and
mixed-signal ICs. These innovations will require educational innovation at
multiple levels and could enable future commercial opportunities built around
these tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a design-automation
framework that enables end-to-end synthesis from the high-level description down
to targeted configurable devices or custom silicon IC layouts. It lays a solid
technology-independent foundation to abstract and automate analog design. This
tool capability enables a new vision for analog and mixed-signal computing,
similar to that has already seen in digital design spaces. This effort creases
the first analog/mixed-signal high-level synthesis, i.e., from behavioral-level
description such as Python, as well as text-based analog/mixed-signal mid-level
synthesis. The co-design of mixed analog/digital architectures enables real-time
to near-zero latency computing for ultra-low-energy applications, while
expanding the architectural design space for analog
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.