* 2212932
* SBIR Phase I:  A fractional-order computational platform for the multiscale and multiphysics analysis of failure-critical systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Sansit Patnaik, M3SIM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,940.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
foundation of a fractional-calculus-based computational platform for the
simulation of multiscale and multiphysics systems. This Phase I effort will
focus on developing modeling capabilities for nonlinear thermomechanical fatigue
and damage behavior of ductile materials and will provide important insights on
both feasibility and performance of the fractional calculus approach for a class
of nonlinear problems that is not only of extreme importance for scientific and
industrial applications but it is also a prototypical example of multiscale and
multiphysics systems.&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging an advanced and generalized class
of operators, namely the distributed and variable-order fractional operators,
this project will develop fatigue and damage mechanics simulation software
capable of continuum scale computational efficiency and microscale accuracy. The
resulting formulation will offer an unprecedented combination of computational
efficiency, a high degree of fidelity and accuracy, and a revolutionary adaptive
mathematical structure that evolves in real-time based on the underlying physics
controlling the deterioration and damage process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching innovation at the basis of the M3SIM software products is a one-of-
its-kind computational platform based on cutting-edge distributed-variable order
(DVO) fractional calculus (FC). The unique nature of DVO operators allows the
new platform to perform multiscale and multiphysics analyses of complex systems
at a level of accuracy and efficiency that is unattainable with traditional
methods. This new approach will have profound practical implications for
predictive science because it will enable a novel concept of an adaptive
computational platform whose structure evolves with the underlying physics
without a priori and ad hoc decisions from the user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.