* 2212652
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Integration and Culture Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* R Alan Covey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,198.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate how states consolidate power
and expand territorial control by transforming rural landscapes. Specifically,
this project will track the formation of an imperial heartland in a region
inhabited by politically fragmented agropastoral groups. Throughout history,
state societies have transformed landscapes to naturalize their authority and
discredit indigenous inhabitants by alleging mismanagement of natural resources
and land. Although modern nation-states have established borders, disputed land
claims still trigger conflict in many world regions and marginalized populations
fight for sovereignty and territorial integrity by contesting state authority.
This project looks at how states claim occupied territories and support
expansion by transforming existing built environments and evaluates the efficacy
of such endeavors over the long term. Archaeology is an excellent tool to track
the successes and failures of political projects across expansive temporal and
spatial scales. Using archaeological methods, this research will evaluate
strategies of political sovereignty and identify contradictions that threaten
the longevity of state societies, as manifested in the built environment. This
project will be conducted in close collaboration with early-career researchers
in Peru, providing training and capacity-building opportunities. In addition to
forming the basis of dissertation research, two local archaeology students will
conduct their thesis research in tandem with the project for the completion of
their degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will analyze construction
and landscape modification practices to understand how the Inkas established and
managed their imperial heartland. Taking a long-term view over roughly half a
millennium sheds light on the changing geopolitical conditions that shaped this
region and the legacies of non-state political units. Ethnically diverse
agropastoral groups settled in the Sacred Valley and began to build hilltop
villages, agricultural terraces, and above-ground tombs across this mountainous
landscape. Centuries later the Inka ethnic group had expanded political
influence into the valley; their increasing presence was materialized in
irrigated agricultural lands along the valley floor and administrative outposts
in local (non-Inka) territories. By the Spanish invasion the valley had become
foundational in supporting the Inkas’ sovereign ideology and political economy,
which operated through estate systems and intensive landscape engineering
projects. How did the Inkas’ strategies of expansion respond to the existing
built environment? And how did the Inkas’ interventions impact local inhabitants
and landscapes? This research will respond to these questions by defining the
practices that shaped this landscape during the late pre-Hispanic period,
including the standardization of architecture, centralization of agricultural
systems, and diversity in mortuary practices. The contributions of this project
include the development of an innovative research methodology that
quantitatively measures variation in construction techniques to compare the
sociopolitical context of production at local and regional scales. The data
produced by this study can be compared with global cases to better understand
human behavior including landscape modification practices and
territoriality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.