* 2212756
* War, Revolution and the Expansion of Women's Political Citizenship
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Aili Tripp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This project explores the relationship between conflict and the expansion of
women’s political citizenship from 1900 to 2022. It considers two key forms of
political citizenship: women’s suffrage and the expansion of women’s
representation in national and subnational governing bodies. While there are
multiple paths to expanding women’s citizenship, women’s political rights have
often increased more rapidly in times of conflict and revolution. The decline of
empires after World Wars I and II served as a catalyst for the subsequent
creation of new nations along with the expansion of women’s suffrage and their
right to run for office. Civil wars, wars of national liberation, and
revolutions have had similar outcomes in expanding women’s political citizenship
under certain conditions. This study advances theoretical understanding of how
conflict opens up opportunities and creates conditions for the expansion of
women’s citizenship. The study has potential implications for understanding
propitious moments for advancing women’s rights. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study involves a study of archival and secondary in-country sources relating to
women’s political citizenship at critical junctures of transition from an old to
a new political order. It is hypothesized that the expansion of opportunities
and women’s citizenship occurs especially where conflict leads to changes in the
political elite. Conflict also opens up opportunity structures (e.g., peace
talks, electoral and constitutional reform processes) that allow for women’s
rights mobilization. Finally, these changes often occur in the context of a
diffusion of changing global norms. Selected cases represent the different types
of conflict. The first group includes cases diverse in time and location tied to
the end of empire in the context of conflict. For a second group the conflict is
the end of civil war. A third group, included for contrast, is cases with an
absence of conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.