* 2212144
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: Graph Neural Networks for Heterophilous Data: Advancing the Theory, Models, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Jiliang Tang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Graph neural networks (GNNs), which translate the success of deep learning to
graph-structured data, have numerous applications spanning from recommendation
systems and fraud detection to medicine to finance. In such applications, the
extent to which similar entities connect with each other---known as homophily---
is unknown and cannot be computed empirically due to limited labeled data.
Though homophily is common, it is not universal; there are important real-world
settings where "opposites attract", leading to heterophily (low homophily). By
moving beyond a reliance on graph homophily and introducing new GNN models, this
project will generalize GNNs to work effectively in a wider range of domains. It
will also help rectify some negative consequences of GNNs that are tailored to
homophilous graphs, including biased, unfair, or erroneous predictions when
applied to heterophilous data. Focusing on robustness, fairness, and
explainability will help support accountable algorithmic decision-making in the
domains where GNN models are employed. In addition to research, this project
will support the training of a diverse cohort of undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Michigan, the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
and Michigan State University via integration of this research in advanced
courses, capstone projects, and other opportunities to directly contribute to
this research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inability of GNNs to generalize
their strong performance on homophilous or assortative graphs to many
heterophilous graphs has attracted significant attention, and has led to
empirical demonstration of the existence of "good heterophily", where GNNs can
perform well. However, there is still limited understanding about the types of
heterophily that are easy or difficult to handle with GNNs, especially beyond
the limited, typically-studied settings (i.e., node classification on small
homogeneous graphs). This project will advance the theoretical underpinnings of
the interplay between different types of heterophily and GNNs, considering
properties beyond just accuracy, which are necessary for deployment.
Specifically, it will contribute: (a) New Theory: It will formally characterize
the heterophily-related challenges of GNNs to provide a deeper understanding
into "good" and "bad" heterophily, and enhance our understanding of "good" types
of heterophily, which some architectures can model effectively, but have been
vastly ignored until now. (b) New Models: Based on the new theory, it will
introduce new GNN designs and architectures that not only have strong
performance across different levels and types of heterophily, but are also
robust, fair, and transparent, which are crucial for algorithmic decision-
making. (c) New Applications: The project will also go beyond the traditional
tasks and heterophilous network types investigated in the literature, and will
include exploration of high-impact applications along with collaborators in
academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.