* 2212110
* ECLIPSE: Mechanistic understanding and control of nitrogen activation in an atmospheric-pressure plasma-liquid process
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Mohan Sankaran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 457,087.00

To reduce our reliance on fossil fuels, sustainable approaches are needed for
activating and chemically transforming readily available feedstocks such as
nitrogen from the air and water. Plasmas allow chemical reactions to be
performed at atmospheric pressure and near room temperature without any catalyst
using renewable electricity. Plasmas in contact with liquids have recently
emerged as a new approach to promoting electrochemical reactions. However,
chemical reactions taking place at a plasma-liquid interface are extremely
complex and methods of probing the chemistry and gaining mechanistic insights
are needed. This research program will develop cutting edge spectroscopic
methods to study chemical reactions and species composition at the plasma-liquid
interface under operating conditions. While the methods are general, the
research team will focus on the reaction of nitrogen and water to produce
ammonia, the precursor to all nitrogen-based agricultural fertilizers. Ammonia
is currently industrially produced by a century-old process which has a large
carbon footprint and requires large, centralized processing plants. This project
has the potential to advance national health, prosperity, and welfare, by
developing a sustainable and geographically distributed process for ammonia
synthesis. Students will receive experiential learning through visits to local
farms, which will provide them with the socioeconomic context to motivate their
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop in-situ spectroscopic
techniques to characterize the interfacial chemistry between an atmospheric-
pressure plasma and liquid water. Gas-phase activation of dinitrogen will be
characterized by optical emission spectroscopy and laser diagnostics. A major
focus of the project will be to implement in-situ surface-enhanced Raman
scattering spectroscopy to detect intermediates formed near the plasma-liquid
interface by dissociation of gas-phase species and subsequent reaction in the
liquid phase. The fundamental knowledge of plasma-induced chemical reactions
generated by the gas and liquid phase measurements will be combined with two
engineering strategies to improve product yields and energy efficiency: pulsed
operation of the plasma to maintain low gas-phase temperatures and the
introduction of water droplets or water vapor to increase the size of the
plasma/water interfacial area. The outcomes of the proposed work will be a
deeper understanding of reaction pathways induced by a plasma at the surface of
a liquid, elucidation of unique aspects relative to other alternative methods of
dinitrogen activation, and a path forward for optimization of plasma–liquid
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.