* 2212947
* STTR Phase I:  Developing antifouling viral clearance membranes to enable efficient monoclonal antibody (mAb) processing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Reza Foudazi, FILTRAVATE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,982.00

The broader impact of this small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable a scalable, high-volume Tangential Flow Filtration (TFF)
system for monoclonal antibody (mAb) manufacturing applications. The primary
benefactor of this technology is the biomanufacturers and bioprocessing
integrators. However, the cost of goods (COGs) savings provided to the
collaborating industry partners could be far-reaching. This technology could
enable efficient (and lower cost) production of lifesaving drugs and vaccines.
Reducing overall cost will potentially make these life-saving therapeutics more
accessible and affordable to all people regardless of socioeconomic status. The
unique, sustainable, and cost-effective membrane fabrication approach offered in
this proposal could improve the membrane manufacturing industry by producing
membranes containing narrow pore size distribution and high fouling resistance.
Many industries beyond bioprocessing stand to benefit from high-performance
membranes, including food and beverage manufacturers, water treatment
facilities, healthcare providers, and other manufacturing
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to develop a virus
filtration membrane using a synthesis process that is more sustainable and cost-
effective than the conventional process. Pharmaceutical manufacturers rely upon
membrane ultrafiltration due to its advantages of scalability, replication, and
user experience. However, membrane antifouling can hinder a full realization of
continuous bioprocessing production efficiencies. Membrane fouling causes
protein deformation and loss, limiting membrane applications for efficient
virus/protein separation. The proposed membranes have a narrower pore size
distribution and stronger fouling resistance without using any post-production
processes. Additionally, the proposed membrane fabrication technology simplifies
the membrane production process and reduces the manufacturing costs by
eliminating the use of solvents, eliminating the need for solvent reclamation
and recycling. The adoption of the novel membrane product into existing
bioprocessing systems could advance manufacturersâ€™ ability to adopt a more
efficient continuous production method providing potential advantages such as
smaller facility footprints, lower investment costs, increased flexibility, and
lower processing costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.