* 2212290
* HCC: Medium: Grid-Free Monte Carlo Methods for Digital Geometry Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Gautam Iyer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,199,743.00

Problems across science and engineering demand accurate predictions about the
behavior of the natural world, which are often obtained by numerically
approximating solutions to so-called partial differential equations (PDEs).
While such predictions can help us understand diverse phenomena such as the
energy efficiency of complex building models or the transport of groundwater
pollutants through layers of rock and soil, the algorithms for solving the
relevant equations have difficulty managing the immense complexity found in
nature, especially as emerging technology makes it possible to acquire ever more
detailed descriptions of geometry. A major challenge is that traditional
algorithms must partition space into small elements prior to solving equations,
and for detailed geometry this process of discretization can both take far more
time than solving the equation itself and also introduce error that gives a
false sense of the solution. This research side-steps discretization entirely by
building a bridge between PDEs and scalable, reliable Monte Carlo methods
developed for photorealistic image generation. The main goal is to expand the
set of PDEs that can be solved using Monte Carlo techniques and to provide
access to these tools via free and open source software that is easily usable by
non-experts. The effectiveness of the approach for real-world applications will
be evaluated through collaborations with industry partners to address problems
in structural analysis, engineering design, and robotic path planning. The
project will have additional broad impact by building excitement about STEM
among students and the broader public, via online tutorials and open source
course material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical starting point for the
project is Muller's walk on spheres (WoS) method, which provides unbiased
estimates of the solution to a constant-coefficient Laplace equation with
Dirichlet boundary conditions. Although this method has been generalized
somewhat to other diffusive PDEs, it still lags far behind the capability of
modern finite element and finite difference methods, and WoS methods cannot yet
be applied to many problems important for engineering and analysis, such as
linear elasticity or Stokes flow. This project helps close the gap by exploring
new WoS methods that handle anisotropic and spatially varying coefficients, more
general Neumann and Robin boundary conditions, nonlinear PDEs, and PDE-based
optimization problems. A key insight is that sophisticated Monte Carlo
techniques developed for photorealistic rendering in computer graphics (variance
reduction, density estimation, etc.) can be adapted to PDEs, by casting both
problems in a common mathematical framework. Project outcomes will include
critical algorithmic components, such as high-performance closest point queries
for a rich class of geometric representations (implicit surfaces, subdivision
surfaces, etc.), and a domain-specific language that enables PDE specifications
to be automatically translated into unbiased WoS estimators. The resulting
methods share many features with methods from Monte Carlo rendering: no meshing,
trivial parallelism, and the ability to evaluate the solution at any point
without solving a global system of equations. They also allow dynamic changes to
problem data and domain geometry, thereby helping to provide immediate,
progressive feedback that tightens the engineering design
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.