* 2212859
* MSA: Resolving structural diversity controls on ecosystem function along a volume gradient across NEON domains
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Elizabeth LaRue, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2025
* USD 299,908.00

Biological diversity is commonly thought of and measured in terms of the number
of different types of organisms that are present. Using this perspective,
studies have established that biological diversity is an important factor
determining ecosystem characteristics such as stability and function, and the
many ways that different ecosystems sustain all life on Earth, including humans.
This study will examine biological diversity from a very different perspective -
by spatial structure. The project will examine the three-dimensional patterns by
which different types of plants are arranged and layered in relationship to one
another within and between different ecosystems such as grasslands, shrublands,
and forests. This structural diversity impacts how plants obtain resources
which, in turn, controls the health and functioning of ecosystems. Structural
diversity may be limited by the maximum volume of vegetation, so forests may
have higher structural diversity and functioning than shrublands and grasslands.
Research will use remote sensing data from the National Ecological Observatory
Network's (NEON's) Airborne Observatory Platform to test how structural
diversity varies within and between these ecosystem types. This will be
complimented by new, finer-scale data collected using lower-flying drones. The
analyses will be used to develop a new theoretical basis for using remote
sensing to measure structural diversity across ecosystems. The understanding
generated by this project could lead to a new method for monitoring and managing
ecosystems at local to regional scales. The project will also work toward
increasing the retention of underrepresented groups in STEM by bridging a gap in
data science education for ecologists. New macrosystems biology-focused
curriculum and research experiences will train students at the USAâ€™s largest
Hispanic American-Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to uncover the degree to which structural diversity influences
ecosystem function and biodiversity similarly along a plant volume gradient at
macrosystem scales, and whether there are unique structural attributes of
ecosystem types that govern the mechanisms linking structural diversity and
function. Specific objectives are to: (1) test if the same relationships occur
between structural diversity with function and biodiversity along a plant volume
gradient across spatial scales, and (2) test the relative importance of
environmental factors mediating the spatial patterns of structural diversity-
function and -biodiversity relationships. The project will harness the power
created by NEON data and integrate it with a new LiDAR drone data product across
a sub-continental scale. This combined approach is especially needed for
measuring structural diversity in grasslands and shrublands. The project will
also train diverse undergraduate and graduate students and will support the
development of two early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.