* 2212309
* AF:Medium:RUI:Algorithmic Problems in Kinematic Distance Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2026
* USD 354,871.00

The problems addressed by this project are motivated by concrete computational
questions arising, among others, in crystallography and materials science. The
objects of study are dynamic point sets whose motion is subject to distance
constraints. They arise in multiple areas of science and engineering, including
computer-aided design (CAD), robotics, sensor networks, structural molecular
biology and materials science. The problems in this project have the potential
to help elucidate fundamental properties of matter, such as phase transitions in
crystals, and could lead to the discovery or to the design of new auxetic
metamaterials (which are materials with unusual deformation properties, rarely
found in nature). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first direction is on problems arising
in Crystallography, including comparison of rigid or flexible crystals, ultra-
rigidity of periodic frameworks, auxetic-material designs produced by finite-to-
periodic methods, embeddings of minimal rigid graphs and more efficient
algorithms for computing rigidity and flexibility parameters of periodic
frameworks. A second direction is to develop efficient algorithms for kinematic
design, where the motion of a geometric object subject to distance constraints
(framework) is decomposed into a finite collection of trajectories arising from
related one-degree-of-freedom frameworks, each deployed for a specific, finite
interval of time. The motion is guided by novel combinatorics underlying the
algebraic constraints and leads to effective and efficient algorithms for
designing both the geometric structure and its kinematic behavior (motions). The
algorithms developed here are amenable to be turned into software tools for
these needs. The project builds upon mathematical results, algorithms and
software obtained or developed by the investigator, students and collaborators.
It relies on and combines ideas from several areas: combinatorial rigidity,
distance geometry and computational algebraic geometry. Algorithmically, the
investigator has recently succeeded in overcoming enormous challenges posed by
Groebner-basis methods and carried out previously unattainable calculations in
the 2D Cayley-Menger ideal. These very recent results open the possibility for
novel computer experiments, anticipated to lead to previously unobserved
mathematical properties that will be put to use in addressing the selected open
questions in distance geometry and kinematics. A diverse population of students
have been and will continue to be engaged in this research, conducted in part at
an all-women college with a sustained reputation in STEM education. The
investigator will also continue engaging her students in the development of new
educational materials that will make the results accessible to non-specialists,
and will actively disseminate them via publications, tutorials and talks in
several scientific fields and to diverse audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.