* 2212480
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: A Traffic Map for the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2025
* USD 261,439.00

To understand the impact of Internet events---attacks, outages, degraded
performance, or newly deployed infrastructure---one must understand how they
affect peoples' use of Internet services. Researchers, network and service
operators, regulators, policy makers, and economists need a map of what portion
of Internet use depends on the networks, routes, and servers impacted by the
events: an Internet traffic map.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a traffic map will
inform other networking researchers by providing context to interpret
measurement results and proposed improvements, ultimately contributing to
improving the Internet for everyone. An Internet traffic map will also help
regulators, policy makers, and economists assess the societal impact of
networking outside computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of network
research have studied components related to---but distinct from---a traffic map,
including the autonomous system (AS) and router-level topologies, Internet
exchange points (IXPs), content distribution network (CDN) deployments, and
general traffic matrices. Internet service providers (ISPs) and content
providers have their own, high-quality views of their part of the Internet
traffic map, but business- and customer-sensitivities prevent public release.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s goal is to provide a sharable, trusted
traffic map. This map traffic will be quantified—with estimates of error;
broad—with estimates of completeness; and sustainable—with regular updates. This
project proposes to meet this need by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;• Measuring a
traffic map that identifies which networks host Internet users and where popular
services deploy servers for popular services, the paths between users and
services, and relative activity levels on those paths. This map must be derived
from replicable approaches and open data so it can be shared. Doing so will
require developing new techniques. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;• Evaluating the
accuracy of this map by comparing multiple, independent methods, and testing
against external information. Comparison against accurate but privileged
information will establish confidence in open-source techniques. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;• Providing regularly-updated maps to the research community and
tools that allow others to create their own maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.