* 2212002
* I-Corps: Non-Intrusive Cooling System Fault Detection Using Deep Learning of Acoustic Emissions
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Han Hu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a data-driven approach for reliable operations of high-
performance cooling systems that will break through the thermal limitations for
high-power-density electronic and energy systems. The proposed technology will
not only make an impact on fundamental thermal transport research but also
industrial production of electric vehicles, hybrid vehicles, power electronics,
power generation, etc. By enabling more efficient cooling, reduced energy
consumption, and reduced carbon oxide emissions, this technology will benefit
both the economy and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of accurate and reliable technology for fault
detection of high-performance two-phase cooling systems by coupling high-speed
imaging, acoustic emission (AE), with multimodal fusion using deep learning
(DL). The technology has fast, real-time, online monitoring and detection
providing extremely fast processing of data/images, in the order of 1-10
ns/frame. The innovation is non-invasive fault detection using contact AE sensor
attached to the heater, hydrophones immersed in the working fluid, and high-
speed imaging outside the boiling chamber. The innovation uses data-driven
anomaly identification via machine learning-based dimensionality reduction, and
fusion of multimodal signals. Our technology will leverage optimized model
architectures for each modality of signals, e.g., convolutional neural networks
for images, recurrent neural networks for time-series signals, and fuse the
signals by concatenating the output layer of each
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.