* 2212121
* Biomechanical Regulation of Intranuclear Elastography and Gene Location in Single Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Corey Neu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2025
* USD 462,332.00

This grant will support research about how the cells of our bodies react to
mechanical forces. The results of this work will greatly advance progress in
science and improvements in national health. Mechanobiology is a science that
seeks to explain how cells actively adapt to mechanical forces. Understanding
the mechanobiology of cells can lead to new therapies to treat damage due to
aging and disease. There are many ways that cells react to force, which often
involves the cell nucleus that contains the DNA defining our genetic code.
However, we do not yet know how mechanical force stimulates the cell to alter
its structure and position of DNA. This award supports fundamental research to
measure gene expression in the cell nucleus and how it changes with applied
forces. This will reveal mechanisms that cells use to alter their biological
function triggered by force. Understanding this complex biological process may
lead to new therapeutic and diagnostic approaches in medical science. This
research project is multidisciplinary, and impacts the sciences of biomedical
engineering, imaging, biomechanics, cell biology, and materials science. This
project will also target broad participation of underrepresented groups in
research, including children. This outreach is anticipated to positively impact
education in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to study the structural and biomechanical regulation of nuclear gene
expression using new methods to measure elastography and gene positioning in
living cells. Structural complexity and hierarchy are hallmarks of the cell
nucleus, and the expression patterns of protein-coding genes in the nucleus are
regulated by multiple factors, including the dynamics of chromatin organization
and movement. Unfortunately, how intranuclear biomechanics and gene position
relate to complex processes like transcription are still not well defined. Our
work aims to provide new methods and knowledge to biomechanics and
mechanobiology communities, including first-of-its-kind methods and data
describing spatial patterns of strain and material properties for nuclei of
single cells challenged by physiologically-relevant conditions, direct evidence
relating gene activation to gene location and chromatin mechanics following cell
stimuli, and platform technologies to more broadly explore mechanisms of
mechanobiology in the nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.