* 2212433
* RI: Medium: Learning to Map and Navigate with Vision and Language
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Dan Roth, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project aims to advance the state of the art in robotic mapping and
navigation by enabling spatial understanding using semantic maps and spatial
reasoning for following language instructions given only visual inputs. Current
performance in those tasks is low because of the inability to ground semantic
entities and instructions spatially. Instead of grounding semantics to images,
spatial understanding and navigation can be achieved if a system uses maps as an
intermediate representation, as also indicated by behavioral and neural findings
in spatial cognition. Building a map of an unseen space without exhaustive
exploration can be learned, and this process can be facilitated by cross-modal
language-vision attentional mechanisms. The project will integrate research with
education and outreach underrepresented groups in Philadelphia neighborhoods as
a target broadening the participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
centered around understanding how vision and language interact to create better
spatial representations like maps and facilitate navigation. The project will
approach the vision-language from three angles. (i) How robots can learn to
predict a map when entering an unseen environment using active learning. (ii)
How navigation instructions can be encoded into spatial configuration schemata
and navigational concepts that can be better aligned to maps and paths than raw
language embeddings, and (iii) how navigational language representations can
facilitate the creation of maps in unseen environments, and how one can follow
instructions by using maps and language to create paths to
follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.