* 2212082
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: lake ecosystem responses to fire along gradients of burn characteristics and hydrologic connectivity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Kendra Cheruvelil, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 67,792.00

High-quality water is needed for sustaining all life on Earth. Different types
of pollution, however, can reduce water quality and harm the plants, animals,
and people that depend on water to live. Specifically, recent wildfires across
the U.S. may reduce water quality in several ways. For example, ash from
wildfires can end up in lakes and rivers, potentially harming aquatic organisms
and drinking water supplies. In this project, a group of researchers will study
water quality of northern Minnesota lakes after the 2021 Greenwood Fire. This
wildfire burned a large part of Superior National Forest in fall 2021, including
areas near 28 lakes. The researchers expect that after spring snowmelt or rain,
ash and large pieces of burned plants will wash into these lakes and reduce
water quality. They will visit lakes five times from spring to late summer of
2022 to document any water quality changes following the Greenwood Fire. Results
of this study will help water managers in Minnesota and elsewhere predict how
water quality in lakes and reservoirs may change after future wildfires. This
project will also help people who live near lakes understand how the water
activities they care about, such as fishing and boating, may be affected by
future wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although wildfire activity is increasing
across the U.S. and concern is mounting over fire effects on water resources,
few studies have documented fire effects on lake ecosystems. At 10844 ha in
size, the 2021 Greenwood Fire in Superior National Forest was the largest
lightning-caused Minnesota wildfire in 10 years and covered all or parts of 28
lake watersheds through October 2021. This project assembled an integrative
group of aquatic ecosystem, landscape, and fire ecologists to study the
physical, chemical, and biological responses of northern Minnesota lakes to the
Greenwood Fire. The researchers hypothesized that (1) lake responses will vary
proportionally to the percent watershed burned and between drainage vs. isolated
lakes and (2) post-fire temporal trajectories will vary according to major
hydrologic events (e.g., snowmelt, precipitation). Both hypotheses are being
tested using Bayesian approaches (i.e., information theoretic modeling and model
choice procedures). Approximately 15 lakes are being sampled each in (1) burned
and (2) unburned control watersheds beginning after spring snowmelt, a critical
time for the delivery of nutrients and materials from the burned landscape to
lakes, and throughout summer 2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.