* 2212865
* SBIR Phase I:  Detection of Chronic Diseases via Multiplex Analysis of Circulating Metabolites
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Martin Fuchs, METFORA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,706.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel metabolite diagnostic blood test
indicative of early-stage diseases including cancer, chronic heart and lung
disorders, and diabetes. The technology analyzes specific panels of blood
metabolites indicative of changes in cellular function that occur with disease.
This technology reduces the diagnostic interval time from years to weeks or
days, diminishes misdiagnosis resulting in improper therapy, and has the
potential to alter the use of more invasive diagnostic methods such as biopsies,
colonoscopies, and heart catheterizations from an exploratory to a confirmatory
role.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to use specific panels of circulating metabolites
measured using mass spectrometry (MS) and analyzed using artificial intelligence
to detect chronic disease conditions. Pre-clinical models have demonstrated that
alterations in metabolism occur at the stage of mild disease, before overt
symptoms become evident. The first specific condition to be evaluated in this
project is pulmonary arterial hypertension. The objective is to establish
calibrated MS methods with quantified values of multiplexed metabolite panels in
a reproducible manner as required for clinical use. Multi-label classifications
will also be developed in order to detect and account for various co-morbidities
that can affect overall metabolic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.