* 2212533
* Collaborative Research: Novel Electronic-Photonic Silicon Carbide Probes for Neural Recording and Stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ali Adibi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

Dynamic functions of complex neural circuits in the brain mediate our behavior.
Monitoring neural circuits over short periods of time and under constrained
conditions will not provide a full picture of how neural circuits function under
naturalistic behavior. Existing devices that are surgically implanted in the
brain for long-term recording or stimulating neural circuits usually fall apart
after a while and fail to interface with neurons for an extended period of time.
In this project, the investigators seek to design a novel neural probe in the
silicon carbide (SiC) material platform, which is a robust material, known to
withstand harsh conditions. The goal is to design a penetrating neural probe
that can last long in the corrosive environment of the brain and enable
electrical recording as well as optical stimulation of neural activity in the
brain. By combining electronics, photonics, and nanotechnology with biology and
neuroscience, this project provides a unique training opportunity for students
and researchers to learn how to work on a multidisciplinary project that bridges
between different branches of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a novel penetrating neural probe technology entirely made in SiC, a
robust and reliable material that is proven to remain viable in the brain over a
long period of time. These neural probes will include electrical recording
functionality and optical illumination functionality to enable simultaneous
electrophysiology recording and optogenetic stimulation of neural activity. This
novel neural interface will address outstanding needs in the field, including
(i) longevity and chronic viability, (ii) high spatial and temporal resolution
recording, and (iii) localized targeted light delivery. The design of this novel
neural probe technology builds on a host of innovations including (i)
microfabrication of high-density electrical recording electrodes in SiC, (ii)
reconfigurable photonic switch banks for realization of high-density probes with
great scalability; and (iii) metasurface optical output ports for shaping the
beam of light in the tissue to provide a seamless all-SiC interface to the brain
tissue that enables long-term stability for chronic neural interfacing. The
outcome of this cross-field research will be a new technology platform that can
be used to test various neuroscience hypotheses on the role of specific neural
circuits in encoding and transforming information in brain through long-term
high-throughput neural recording and stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.