* 2212135
* Collaborative Research: AF:Medium: Advancing the Lower Bound Frontier
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Ramamohan Paturi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 393,460.00

The central problem in computational complexity theory is to develop the most
efficient algorithms for important computational problems. To prove that an
algorithm is the most efficient, the holy grail of complexity theory is to prove
unconditional lower bounds, showing that any algorithm, however clever or
sophisticated, will inherently require a certain amount of resources (hardware,
or runtime) to solve. The goal of this research is to tackle the most basic
challenge of proving circuit and runtime lower bounds for explicit problems, as
well as similar challenges in proof and communication complexity lower
bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project is focused on two
approaches. The first approach involves exploiting the two-way connection
between circuit lower bounds and meta-algorithms, algorithms whose inputs or
outputs are circuits or other algorithm descriptions. Important examples of
meta-algorithms are: circuit satisfiability, where the input is a circuit and
the output is whether it is satisfiable; proof search, where the input is an
unsatisfiable formula and the output is a small refutation of it in a proof
system; and PAC learning, where the input consists of labelled examples of an
unknown target function to be output. Often, paradoxically, efficient algorithms
for meta-computational problems such as these lead to improved lower bounds and
vice versa. The second approach is known as lifting, whereby lower bounds in a
more complex model of computation are reduced to lower bounds in a simpler
model. Through lifting and related ideas, circuit complexity has been related to
proof complexity and communication complexity, and lower bounds have been
improved for all three settings. The team of researchers will investigate a
variety of ideas to extend and deepen these approaches to push past the current
barriers in lower bounds. The research is also expected to develop improved
algorithms for meta-algorithmic problems, which are of central importance for
hardware and software verification, algorithmic learning, and a broad range of
other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.