* 2212935
* SBIR Phase I: Wearable System for Stress Management via Real Time Stress Tracking and Biofeedback
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Emily Casey, NEUROSMART INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is creating a tool for police officers and other
service members who are expected to perform their job duties under high stress.
This Phase 1 project seeks to develop a technology that creates stress scores
and alerts users when they are in “red zones” for decision making based on
physiological monitoring via a wearable sensor unit. The initial target market
segment for this technology is the ~$1 billion law enforcement market as there
is a high need for tools that can help de-escalate situations and potentially
improve the use-of-force decisions. The pain points of acute stress impacting
decision-making have been validated in military and professional athletic
markets as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a wearable technology that uses skin
conductivity to measure stress and alert users via vibrational feedback. This
Phase 1 project proposes to: (1) run a pilot study on police officers to collect
skin conductance data during scenario training, (2) build machine learning
artificial intelligence (AI) models with a high predictive accuracy of poor
decision making using this data, (3) determine ideal sensor location and build a
custom wearable strap attachment, (4) develop the mobile application to build a
data visualization interface for officers and trainers, and (5) test the
effectiveness of delivering vibrational feedback during decision making of
officers using the prototype. The successful conclusion of Phase 1 may lead to a
hardware-software prototype that measures the police officers' emotional stress
using a skin conductance signal, then alerts the user via vibrational feedback
when they are in a heightened level of stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.