* 2212462
* Collaborative Research: CCF: AF: Medium: Validated Soft Approaches to Parametric ODE Solving
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Chee Yap, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 07/31/2026
* USD 159,108.00

Many physical, biological, and social processes are modeled as one
or&lt;br/&gt;more ordinary differential equations (ODEs) with unknown
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;Usually there are three fundamental tasks in working with
such ODEs: (1)&lt;br/&gt;checking whether the structure of the ODE even allows
these parameters to&lt;br/&gt;be estimated in principle, (2) if it does,
numerically estimating the&lt;br/&gt;parameters, and (3) solving ODEs with the
estimated values of the&lt;br/&gt;parameters. Thus, it is crucial to develop
tools for the three tasks. Due&lt;br/&gt;to its importance, there has been
extensive research on developing&lt;br/&gt;necessary mathematical theories,
algorithms and software tools, with&lt;br/&gt;tremendous progress/achievements.
Broadly, there have been two different&lt;br/&gt;approaches: symbolic and
numeric, each with its own objective, theory,&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, and software
tools. Roughly put, the symbolic approaches&lt;br/&gt;prioritize correctness
over efficiency, while the numeric approaches&lt;br/&gt;prioritize efficiency
over correctness. Naturally, they developed (often&lt;br/&gt;dramatically)
different sets of theories and algorithms. Consequently,&lt;br/&gt;there are
currently two kinds of software tools: one correct but
often&lt;br/&gt;inefficient, the other efficient but often incorrect. Hence,
there is an&lt;br/&gt;utmost need and thus a challenge: develop a new approach
(theory,&lt;br/&gt;algorithms) that can yield software tools that are both
efficient and&lt;br/&gt;correct. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators propose a novel approach that has a&lt;br/&gt;potential to meet
the challenges of efficiency and correctness for&lt;br/&gt;parametric ODEs. The
approach may be described by the key phrase&lt;br/&gt;``validated and soft
approach''. One may try to develop validated&lt;br/&gt;(correct) algorithms in
two ways. (1) Use a symbolic approach. It always&lt;br/&gt;produces correct
output, but is inefficient. (2) Use a numerical interval&lt;br/&gt;approach with
modified notion of correctness, e.g., specifying a priori&lt;br/&gt;error
bounds. This allows the use of approximate arithmetic,
providing&lt;br/&gt;efficiency, but this is only true for non-singular ODEs. For
singular&lt;br/&gt;problems, there is an implicit ``Zero Problem'' that does not
yield to&lt;br/&gt;numerical approximations, and may not even be Turing-
computable. The soft&lt;br/&gt;approach overcomes this limitation by allowing
indeterminacy for certain&lt;br/&gt;inputs: informally, inputs on the verge of
singularity are allowed to have&lt;br/&gt;indeterminate outputs. The resulting
soft formulations of the problems&lt;br/&gt;allow one to exploit and combine
strengths of both symbolic and numeric&lt;br/&gt;approaches, resulting in
algorithms that are correct (in the modified&lt;br/&gt;sense) and practical
(efficient). The investigators' preliminary research&lt;br/&gt;indicates that
the validated soft approach is quite promising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.