* 2212910
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptable Refrigeration Cycles for Smart Mini-Containers
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jesus Villalobos, FRESHKUBE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 255,981.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project includes reductions in food
waste, energy use, and carbon emissions by developing a highly efficient and
adaptable system for refrigerated transport. Mini-containers, which are small,
insulated boxes with environments controlled by a central driving unit that
contains a refrigerator and other environmental controls are proposed. The
technology may increase the economic feasibility of small farms by allowing them
to target a more resilient, efficient, and potentially carbon-neutral cold
supply chain. The potential impact of the research includes improved
availability of nutritious food for the general population and mitigation of
negative environmental effects of cold logistics. Additionally, mitigating food
waste will create savings up and down the supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
key technical challenges are addressed in this research. The first area has, as
its main objective, the development of a volume-adaptable refrigeration system
that allows for the efficient operation of several levels of control to best
adapt to high levels of cooling capacity needs. The second area of research
corresponds to the development of the methodology and solutions algorithms to
exercise a hybrid control strategy for the optimal scheduling operation of the
refrigeration system. The archetype refrigeration system would be subject to
constraints imposed by the heterogeneous loads stored in the different special
storage and transportation units known as mini-containers which receive cooling
and other environmental services. This technology will allow for efficiently
aggregating, storing, disaggregating, and distributing fresh products in the
mini-containers. The mini-containers will allow the emergence of efficient cold
logistics for small loads by enabling the capacity of large transportation
containers to be split among multiple conveyances. The proposed solution will
also make it possible to convert almost any truck into a refrigerated truck and
any warehouse into a cold storage facility, supporting the emergence of sharing
economies in cold logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.