* 2212616
* EAGER: A Novel Carbon Nanotube Based Phosphate Sensor Using Potentiometric Principles for Oceanographic Use
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Annie Bourbonnais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 37,467.00

The PI's request EAGER funding to build a phosphate sensor for aquatic systems.
Phosphate and Nitrate are essential macronutrients limiting primary productivity
in most aquatic ecosystems. The availability of phosphate, a main component of
the marine biological carbon pump strongly influences the ability to capture and
store the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. Development of a phosphate sensor with
high precision, long lifetime, low detection limit, and good reproducibility
would improve estuarine and coastal water quality monitoring and further
understanding of marine nutrient cycling. If successful, these phosphate sensors
could have far reaching impact for a range of other applications. The PI's
envision an array of low cost, low power sensors fitting onto the sensor surface
the size of a quarter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to build and
characterize a carbon nanotube based potentiometric phosphate sensor. This
prototype sensor will allow the PI's to test the sensors response, its
sensitivity and lower selection limit and long-term performance in the lab and
field testing at the dock. With other funding the PIâ€™s have been developing a
potentiometric Chloride sensor. They plan to follow a similar strategy for
developing the proposed potentiometric phosphate sensor. The goal is to be able
to produce a small, low cost, accurate, in situ phosphate sensor to provide the
needed data on spatial and temporal scales necessary to answer questions not
possible with current technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.