* 2213849
* Frontier Research at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,743,568.00

The ionized portion of the upper atmosphere at the magnetic equator (equatorial
ionosphere) is a unique plasma environment which hosts diverse plasma phenomena
ranging from equatorial plasma bubbles to small-scale plasma structures. Plasma
bubbles and other plasma density structures are known to disturb radio and
satellite communications and thus represent a space weather hazard. The
Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO) near Lima, Perú has been providing high-
quality observations of these phenomena and the associated plasma processes for
60 years. JRO is owned and operated by the Peruvian Geophysical Institute
(Instituto Geofísico del Perú) with support from an award from the Geospace
Facilities program at NSF to Cornell University. JRO is the equatorial anchor of
the Geospace Facilities chain and the only such facility that enables
experimental investigations of space plasma physics and space weather
disturbances near the magnetic equator. Over the years, JRO has undergone
continual improvement and upgrades and its centerpiece, the Jicamarca incoherent
scatter radar (ISR), is currently the largest ISR in terms of the power-aperture
product, a measure of how sensitive the radar is to various plasma disturbances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will exploit the JRO’s unique capabilities
associated with its location near the magnetic equation and its high sensitivity
by focusing on new classes of plasma phenomena and processes unique to the
equatorial zone. These include upper-hybrid plasma instability in the daytime
150-km region, lower-hybrid waves in the high topside at night, solar echo
experiments, multi-frequency plasma irregularity studies, the effects of Coulomb
collisions on the incoherent radar spectrum, and meteor echoes and derived
neutral winds. This work will expand relationships with outside researchers and
programs through collaborative investigations and by hosting visits from
students and professionals; maintain an efficient, diverse management system
that is resilient to changes occurring at NSF, Cornell, and in Peru; expand STEM
educational opportunities by directly supporting undergraduate and graduate
students; and train the next generation of radio scientists through a
combination of summer schools, workshops, and hosted visits as well as the
creation of curricula and educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.