* 2213821
* CCRI: Medium: FLOTO: A Discovery Testbed for Measurement of Internet Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Feamster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,565,166.00

The FLOTO project will build a discovery testbed: a large, distributed
observational instrument built for the purpose of advancing research on access
networks, i.e., the “last mile” networks that connect individuals, homes, and
businesses to their service provider. In practical terms, the instrument will
consist of roughly one-thousand edge devices deployed across a major urban area
(Chicago) and several university campuses. These devices will be instrumented
with broadband diagnostic tests to obtain observation data that will allow
network scientists to gain insight into access network performance. To make this
system possible, FLOTO will develop a fleet management framework for edge
devices, extend and deploy a set of existing active network measurements
developed as a result of community effort, and manage further community
contributions to shape the observational capacity of the instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will provide an unprecedented
capability for observing and understanding the dynamics and evolution of the
Internet, and ultimately provide an invaluable tool for research and
policymaking. In particular, it will allow researchers to investigate where
disparities exist in terms of deployment, availability, reliability, and
performance that lead to the “digital divide” in society -- and ultimately
catalyze new solutions that are likely to work for every member of society. On a
more general level, this project will also create a blueprint for a discovery
testbed at a large scale and pioneer new allocation and sharing methods that can
be adapted to different types of discovery. Finally, through a new collaborative
agreement with the City Colleges of Chicago, this project will provide
opportunities for practical, hands-on training for students as part of two-year
degree programs in computer networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.