* 2213322
* MPS-Ascend: Improved Accuracy and Robustness for Numerical Partial Differential Equations and Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Alan Marquez, Marquez, Alan
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Alan Marquez is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Marquez supports the research project entitled "Improved
Accuracy and Robustness for Numerical Partial Differential Equations and Non-
Linear Optimization," under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is Vanderbilt University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. David Hyde.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance
the accuracy and robustness of techniques based on the material point method to
model systems of partial differential equations, with applications ranging from
weather balloons used in climate research to engineering challenges such as
particle-laden flow and avalanches. Furthermore, data-driven formulations are
intended to achieve breakthrough results in convergence and accuracy for coupled
level set methods in the context of multiphase flow problems such as
polycrystalline grain boundary evolution, with applications, for example, to the
design of efficient materials for photovoltaic cells. Additionally, the PI and
the sponsoring scientist will develop strategies for leveraging novel approaches
to obtain sparser and more semantically interpretable solutions for inverse,
control, and neural network training problems. The PI will engage in multiple
programs for outreach to and recruitment from groups that are under-represented
in mathematical and physical sciences. These include advertising projects
through websites and programs focused on increasing success and participation of
underrepresented populations, working with existing programs at Vanderbilt, and
mentoring students from underrepresented groups to access resources available
through the Association for Women in Mathematics, as well as technical tracks of
the Grace Hopper and Tapia conferences. A quantitative and qualitative
evaluation will be conducted to assess the impact of these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.