* 2213408
* LEAPS-MPS: Rational design of macromolecular assemblies controlled via plasmonic activation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Julianne Griepenburg, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEAPS-MPS: Rational design of
macromolecular assemblies controlled via plasmonic
activation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, light controls a large number of
physical and biological processes. In synthetic systems, using light as a
trigger to initiate processes is beneficial because it is often biocompatible,
and can be well controlled in both time and space, especially through the use of
ultrafast lasers. This proposal seeks to use light to trigger structural changes
in macromolecules, such as in DNA assemblies and molecular storage compartments
known as vesicles. Vesicles are of interest because they provide the ability to
compartmentalize contents, preventing interaction with the surrounding
environment; light-induced structural disruption could allow for their contents
to be released on-demand. In order for this to happen, light must be converted
into heat or mechanical energy which can disrupt surrounding structures. This
can be achieved with the unique light-sensitive properties of small gold
particles known as nanoparticles, sometimes only consisting of a few hundred
atoms. DNA assemblies can assist in this process by providing a scaffold for
nanoparticle placement. The thorough investigation of these interactions has the
potential to be transformative for applications in biotechnology and
nanotechnology, for example, drug-delivery, allowing for therapeutics to be
released in a specific location within the body to reduce side effects in
healthy tissues or cells. In addition to important scientific applications, a
significant goal of this proposal is to provide experiential learning
opportunities for students at Rutgers University-Camden. Such opportunities are
essential on this campus, to increase engagement in the large population of
first-generation college students as well as students who identify with groups
commonly underrepresented in STEM fields. Recruitment, training, and mentoring
will ensure that students become highly competitive for future endeavors in
industry and academia. The campus location in the heart of Camden, NJ provides
unmatched opportunities for outreach in the surrounding community. Towards this
goal, an outreach program called MEDIA (Meeting Exceptional Diverse Inclusive
Academics) will be launched, where a diverse group of scientists from Rutgers-
Camden will interact with grade school students; the goal of this program is
early intervention to dissuade common scientist gender and race stereotypes
frequently portrayed by the media that can limit interest in and later pursuit
of scientific study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic nanoparticles, such as those comprised of
gold, hold great potential as photosensitizers due to their unique optical
properties which allow them to strongly absorb light and convert that energy
into a localized response; the localized surface plasmon resonance absorption
wavelength can be readily tuned through size, shape, organization, and
composition. This plasmonic response can result in thermal and/or mechanical
disruptions to the surrounding environment. This proposal hypothesizes that
plasmonic effects can disrupt both the local organization of both diblock
copolymer bilayer membranes which make up polymersome carrier vesicles, as well
as DNA origami assemblies, both together and individually. The first aim of this
work proposes to address the level of disruptions (i.e., poration vs. thermal
dissociation). In Aim 2, the fundamental knowledge acquired in Aim 1 will be
used to rationally design polymersome-DNA heterovesicles. The ability to control
and detect the macromolecular organization of each component will be developed,
to gain high spatiotemporal control over dissociation, poration, and cargo
release in response to pulsed irradiation. Synergistically, this work will open
doors to many training opportunities for undergraduate, M.S., and Ph.D. students
at Rutgers-Camden, creating a hierarchy of opportunity, mentorship, and
productivity. A large emphasis will be on the recruitment and retention of first
generation college students and students from groups underrepresented in STEM,
by providing paid research training and creating a sense of belonging in the
scientific community through opportunities such as conference presentations.
Proposed outreach programs in grade schools in the local Camden, NJ community
will ensure the future diversity of STEM scholars by working towards offsetting
the commonly media portrayed racial and gender stereotypes of scientists,
through a program entitled MEDIA (Meeting Exceptional Diverse Inclusive
Academics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.