* 2213277
* MPS-Ascend: Ergodic Schrödinger Operators and Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alberto Takase, Takase, Alberto
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Takase is awarded a National Science Foundation
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities related to
broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr.
Takase supports the research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Ergodic Schrödinger
Operators and Quasicrystals", under the mentorship of two sponsoring scientists.
At the first host institution, Michigan State University, Dr. Takase will work
with the sponsoring scientist Dr. Ilya Kachkovskiy, from August 2022 through
July 2023. Dr. David Damanik will be Dr. Takase’s sponsoring scientist at Rice
University from August 2023 through July 2025. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to investigate the spectral theory of ergodic Schrödinger
operators, with a focus on explicit multi-dimensional operators that appear in
quantum mechanics to model physical phenomena. The PI plans to study Laplacians
on Penrose tilings to describe the topological structure of the spectrum,
continuity of spectral characteristics of Schrödinger operators as the coupling
constant approaches zero, and ergodic Schrödinger operators with separable
potentials. The PI plans to engage with undergraduate research mentorship and
professional development activities through directed reading programs. To
broaden participation in mathematical and physical sciences, Dr. Takase brings
insights from his own experience as a Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellow and his
engagement with middle school outreach as a graduate student member of a
community educational outreach program called Math CEO. He has participated in
several outreach activities at HSIs and HBCUs and plans to continue these
initiatives in future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.