* 2213806
* Summer School for Integrated Computational Materials Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Liang Qi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 380,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for the Summer School
for Integrated Computational Materials Education that is held on the campus of
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Established in 2011, this summer school
aims to expand the educational opportunities in computational materials science
by training and assisting graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
professors who intend to incorporate computational and data science tools into
university-level materials science and engineering education. The participants
who complete the program become ambassadors of computational materials science
and engineering - they return to their home universities/colleges and implement
the modules and approaches presented in the summer school. This in turn
stimulates the advancement of computational materials science, and thus will
ripple through the broader field of materials science and engineering. Graduate
student participants are trained in computational and data science approaches
for both research and teaching, providing them the first step towards more in-
depth learning of the computational techniques and future career path in higher
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides support for the Summer School for Integrated Computational
Materials Education. While computational approaches have transformed materials
research, the education and training in materials science and engineering have
not fully reflected the evolution of the field. In response to the needs and
challenges identified by the community, this two-week summer school was
established to “educate the educator” by providing training through an intensive
course on computational materials science and engineering (CMSE) and focus
sessions on educational modules that can be adopted into existing materials
science and engineering core courses. This program aims to equip current and
future educators with abilities and materials to introduce CMSE to undergraduate
students. Graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty who intend to
incorporate computational and data science tools into university-level materials
science and engineering education are invited to participate in the program. The
modules that have been developed incorporate concepts from thermodynamics,
kinetics, electronic properties, and mechanics. By training the educators, the
Summer School benefits not only those who attend, but also the undergraduates
who would be taught by the participants. It also provides a stepping-stone
towards more intensive CMSE research training for researchers who are not
necessarily familiar with computational approaches. This in turn broadens the
application of computational and data science tools in materials research and
development and thus stimulates the advance of computational materials science
education, leading to ripple effects in the broader field of materials science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.