* 2213711
* Promoting Math in Young Children: Leveraging pediatric clinics to reach underrepresented children in rural communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Susanna Loeb, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,957,779.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. Informal STEM learning opportunities are often
rare in rural locations where the early childhood education system is also
under-resourced. Through partnerships with educational researchers, early math
educators, pediatric health experts, and pediatric clinics, this project will
develop and study a new opportunity for informal math learning. The project will
work with pediatric clinics that serve rural immigrant families who are
racially, culturally, and linguistically diverse. The project leverages the high
levels of trust many caregivers have in their child’s pediatrician to improve
math learning during critical early years. This project will build on a previous
program where physician text messages to caregivers supported youth literacy
development. In this instance the project will support caregivers’ math
interactions with their 3- and 4-year-olds to cultivate children's math
knowledge and skills. The text messaging program will be grounded in research in
child development, mathematics learning, parenting practices, and adult behavior
change. Texts will also provide caregiver supports for how to engage their
children in mathematical activates in their everyday lives and provide
information about the important skills children are developing. Text messages
will be co-developed with caregiver input, and focus on content underlying
mathematical development such as Number Sense, Classification and Patterning,
Measurement, Geometry, and Reasoning. Caregivers will receive text messages from
their pediatric clinics three times a week for eight months. For example, three
related texts supporting Number Sense include: “FACT: Kids enjoy counting and it
prepares them for K! Mealtimes are a fun time to practice counting objects;”
“TIP: At a meal, say: Can you count all the cups on the table? All the plates?
What else can you count? (Forks) Tell them: Great job!” and “GROWTH: You are
helping kids to count &amp; get ready for K. At the park, ask: How many bikes
are there? How many birds? Count together &amp; find out!” Throughout the
planning and implementation phases of the project the team will work closely
with early education math experts, key advisors, and caregivers to ensure the
text messaging program is tailored to meet the cultural, linguistic, and
contextual needs of rural caregivers and children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will research impacts of the text messaging program on children,
caregivers, and clinical staff. First, the project will investigate the impact
of the texting program on children through a randomized trial, and pre-and-post
measures of early childhood math skills and abilities. Second, using interviews
at baseline and in a 9-month follow-up, the project will study the texting
program’s impact on caregivers’ perceptions regarding the importance of math
learning for young children. Third, the project will explore the impact of the
text messaging program on health professionals’ understanding of math learning
in early childhood by collecting qualitative data and assessing attitudes about
the clinic’s role in supporting early math. Caregivers and clinic staff will
also participate in focus groups to better understand impacts for each of these
groups. The project will reach 1000 families, who will be randomly assigned to
treatment or control groups through block-randomization, stratified by caregiver
language and child’s age. This parent-informed project will build evidence
toward new approaches to promoting early math in the pediatric clinic, an
informal environment that can reach all families and can leverage innovative
technology. Findings will be shared widely though a communication and engagement
plan that includes children, caregivers, physicians and clinic staff, informal
STEM educators, researchers, and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.