* 2213700
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: A Scalable Hardware and Software Environment Enabling Secure Multi-party Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Aidong Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,120,000.00

Advances in machine learning have made a major impact on many real-world
applications over the past decade, and have achieved scientific and engineering
breakthroughs across many disciplines. A new era of collaborative learning is
emerging as part of the next phase of ubiquitous computing, wherein researchers
at different sites will work together to correlate the disparate data they have
separately acquired and eventually create a sophisticated decision-making model.
It is thus imperative to establish a platform to support collaborative, multi-
party data analysis, through which the participating parties can share their
data with each other with different degrees of privacy control. The participants
can compute with each other's data, by either directly sharing data with the
server or only sharing their model parameters with the server to collaboratively
derive a solution with other parties. To make such an environment available to
the community, this project establishes a scalable and trusted hardware and
software environment, termed Bridge, to support a general form of collaborative
machine learning. The Bridge platform enables scalable multi-party learning and
data analysis in a variety of forms, in both centralized and decentralized
settings, with security and privacy guarantees. The project's novelties are to
synergistically design and integrate both hardware and software innovation as
well as a suite of security and privacy mechanisms and tools to support various
types of multi-party machine learning. The project's impacts are to enable
collaborative research efforts in diverse communities of CISE researchers
pursuing focused research agendas in computer and information science and
engineering, and generate enormous social and economic benefits to individuals
and organizations. The minority students and under-served populations will be
engaged in research activities to create an inclusive environment where everyone
contributes to and benefits from cutting-edge scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bridge platform will develop a
unified hardware and software infrastructure to achieve hardware and software
co-design for multi-party learning. An algorithmic software infrastructure is
designed to support distributed, federated, and multi-modal model learning and
sharing. The Bridge platform integrates cryptographic (secure multi-party
computation) and noise-based methods (differential privacy) to provide privacy
across the entire process from data collection to output. The Bridge platform
provides a set of tools on integrated data access, AutoML, team creation,
machine learning model vulnerability evaluation, and heterogeneous feature
embeddings to support flexible user applications. The Bridge platform ensures
the scalability in the number of tasks, the number of users, and heterogeneity
of data types by developing advanced techniques to improve asynchronous model
updates, communication efficiency, fast convergence, and vertical data
partition. The Bridge platform builds a collaborative learning community and
accelerates many new research areas in the core Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE), such as advanced machine learning and data science, data
privacy and trustworthy AI, convergent research among hardware, software and
machine learning, and intelligent internet of things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.