* 2213479
* LEAPS-MPS: Mobility and reactivity of covalent organic framework precursors under physical confinement by exfoliated 2D materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Ryan Brown, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) are a diverse field of
crystalline two-dimensional polymers that have highly tunable properties due to
the geometry of the bonding between components and variability in the nature of
the bond and functional groups present on the reactant molecules. The formation
of COFs “under confinement” has been studied at a variety of interfaces, but not
for reactants trapped between two solid surfaces. Graphene is a single layer of
covalently linked carbon atoms that is easily exfoliated from graphite and can
trap highly mobile molecules at solid surfaces. With this LEAPS-MPS project,
Professor Ryan Brown’s research group at Clarkson University investigates
trapping reactants between graphene and a solid surface to study COF formation
at a solid-solid interface. They look at how COF growth changes when reactants
are confined between solid interfaces. Some COF linkages are not easily formed
through a direct condensation reaction at surfaces or in solution due to
competing reactions or desorption at the high-temperatures. Prof. Brown’s group
employes graphene confinement as a strategy for carrying out these inaccessible
reactions, as well as using graphene trapping to pattern COF growth for linkages
not normally formed through direct condensation reactions. In addition to the
science aspects, the project also engages underrepresented communities within
the Mathematical and Physical sciences field through seminar invitations for
pre-tenure faculty, professional development workshops for undergraduate
students from underrepresented backgrounds, and the provision of paid research
experience for high school students from the local indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The growth of
two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (COFs) confined at a variety of
interfaces is an active field with a variety of outcomes based on the nature of
the confinement. So far though, the existing body of work in this field does not
address the consequences of forming 2D-COFs under confinement by a solid-solid
interface. Understanding COF growth confined between solid-solid interfaces is
important for assessing the viability of employing this class of materials as
intercalation species to modify the chemical, optical, or electrical properties
of two-dimensional materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides and
MXenes. With this LEAPS-MPS project, Professor Ryan Brown’s research group
explores the impact of physical confinement between solid surface on COF growth
by employing scanning probe microscopy (SPM), spatially-resolved Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and density functional theory
calculations to assess changes in the mobility and reactivity of COF precursors
confined between exfoliated graphene and solid interfaces. Exfoliated graphene
can confine gases, liquids, and small molecules at solid interfaces, and the
graphene-mica and graphene-Au(111) interfaces are used as experimentally
accessible model systems for confinement at a solid-solid interface. Professor
Brown’s research group investigates the impact of a graphene capping layer on
the growth and morphology of COFs formed from common condensation reactions for
single and multiple reactant systems. This work also extends to assessing the
viability of using graphene confinement at surfaces to produce COF linkages not
readily accessible through direct condensation reactions. Additionally,
Professor Brown works with existing organizations within Clarkson University to
enhance the mentoring, training, and career progression undergraduate students
and pre-tenure faculty members from underrepresented backgrounds in Mathematical
and Physical Sciences through a series of enrichment activities and research
opportunities. High school students from the northern New York indigenous
communities gain valuable research exposure and experience through this program,
as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.