* 2213213
* MPS-Ascend: Bi-Orderability, Fibered Knots, and Cyclic Branched Covers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Johnson, Johnson, Jonathan C
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 172,496.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Jonathan Johnson is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Johnson supports the research project entitled "MPS-Ascend:
Bi-Orderability, Fibered Knots, and Cyclic Branched Covers", under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
Oklahoma State University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Neil
Hoffman.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the PI’s past research, this project
includes a novel conjecture linking bi-orderability of fibered and two-bridge
knot groups to the L-space conjecture conditions of the cyclic branched covers
of the knots, a possible characterization of bi-orderability in terms of the
Alexander polynomial of knots, and new methods of producing examples of bi-
orderable 3-manifold groups. For broadening participation, the PI plans to
create a Directed Reading Program at Oklahoma State University, with a focus on
recruiting students from underrepresented groups, particularly the university's
large Native American population. An additional contribution will be to create
publicly accessible online videos covering a broad range of topics in low-
dimensional topology, aimed at undergraduate students and early career
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.