* 2213183
* Travel: Symposium on Advances in Ocean Observation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Ajit Subramaniam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 40,303.00

This project supports a symposium with a novel format which brings together a
small (~30 people) yet highly motivated group of experts focusing on smarter
methods in ocean observation. The primary aim of the symposium is using
convergence science to catalyze active discussion between marine scientists and
technologists and generate actionable ideas with a central focus on bringing
computational and robotic intelligence to ocean observation. This will make
connections for ideation to advance observation methods at various levels
(national, international), during this UN Decade of the Oceans (UN 2021). This
will hopefully help marine scientists understand and leverage advances in
robotics and computer science and help technologists advance their science and
problem solving methods to have a real societal impact with the ultimate goal of
advancing the state of ocean science and our understanding of the world’s ocean.
The symposium will bring together researchers from diverse backgrounds and
career stages, who might not have any reason (or incentive) to interact outside
their siloed environments. In other words, this effort is a form of persuasion
to collaborate across disciplinary and geographic boundaries. While the latter
continues to be a challenge, the anticipation is that methods in trans-national
collaboration will be provided by agencies in the US and Europe during this UN
Decade. The organizers expect to produce a manuscript with all participants as
co-authors to expose the ideas and concepts discussed at the symposium to the
larger ocean science, robotics and computer science
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean science is a highly inter-disciplinary
field. Yet it’s practice in the field, especially in the context of
observational methods, continue to be hobbled by a mismatch between the spatial
and temporal scales of observation and processes in a dynamic and harsh
environment. The disconnect between the reality on the ground, the advances that
have been made in the computational and robotic sciences, and the actual needs
in ocean science are stark and at the heart of what the Azores Symposium aims to
address. The principal focus of this meeting therefore is convergence science to
address the gaps between the science needs and the available technologies. Since
ocean science is a vast field, the core domain this symposium will focus on, is
the upper water-column biogeochemistry and physics. The meeting will be highly
transdisciplinary with leading experts from across Europe and the US. The
meeting will have an atypical method of interaction that is augmented by more
probing participation. The organizers intend to use a highly participatory
approach used by the Cognitive Science community. Also, in this Decade of the
Ocean, it provides a distinct foci for scientists and technologists to make a
coherent thrust in working together to make concrete progress in observational
methods. In large part this is doable, because of the maturity and advances in
computational and robotic sciences, which leverage decades of funding in the US
and Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.