* 2213918
* PFI-TT: Development of a Battery Health and Safety Monitoring Technology with High Accuracy and Speed
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Jaber Abu Qahouq, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a battery health
monitoring technology and a prototype system that can detect performance
deterioration and possible battery failures more quickly and accurately than
current technologies. Fast and accurate health monitoring of batteries impacts a
wide range of applications and products and may have significant impact on the
safety of materials and personnel. Applications and products such as electric
and hybrid-electric vehicles, electric aircrafts, electric boats, green homes
and buildings, off-power-grid homes and buildings, backup battery systems for
data centers and computing infrastructure, communication systems, hospitals and
grid or micro-grid scale energy storage are potential direct beneficiaries of
this technology. The resiliency of power availability increasingly impacts daily
lives and security. Fast and accurate state-of-health degradation evaluation
technology is also important for repurposing batteries for second-life
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a battery health
monitoring technology. The technology employs new battery health indicators,
advanced algorithms such as Artificial Neural Networks, and measurement methods
that are suitable for online applications and simultaneous multi-battery
component monitoring with reduced cost and size. A proof-of-concept prototype
will be developed during this project to demonstrate the competitive advantages
of the technology such as accuracy, speed, cost, and size. The project seeks to
evaluate and demonstrate the commercial potential and viability of the
technology using many parameters. The proof-of-concept prototype will also be
used to demonstrate the technology to potential industry collaborators and
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.