* 2213951
* PFI-TT: Artificial Intelligence-enabled Real-time System for Early Epileptic Seizure Detection and Prediction
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Fahad Saeed, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be in the area of seizure
prediction for patients suffering from drug-resistant epilepsy. The technology
developed can have impact on more than 3.4 million Americans that suffer from
epilepsy – including 1 million who suffer from drug-resistant epilepsy. Current
infrastructure available to the epileptic population is inadequate and is mostly
reactive i.e., support is provided after a seizure attack. Physical injury,
social ostracization (emotional injury), or limited opportunities (economic
injury) result from the inadequate ability to predict siezures. The proposed
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based models will be incorporated into wearable
sensors that detect abnormalities in brain electrical activity. The technology
will be incorporated into devices like smart phones, and will be non-invasive,
and low-cost. Siezure prediction can enable timely human mitigation measures
thus providing value by reducing emergency room costs, improving quality of
life, and allowing caregivers to provide precautionary measures such as anti-
seizure medications. With recent advances in seizure rescue therapeutics, the
proposed early prediction technology can help patients make better decisions on
when to medicate to prevent a seizure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will design and develop advanced machine learning algorithms to identify
neuromarkers that can be used for the prediction of epileptic seizures using
data from wearable electroencephalography (EEG). The goal of this project is to
provide computational infrastructure that can predict seizures with high
sensitivity and low false positive rates, and can provide real-time continuous
monitoring making it highly impactful for patients and caregivers. These
solutions will be developed by formulating deep-learning models that will
combine residual and long-short term memory(LSTM) layers for feature extraction
for improved sensitivity and specificity for class imbalances. This development
will be followed by prediction using fully connected layers. To ensure
generalizability, the models will be trained and tested using data from various
EEG data acquisition sites and techniques. The edge/federated computing
infrastructure will be formulated to alert patients and caregivers to take
preventative measures about an impending seizure resulting in better outcomes
for the patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.