* 2213412
* LEAPS-MPS: Tailoring Magnetic Topological Phases in Rare-earth based Kagome Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Arjun Pathak, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,934.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The so-called quantum materials including “rare-earth-
based” materials possess unique properties for critical roles in important
technologies like high-speed computation, clean energy, automotive, and defense
industries. It is therefore important to clearly understand the key properties
of these materials in order to harness them for the various applications. This
project enables targeted design of rare-earth kagome materials with multiple
functionalities. Beyond the exciting opportunity for a fundamental impact on a
rapidly emerging international scientific and industrial field, this research
also establishes and sustains a multidisciplinary, team-oriented problem-solving
learning environment for students. This research provides the opportunity for
hands-on research experiences, particularly for underrepresented minorities,
women, and first-generation College students at SUNY College at Buffalo with a
large percentage of these underserved students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the interplay between topology, magnetism,
and correlation is emergent research that can potentially find exotic
topological rare earth materials with anomalous topological Hall effect, Chern
topological magnetism, and unusual pressure-induced topological phase
transitions. The research focuses on (i) discovering new magnetically inspired
topological phases by carrier-tunability via the design and synthesis of 4f
-based systems and (ii) revealing the role of defects, structural and
compositional variations in the electronic structures of the proposed materials
with an emphasis on unique magneto-transport, anomalous and quantum Hall effect,
and evolution of electronic structures with temperature, pressure, and magnetic
phases. This research involves synthesis of bulk single-crystalline materials,
then their crystallographic, magnetic, electrical, thermodynamic,
microstructural, and spectroscopic characterization. This proposed research and
education activities also provide an excellent opportunity to recruit and retain
students for the future STEM workforce, particularly underrepresented
minorities, women, and first-generation college students. The project aims to
train at least five undergraduate students and prepare and refine activities for
K-12 students during the funding period. Proposed activities create great
opportunities for STEM students to pursue ground-breaking pathways in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.