* 2213441
* LEAPS-MPS: Solution Processed 2D Tellurene with Outstanding Thermoelectric Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Heng Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 236,824.00

Non-technical Description. Providing precise, localized temperature control is
important for many applications, such as to keep microprocessors from
overheating and for medical equipment. This is often realized with
thermoelectric devices where cooling and heating are performed by special
semiconductors. Thermoelectric devices also have the potential for renewable
energy, yet cost and efficiency limitations have precluded widespread use. While
other semiconductor devices have seen dramatic increases in performance through
materials advances, thermoelectric devices still use the same materials as
decades ago. This project explores a new pathway to thermoelectrics, taking
advantage of recent progress in low-dimensional materials and a novel synthesis
technique. This research has the potential for profound impact in many technical
areas. The research activities advance knowledge on the control of electrical
and thermal transport in two-dimensional semiconductors as well as how to
preserve the merit of these materials when they are assembled into bulk forms.
The project promotes the education and training of next-generation workforce in
semiconductor engineering. These include community-focused, in-person and
virtual outreach programs, which serve primarily underprivileged groups on the
south side of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. This research
project explores tellurene for thermoelectrics, based on a favorable electronic
band structure in its two-dimensional form. A large number of degenerate bands
is the key feature for better thermoelectric performance. This activity advances
research on similar materials for thermoelectric and other applications. Ligand
removal will be systematically studied to minimize interface influence on
electrical transport. Carrier density tuning, a challenging problem for 2D
semiconductors, will be addressed by a surface doping scheme.The use of
inorganic binders allows mild-temperature assembly to preserve nanoscale
features. Electrical and thermal transport property characterizations are
complemented with Boltzmann transport modeling, which provides deep
understanding on the unique features of tellurene. Knowledge generated through
this research will provide insights on future materials design for
thermoelectric and other device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.