* 2213494
* LEAPS-MPS: A Systematic and Automatic Spectral Analysis of Physical Conditions of Circumgalactic Medium using Genetic Algorithms;
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Min Long, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 247,238.00

Astronomical spectroscopy lies at the foundation of our understanding of the
universe and its constituents (e.g., stars, planets, galaxies, interstellar
medium), and for generations of astronomers, the analysis of spectroscopic data
has been carried out by experienced and highly trained end-users - the
astronomers themselves. This paradigm will be severely challenged by new
generations of spectrographic instruments that will produce literally billions
of high-resolution spectra on relatively short timescales and orders of
magnitude faster than they can be analyzed. The research team will address this
"data firehose" problem by developing an open-source spectral analysis package
based on a genetic algorithm (GA) to accurately analyze astronomical spectra
automatically with minimal human intervention, and then use it to explore the
physical conditions within the gaseous halos of galaxies as a proof-of-concept.
This project will support the thesis research of two graduate students and allow
the PI to further efforts at his home institution to involve students in
computational astrophysics and other STEM fields. This project is co-funded by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing fast and automated global optimum
search methods applicable to large and rapid growing datasets in spectral
analysis is a complex and long-standing problem. The proposed work will advance
knowledge in multiple areas by developing a GA-based global optimization method
for the analysis of high-resolution spectra that is applicable to large and
rapid growing datasets in modern data environments and then applying it to
facilitate understanding of the circumgalactic (CGM) and intergalactic (IGM)
media of galaxies using archival spectra of background sources obtained with the
HST's Cosmic Origin Spectrograph (COS). The project outcomes will include an
extensible and open-source code base software package (Astro-Neo) that will
enable astronomers to analyze large quantities of data with improved quality and
reproducibility. The core software has been applied successfully in materials
science and will be extended to other fields beyond the lifetime of this
project. The project outcomes will directly address the challenges of data
analysis when data is obtained at Petabyte/year rates and contribute to a new
research platform for accelerating discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.