* 2213770
* Generative number concepts in children
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joonkoo Park, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 509,597.00

As the idiom goes, the natural numbers are as easy as one-two-three. However,
learning about them as a child is not easy. It takes several years of formal and
informal education to understand what number words mean, how each number relates
to another, and that numbers are infinite. This project investigates how
children come to understand that numbers are generative, that is, a new number
can be generated endlessly. A new theoretical framework that integrates ideas
from psychology, linguistics, and history is proposed, and cognitive
developmental experiments will evaluate that theoretical framework. The outcomes
of this project are expected to address where the fundamental human capacity for
mathematical thinking comes from and, more broadly, to expand our knowledge
about how humans make “infinite use of finite means,” one of the deepest
cognitive science questions yet to be answered. The foundational knowledge
gained from this project is also expected to inspire new pedagogical approaches
to STEM education that are based on the natural mechanisms of number
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key question in number acquisition research
is how children learn that a set of rules allows the generation of new numbers
indefinitely. Existing psychological theories propose children learn generative
number concepts by using a formal mathematical principle, making it difficult to
generate falsifiable hypotheses and test them empirically. This project suggests
a departure from the abstract mathematical perspective and instead proposes an
empirically testable and falsifiable hypothesis developed from an
interdisciplinary analysis of the broad literature. Specifically, it proposes
and tests the central hypothesis that generative number concepts are acquired by
learning the polynomial representation of quantity enabled by the combinatorial
structure of number words and Arabic numerals. This hypothesis will be tested
using novel cognitive experiments in children between four and eight years of
age. The outcomes of this project are expected to establish a novel
psychologically plausible and falsifiable theory about number concepts and their
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.