* 2213683
* CCRI: Research Infrastructure: Planning-M: Multi-Modal Infrastructure for Enabling Social AI Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2022
* James Rehg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) for understanding social communication can play a
key role in important application domains such as household robotics. However,
current advancements in natural language processing and computer vision mainly
focus on analyzing the surface structure of text and videos, lacking the ability
to understand social communication deeply. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To build
large-scale AI systems that can better understand social interaction, this
planning project aims at how to develop a process for collecting and annotating
multi-modal and cross-cultural datasets of social communication in a responsible
and sustainable way. The planning activities also include organizing workshops
and panels around multi-modal social data collection to characterize the needs
of this emerging social AI community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These planning
activities will provide the foundation towards building the next generation of
social AI models and ensuring that collection and use of the data complies with
ethical and legal considerations. The resulting data infrastructure will
facilitate future research on theory of mind, teamwork, and group decision-
making. This planning project will demonstrate the potential of
interdisciplinary research between natural language processing, computer vision,
social science, law, and ethics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will be
hosted via this website: socialai-data.org, where data, code, and data use
protocols will be actively updated and maintained during the project
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.