* 2213069
* Fully Decentralized (Attack-)Resilient Dynamic Low-Rank Matrix Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project designs (fully) decentralized Byzantine attack-resilient algorithms
for low-rank (LR) matrix learning from “bad” (deliberately undersampled,
missing, outlier-corrupted or nonlinear) data. In particular, we focus on two
problems: LR column-wise compressive sensing and LR matrix completion. Efficient
solutions to these problems can enable the design of fast and power-efficient
mobile applications for recommendation system design, e.g., for Netflix content,
and for storing compressed videos/images on the cloud. In many of these
settings, there is no central coordinating node, each node can only communicate
with its neighboring nodes. The project also supports the expansion of the co-
PI’s CyMath program to a larger group of under-served grade and middle school
students. CyMath is a Math tutoring program started in 2020 to provide sustained
year-long support and extension to under-served K-12 students, with the eventual
goal of raising a new generation of students who pursue, and thrive in,
Engineering or other Math-intensive majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops provably accurate decentralized alternating projected
gradient&lt;br/&gt;Descent (GD) based algorithms for batch and dynamic LR matrix
learning from “bad” data. These involve factorizing the unknown n x q rank-r
matrix X as X=UB where U and B are matrices with r columns and rows
respectively. Here r &lt;&lt; n, q (low-rank). The approach alternatively
updates U and B by (a) one projected GD step on U keeping B fixed at its
previous value, and (b) minimization, or GD, over B keeping U fixed at its most
recent value. Here (a) means one GD step on U followed by projecting the output
onto the space of matrices with orthonormal columns. The projection is critical
for ensuring that the matrix norms stay bounded. This approach is both
significantly faster and more communication-efficient than competing methods –
convex relaxation, alternating minimization, or projected GD on X directly.
However, the design of its efficient decentralized version is not
straightforward. The reason is: (i) when using the UB factorization, the cost
functions are non-convex; and (ii) the constraint set (set of n x r matrices
with orthonormal columns) is not a convex set either. This precludes the use of
ideas from the existing literature on efficient consensus algorithms for
decentralized projected GD, almost all of which are designed to either solve
unconstrained convex problems or problems with convex costs and constraint sets.
This project also develops a novel solution framework for decentralized LR
recovery that is resilient to Byzantine attacks. There has been some work on
Byzantine-robust LR recovery in the centralized federated setting. However, LR
recovery problems in fully decentralized adversarial environments have received
little attention. These are more challenging because (i) existing decentralized
results assume convex cost functions and constraints; and (ii) the design of
attack-robust algorithms is much harder in a decentralized setting, e.g.,
median-of-means cannot be easily implemented without a central coordinating
node.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.