* 2213656
* CCRI: Research Infrastructure: NEW: Semantic Scholar Open Data Platform: Enabling Research Into Scientific Search and Discovery
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Weld, THE ALLEN INSTITUTE FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The exponential growth of scientific publication makes it difficult for
scientists to track developments in their field and make connections between
different advances. In response, artificial-intelligence researchers have
started to develop techniques that allow computers to ‘read’ scientific papers
and automatically classify topics, extract key results, summarize contributions,
identify connections, and select a personalized set of papers that may be of
special interest to each scientist. The enduring vision is to build AI systems
that can process an immense corpus of scholarly documents and augment the
capabilities of human scientists – accelerating scientific discovery and helping
humanity quickly confront disasters such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed
Semantic Scholar Open Data Platform builds infrastructure to support this
research by first gathering a comprehensive set of papers and arranging for
efficient indexing. The system processes PDF-formatted papers to extract
information and use advanced analytic processing approaches to provide
researchers access to results. The infrastructure will dramatically lower the
barrier to entry for newcomers to the field of scholarly document processing,
improve reproducibility of experiments, and accelerate innovation in the
important area of AI-augmented scientific discovery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
infrastructure proposed is unique, because alternative sources of academic
papers are either closed, incomplete, have limited programmatic access, or have
been retired. The proposed Semantic Scholar Open Data Platform has three parts:
1) a comprehensive set of online services enabling researchers to
programmatically search, filter, extract, summarize, and analyze a large and
continually-updated corpus of documents; 2) a new mechanism that enables
researchers to curate their own domain-specific text corpora, as the team
previously created the CORD-19 dataset for coronavirus research; 3) open source
software, including pretrained language models and user interface templates to
serve as research building blocks. Together the infrastructure will dramatically
lower the barrier to entry for newcomers to the field of scholarly document
processing, improve reproducibility of experiments, and accelerate innovation in
the important area of AI-augmented scientific discovery. Fortunately, the recent
increase in research in scholarly document processing (e.g., the rapid uptake of
our CORD-19 dataset) shows that the computer and information science community
has the interest and capability to develop new technologies that accelerate
science and help meet global societal challenges, such as pandemics and climate
change. The resulting advances in AI-augmented scientific discovery will benefit
all areas of science, spurring medical advances, creating new jobs, and
improving access for blind researchers. We will improve global infrastructure by
providing open services, data sets, code, and associated educational materials.
The team will also engage with underrepresented STEM students and through K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.