* 2213568
* MSA: Quantifying the drivers of mammal food web networks over space and time in Sub-Saharan Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lydia Beaudrot, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2025
* USD 334,795.00

Biodiversity is central to human health and well-being because it influences
services that make human life possible. Food webs and the predator-prey
interactions that comprise them play a critical role in maintaining
biodiversity. Most food webs have been studied locally, which inhibits
generalizations to larger areas and hampers predictions of the impact of global
environmental changes. The extent to which food webs depend on changes in
primary productivity – the rate at which plants turn energy into plant material
through photosynthesis – remains largely unknown. More studies have been
published describing predator-prey interactions in mammals than in other
animals, but we know little about what affects mammal food webs. Primary
productivity predicts mammal biodiversity in Africa more than in other regions,
suggesting the potential for a strong influence on African food webs.
Nevertheless, as the biosphere changes rapidly, changes in climate and land use
can alter predator-prey interactions, thereby altering food webs. In the coming
decades, African mammal food webs may be more intensely affected by land-use
change than other regions because projected human population growth rates for
sub-Saharan Africa are among the highest globally. Identifying the ecological
and anthropogenic drivers of food webs over space and time has never been more
important. This work supports 2 Ph.D. students and 3 undergraduate students co-
advised by the PI in Biosciences and the Co-PI in Electrical and Computer
Engineering, thus providing opportunities for cross-disciplinary education in
mathematical, computational, and environmental sciences. To amplify the broader
impacts of the research in the Houston area, two local K-12 teachers are
participating in Rice University's R-STEM program, which provides inquiry-based
professional development for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
leverages standardized annual camera trap data from five African protected areas
and community composition data from 170 mammal communities throughout sub-
Saharan Africa, and the researchers are constructing an overarching food web for
the mammal species from published data. To date, a key limitation of ecological
network research has been the widespread application of heuristic approaches
lacking strong theoretical support. The researchers are harnessing recent
developments in topological data analysis to quantify similarities in food web
structures. Specifically, they are developing fast algorithmic implementations
to measure differences in food webs over space and time. The research objectives
are to determine: 1) how climate and fragmentation influence vegetation
productivity, 2) how local food web dynamics respond to changes in productivity
and fragmentation over time, and 3) how food web network structure varies as a
function of productivity and fragmentation at regional and continental scales.
The researchers are also providing open-source implementation of the algorithms
and examples and tutorials of their use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.