* 2213895
* PFI-TT:  Next-Generation, Low-Cost, and Sustainable Recycling of Lithium-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Zheng Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to design and develop novel
approaches to recycle and re-manufacture lithium-ion Batteries (LIBs) by
recapturing valuable materials and thus mitigating environmental impacts. The
large consumption of LIBs is poised to increase demand and resource shortages of
lithium, critical metals, and graphite. The recycling of these valuable metals
may reduce the overall cost of LIB manufacturing as a significant portion of the
battery cost comes from these materials. The economic recycling of spent
batteries is quite challenging. This project will involve student/researcher
participation to develop the entrepreneurial skills needed to take the next-
generation, low-cost, and sustainable LIB recycling technology to market. This
project seeks to enhance fundamental understanding of the correlation between
processing conditions and composition/structure properties of LIB materials.
Such knowledge may be applied to scale up and commercialization of the next-
generation technology for low-cost and sustainable LIB recycling. This project
also seeks to increase the participation of women and minority students in
entrepreneurial and technical training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to improve and scale up advanced direct recycling technologies for
spent LIBs to both recapture valuable materials and mitigate environmental
pollution. The current industrial recycling methods, such as pyrometallurgical
and hydrometallurgical processes, are costly with secondary pollution and
limited profits. In contrast, the proposed direct recycling method offers a
pathway to reduce the processing steps, reducting both cost and environmental
issues. While the direct recycling process has been demonstrated in small
laboratory scale, it has not been validated at commercially-relevant scales due
to complications of material compositions and structural changes during scaling
up. This project seeks to fill the remaining technological gaps and scale up the
direct recycling process to kilogram levels of active materials for practical
evaluation. The goals will be achieved through integrating efforts in: (1)
examining and analyzing sorted battery electrode materials from different
separation methods, (2) improving, optimizing and scaling up materials
relithiation with a safe and low-cost process; (3) recycling active materials to
accommodate the evolution of battery materials chemistry, (4) testing and
evaluation of the performance of recycled materials to meet target performance,
and (5) conducting life-cycle analysis to further guide the improvement of the
entire direct recycling process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.