* 2213390
* LEAPS-MPS: Incorporating Stratification by Vaccination Status and Virus Variants in Mathematical Models of Infectious Disease Spread
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Matthew Johnston, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 242,192.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the beginning of the
COVID-19 pandemic, mathematical modeling has played a significant role in
assessing and forecasting the impacts of the disease and guiding public health
policy. Existing mathematical frameworks, however, have been slow to adapt to
sudden changes in disease spread dynamics resulting from the waning vaccine
immunity and emergence of COVID-19 variants such as delta and omicron. This
project will address these challenges by developing data-driven mathematical
modeling tools which divide populations according to factors that have distinct
characteristics, such as those due to differences in vaccination status and the
spread of virus variants. As COVID-19 evolves and becomes endemic in the global
population, the developed frameworks will guide public health officials in
evaluating the effectiveness of potential vaccination strategies and assessing
the capacity of variants to alter the course of disease spread. This will
facilitate targeted and impactful policies rather than disruptive population-
wide restrictions and lockdowns. The project will engage undergraduate students
in topical applied mathematics research and support underrepresented students in
STEM with a particular focus on the African American community in Metro Detroit.
The project will additionally advance curricular and program development at
Lawrence Technological University, which will enhance the institution's research
environment and further the principal investigatorâ€™s professional goal of
establishing a sustained, student-focused, and interdisciplinary research
program in mathematical biology at Lawrence Technological
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional mathematical modeling frameworks of
infectious disease spread often ignore factors of heterogeneous spread within a
population. This can lead to poor estimates of epidemiological parameters (such
as the basic reproduction number and herd immunity threshold), mistaken
assessments of the mechanisms of disease spread, and inaccurate forecasts. This
project will develop the theory and application of compartmental SIR-type
(Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered) models, which are associated with a system of
ordinary differential equations, to incorporate variances in a population's
vaccination coverage level, differing waning immunity periods, and competition
between virus variants with distinct epidemiological characteristics. Waning
immunity will be incorporated through a gamma-distributed delay on return to
susceptibility after vaccination or previous infection. The resulting
distributed delay differential equations will be analyzed and numerically
simulated using the linear chain trick, which reduces gamma-distributed delays
to a linear chain of exponential delays. Case data from The Michigan Department
of Health and Human Services will be used to parametrize and validate the models
with the goal of providing insightful forecasts for the spread of COVID-19 under
different immunization schedules. Virus variants will be incorporated by
dividing the infectious class into distinct compartments with variant-specific
parameters, such as variances in transmissibility, severity, vaccine resistance,
reinfection rate, and diagnostic detection. The goal will be to establish novel
critical thresholds for when a virus variant can persist or become dominant in a
population as well as address the inverse question of estimating a variant's
epidemiological parameters from its early-stage growth. By controlling a
population's vaccination coverage level, the developed models will be able to
cut through the complexity of case incidence data to provide critical insights
into the primary factors driving disease spread. User-friendly computational
packages capable of implementing the models and interfacing with public health
databases will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.