* 2213057
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Experimental Platform for Rapid Prototyping and Deployment of Secure Multi-Party Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Marina Blanton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,982.00

The goal of this transition-to-practice project is to build an experimental
platform for prototyping and deployment of secure multi-party computation
applications. Secure multi-party computation is a concept that permits computing
on private data distributed across different data sources by protecting the data
via cryptographic means throughout the computation and thus conducting the
computational task without learning the data. A variety of different techniques
and tools have been developed in the past for secure computation with private
data, but their deployment remains slow due to complexity of the techniques, a
lack of sufficient expertise in organizations, and poor usability of the
available tools. This project facilitates easier development and deployment of
secure multi-party computation applications developed by application designers.
This goal is accomplished by improving and extending a general-purpose secure
multi-party computation compiler called PICCO. The resulting platform can be
used by both researchers and programmers who are not domain
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary features of the developed
platform is the generality of the computation it supports. Namely, a program
written in a variant of a conventional programming language is transformed into
an implementation of the corresponding secure multi-party computation protocol
and additional supporting programs. The platform is extensible and configurable
to the needs of specific applications and their computational setup. A novel
component includes a convenient web-based user interface for private data entry
and output recovery generated at the time of program compilation. A part of the
effort also consists of developing educational materials for facilitating the
use of secure computation in courses and educational programs and helping local
non-profit organizations set up and run privacy-preserving data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.