* 2213272
* LEAPS-MPS: Unraveling the Surface Effects on Tungsten-Based Plasma-Facing Materials Through First-Principles Calculations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* David Cereceda, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,459.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fusion, the nuclear reaction that powers the sun,
is an energy source with one of the highest energy densities. However, there is
a lack of understanding associated with the plasma-facing materials (PFMs),
which are located in a critical region of the fusion reactor vessel that
provides the physical boundary for the hot, charged state of matter composed of
free electrons and atomic nuclei, called the plasma. This LEAPS-MPS award
supports theoretical and computational efforts that aim to facilitate human-
engineered fusion through the design of plasma-facing structural materials with
superior plasma-surface interactions. The PI and his team will formulate a novel
multi-physics framework to unravel surface effects on structural PFMs,
predicting their behavior when exposed to the hydrogen and helium plasma-surface
interactions expected in fusion power plants. Specifically, it will advance the
state of knowledge regarding (i) the local chemical order and segregation of
tungsten-based PFMs both in pristine form and in the presence of defects, and
(ii) the prediction of the surface-structure-property relationships in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research efforts, this award
also supports a broadening participation plan which is aimed at increasing
racial, gender, and socioeconomic diversity in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) careers by integrating fundamental materials research
into programs of particular interest to young learners: sailing for its
excitement as an often inaccessible, costly hobby, and game programming for its
familiarity and draw within youth culture. These broadening participation
platforms are especially conducive to sparking students’ interest in Materials
Science and High-Performance Computing at the elementary, middle, high school,
and college levels. Additionally, students’ interests will be nurtured and
sustained through the collaboration with the Society of Hispanic Professional
Engineers and a follow-up virtual mentoring platform to help them choose future
courses and opportunities as they build their paths toward careers in these STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LEAPS-
MPS award supports theoretical and computational efforts that aim to facilitate
human-engineered fusion through the design of plasma-facing structural materials
with superior plasma-surface interactions. Through this project, the PI proposes
to unravel the H and He surface effects on candidate tungsten-based plasma-
facing materials (PFMs) through accurate and computationally efficient first-
principles DFT electronic structure calculations. The proposed research strategy
for accomplishing this objective include: (i) the construction of atomistic
structures (both in bulk and in the vicinity of defects) with energetically-
stable arrangements of chemical elements; (ii) the assessment of the H and He
surface-interaction parameters with the candidate PFMs; and (iii) the prediction
of the surface-structure-property relationships in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research efforts, this award
also supports a broadening participation plan which is aimed at increasing
racial, gender, and socioeconomic diversity in STEM careers by integrating
fundamental materials research into programs of particular interest to young
learners: sailing for its excitement as an often inaccessible, costly hobby, and
game programming for its familiarity and draw within youth culture. These
broadening participation platforms are especially conducive to sparking
students’ interest in Materials Science and High-Performance Computing at the
elementary, middle, high school, and college levels. Additionally, students’
interests will be nurtured and sustained through the collaboration with the
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers and a follow-up virtual mentoring
platform to help them choose future courses and opportunities as they build
their paths toward careers in these STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.