* 2213316
* SBIR Phase I:  A Deep-learning-based Chatbot and Personalized Recommendations: Application to Nutrition
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Eric Speck, MEALMATE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance the health and welfare of the American public. Obesity
among American adults has risen from 12% in 1990 to over 40% today, leading to
an estimated medical cost of $260 billion in 2016, according to the Center for
Disease Control (CDC). According to the National Institute for Health (NIH), 70%
of American adults were overweight or obese in 2014. In 2013, American adults
were spending $60 billion annually on weight loss, according to US News &amp;
World Report. A 2008 American Journal of Preventive Medicine study showed that
those who kept daily food journals lost twice as much weight as those who did
not. However, existing diet tracking methods are often too time-consuming for
maintaining long-term weight loss. A personalized artificial intelligence (AI)
chatbot could make food logging fun and easy, benefitting millions of Americans
who are trying to lose weight and furthering knowledge on spoken dialogue
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance knowledge in the field of spoken dialogue systems
in several ways. First, the project establishes a new research area by noting
that AI and spoken dialogue systems have yet to be applied to nutrition.
Typically, conversational agents focus on factual question answering or tasks
such as flight booking, but there is an opportunity to leverage big data for
learning relationships between diet and health. Second, this project will
develop a neural generative chatbot model with memory, demonstrating the benefit
of personalized conversational interactions with intelligent agents that
remember the history of conversations and personal details about the user. While
manually writing chatbot responses ensures more control over the output, the
drawback is that the responses are less interesting, diverse, and flexible. This
work proposes generative Transformers in order to generate more realistic,
human-like responses and knowledge graphs as a novel method for remembering the
conversation and diet tracking history of each user for personalized feedback.
Finally, this project proposes the application of causal inference, often used
for medical diagnosis, to the new, challenging task of predicting which foods
lead to outcomes such as gut symptoms, weight loss, or muscle
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.