* 2213034
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a urine dipstick test that can guide immediate and appropriate antibiotic therapy for treatment of complicated urinary tract infections
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Angel Resendez, BioAmp Diagnostics, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,199,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the clinical outcomes and quality
of life for patients suffering from complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI).
Today, cUTIs account for 400,000 hospitalizations annually in the United States.
Unfortunately, multidrug resistant pathogens are a common cause of cUTI. Many
are resistant to the first-line antibiotic (Ceftriaxone), which is used as the
empiric treatment of this condition. However, the high incidence of multidrug
resistant pathogens causing cUTI delays the time until patients receive more
appropriate treatment. Delayed time to appropriate therapy in cUTI has been
attributed to extended hospital stays and an increased risk of morbidity and
mortality. The current standard test for diagnosing a drug-resistant cUTI takes
2-3 days from obtaining a patient sample. Therefore, diagnostic tests that can
rapidly inform the initial treatment of UTIs are urgently needed to improve
patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop a rapid urinary diagnostic test that
will enable the detection of ceftriaxone-resistant uropathogens. Early detection
of resistance to first-line therapies would enable antibiotic prescribing to be
informed, reducing the risk of disease progression in patients. In the case of
UTIs, disease progression can lead to severely invasive infections,
predominately sepsis. Therefore, diagnostics that can detect resistance to
first-line antibiotics enable early treatment interventions, reducing the time
to appropriate treatment and reducing the risk of disease progression. Decreased
treatment time also lowers the healthcare costs associated with drug-resistant
cUTI, as disease progression is associated with increased lengths of hospital
stays compared to susceptible infections. The completion of the Phase II project
will yield the development of a prototype test that can provide actionable
information regarding ceftriaxone susceptibility in less than 5 minutes. This
project’s success will provide clinicians with a diagnostic solution for cUTIs
that can be acted on immediately to improve patient outcomes and aid antibiotic
stewardship by preventing the unnecessary use of inappropriate
antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.