* 2213966
* PFI-TT:  Increased affinity of cancer therapeutic via single-domain antibody and dimer targeting of canine PD-1
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Christopher Cebra, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the development of safe,
effective, and affordable treatments for animal diseases including cancer in
dogs. A robust immune system is critical for effective treatment of cancer.
Beyond surgery, radiation, and chemotherapeutics, new approaches include agents
shown to block tumors from circumventing the body’s immune defenses. The
societal outcomes of this work may include prototype and manufacturing
optimization to produce biological molecules that bolster immune activity at
comparatively low cost. Like the very expensive, though effective, human
therapeutic counterparts, alternative platforms can be substituted at reduced
cost, making the treatment accessible to animals, improving their lives and
their caretakers’ lives. Greater demands have been placed on healthcare for new
flexible technologies to treat disease in a rapid and inexpensive manner. A
commercial opportunity resides in providing pet owners and veterinarians an
effective, economical, and safe treatment for the nearly 6 million dogs
diagnosed yearly with cancer. Creation of manufacturing processes of these new
prototypic therapeutics will be utilized to demonstrate the feasibility of
project outcomes and contribute to the general public's appreciation of this
platform in generating less expensive biologics-based therapies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to produce a prototype
therapeutic for the treatment of cancer in dogs. As cancer is a leading cause of
death in people and dogs, new technologies need to be brought forth. Development
of cutting-edge therapeutics for humans and animals requires relevant and robust
model systems that provide predictable outcomes. Antibodies, a proven
therapeutic platform, are large, complex proteins, that are expensive to develop
and manufacture. Different configurations of several proprietary subunit single
domain antibodies which are smaller proteins, cheaper to develop and produce
will be examined. An optimal dual epitope-binding prototype, specific to an
orthologous canine target, will be constructed using recombinant DNA methods and
produced in Yeast expression systems. Binding affinity will be measured by bio-
layer interferometry. Feasibility testing and optimization of large-scale
production will be examined, and purity and functional activity assessed. The
anticipated results are that one or more of these combinations will produce a
robust binding protype and thus targeting the orthologous canine molecule could
provide a potent therapeutic benefit in treatment of canine
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.