* 2213580
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Evaluating hypotheses of long-term woody carbon dynamics with empirical data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Michael Dietze, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2027
* USD 315,984.00

Changes in the vegetation of the American Upper Midwest over a ten-thousand year
period, between the end of the last ice age and the 19th century are recorded in
fossil pollen buried in the sediments of lakes, swamps and bogs. It is necessary
to use this fossil record because written vegetation surveys did not begin until
the industrial period. Past investigation of these pollen assemblages has
revealed shifts in vegetation with climate change (such as post-glacial warming)
and natural disturbance (such as the wildfires that prevented trees from
invading prairies). This project takes advantage of new statistical and computer
modeling approaches to quantify post-glacial changes in Midwestern vegetation
and climate in terms that are useful to society (changes in the numbers and
biomass of trees on the landscape over centuries). Better quantification of pre-
industrial Midwestern vegetation is important for two reasons related to this
project. First, the pre-industrial landscape is a key benchmark for: land
managers (a baseline for conservation, timber management, etc.); global change
researchers (changes in pre-industrial vegetation biomass are among the most
uncertain components of the global carbon cycle); and the public (pre-industrial
vegetation helps define the character of the land). This project will engage
with each of these communities through: conferences, publicly-available
reconstructions of thousands of years of vegetation change, and free, online
education modules that will be taught to a broad array of students, from high-
schoolers to professional resource managers. Second, better quantification of
long-term vegetation fills a key gap in our basic understanding of the ecology
of vegetation change. Researchers know that changing climate and disturbances,
like fire, can change vegetation suddenly and irreversibly over large areas, but
the absence of well-quantified records of long-term vegetation change has been
an obstacle to ecological understanding of how and when such changes actually
occur. This project uses an integrated modeling framework to ensure that the new
reconstructions of vegetation changes, which span centuries of tree-lifetimes,
will complement the existing understanding of vegetation change, which is
primarily based on data only collected over recent decades. In addition to the
conferences, public outreach and online training, this project will also educate
and train 4 graduate students in quantitative paleo-
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on and improves a recently-
developed statistical model of changes in aboveground woody biomass pools (AGWB)
across the Midwest over the last 10,000 years. These reconstructions of AGWB
over space and time are the data that test a set of hypotheses about Midwestern
vegetation history centered on the overall question of whether internal
feedbacks (for example between vegetation and wildfire) played important roles
in stabilizing or destabilizing the response of AGWB to changing climates over
the Holocene, and whether modern land-use has altered these feedbacks
significantly. The project will make joint probabilistic inference about
changing biomass pools, demographic rates in forests, and climate drivers
constrained by the AGWB reconstructions, an ensemble of modeled Holocene climate
trajectories, and alternative models of the ecological process of forest change.
Nonlinear threshold responses of vegetation to climate are a special focus of
these retrospective “hindcasts”. The quantitative tools developed in the project
underlie education and outreach programs to students, land managers, and other
researchers through exercises, modules, and curricula that the researchers will
test-drive in a diverse set of short courses, then made available to the public
online. Training of four graduate students will also be interwoven with the
research and outreach objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.