* 2213600
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Climate legacies and timescales of influence on carbon cycle processes in drylands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Nicholas Parazoo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2027
* USD 795,301.00

Earth’s climate is changing, and climate extremes such as droughts and heat
waves are becoming more common. Such changes are impacting vegetation
productivity, the carbon cycle, and the water cycle, especially in drier regions
in the western United States. Studies are showing that not only do extreme
climate events affect ecosystems when those events occur, but the effects
continue long after the events themselves. This lingering effect of climate
extremes, especially drought events, is often referred to as a climate or
drought “legacy.” Studies also suggest that past conditions, regardless of
whether extreme or not, continue to affect ecosystems after they have occurred,
such that ecosystems have “memory” of those past conditions. The importance of
such legacies and memory may be critical to understanding how continued climate
change will impact Earth’s ecosystems and carbon balance. This project will
study the legacies and memory of climate variables — such as precipitation,
drought, and temperature — on tree growth, forest productivity, and ecosystem
carbon fluxes in the western US. Researchers will analyze a huge volume of data
of different types, including annual tree growth, carbon variability, and
vegetation production, and will use computer simulations to predict future
trends. Results from this work will increase understanding of how plants and
ecosystems are impacted by climate variability and extreme climate events, which
may be useful for mitigating the impacts of climate change. Post-doctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate trainees will participate in
the research. The project will share knowledge gained from this research with
local and regional communities via collaborations with professional river
guides, state and federal agencies, and scientists and land managers interested
in understanding the impacts of drought on vegetation, ecosystems, and the
carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to quantify legacies
(prolonged impacts of an extreme event) and memory (timescales of influence,
whether extreme or not) of climate-related drivers on key C-cycle components,
over a range of spatial and temporal scales across drylands in the western US.
This study will (1) quantify the magnitude and duration of climate (e.g.,
drought) legacies on C fluxes; (2) evaluate climatic memory and the timescales
over which climate drivers impact C fluxes; (3) determine how legacy and memory
responses vary across drylands in the western US; and (4) evaluate the
importance of legacies and memory for the C cycle. To address these, this study
will employ modern statistical methods (wavelet analyses, machine learning,
Bayesian models) to integrate diverse datasets varying in temporal and spatial
coverage and resolution, including multiple tree-ring networks, ground-based
flux towers, satellite data products, model-data fusion products, and biospheric
model outputs. This study will provide insights into the magnitude and duration
of climate-C-cycle legacies, how these legacies vary across space, and the
potential mechanisms giving rise to such legacies. The core project team (8
researchers) includes 3 early career scientists, and multiple additional
participants (postdocs, PhD students, undergraduates). The project includes a
variety of training and outreach activities aimed at the scientific community,
land and resource managers, agency stakeholders, and the public. Activities
include organizing sessions for scientific meetings, a workshop focused on
“Drought Legacies and Terrestrial C-cycling,” facilitating interagency
communication via collaborations with the National Integrated Drought
Information System, working with professional guide programs in the Colorado
Plateau region to disseminate knowledge to the public, and developing hands-on
educational materials for the Flagstaff Festival of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.