* 2213443
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigation of topological spin texture and magnetoelectric coupling in non-centrosymmetric orthorhombic oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Chetan Dhital, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 223,728.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project directly supports the development
of materials that possess topological spin textures, and investigate their
formation, control mechanisms and properties. Topological spin textures are
nanosized magnets found in certain classes of materials and can be used to
produce energy-efficient, fast-paced, and reliable information storage, and
transfer devices. Furthermore, the works performed through this project train
undergraduate students from a historically underserved community in material
synthesis and characterization techniques to prepare the next generation of a
scientifically skilled workforce. The undergraduate students will be trained in
all aspects of material physics research from conceptualization to publication
so that they can serve as role models in their community. This research also
supports the development of educational materials with high school science
teachers serving majority underrepresented communities in the diverse metro
Atlanta area. This project contributes to increasing the enrollment and
retention of students from historically underserved communities in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This LEAPS-MPS
project focuses on understanding the role played by crystal symmetries and
chemical constituents on the enhancement of the essential magnetic and spin-
orbit interactions that lead to topological magnetism and the associated
magnetoelectric behavior of non-centrosymmetric oxides. By taking the specific
example of chiral MMoTeO6 (M=Mn, Co, Fe, Cu, Ni) and polar RTWO6 (R=Rare earth,
T=Fe, Cr, V) oxides, this project investigates the following: (i) How do the
topological character, size, and stability of spin textures vary with chemical
compositions within the isostructural family of materials? (ii) Can
ferroelectric polarization be associated with the spin textures and manipulated
using an electric field? (iii) What are the quantitative and qualitative
differences in the magnetoelectric behavior of polar and chiral materials? This
work provides important insights into interactions responsible for the formation
of novel topological spin textures and coupling of such spin structures to
internal and external fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.