* 2213493
* LEAPS-MPS: Direct methods for data rich inverse problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Olalekan Babaniyi, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Scientific measurement is often based on indirect
inference. A famous example is the prediction of the then-undiscovered planet
Neptune in the 1840s based on observations of wiggles in the orbit of Uranus.
That is, by making close observations of Uranus, the existence of Neptune could
be inferred. That inference is the domain of the field of "inverse problems."
Continued growth in distributed and remote sensing (e.g. data from satellites,
imaging in the human body) opens a new realm of inverse problems, those with
distributed and full-field data, that call for the creation of new solution
methods. This project will focus on developing a special class of
computationally efficient methods, called direct methods, to infer various
quantities of interest from differential equation models of observed phenomena.
The research will be conducted at Rochester Institute of Technology, an
institution focussed mainly on undergraduate education, but with a recent push
towards growing its research program by the creation of several PhD programs
with small student cohort. This project aims to grow some of the PhD programs by
recruiting students from groups underrepresented in the STEM field. These
students will be trained in state of the art techniques to model and analyze
data, and will disseminate their findings through publications and presentations
at local and international workshops and conferences. These efforts aim to
increase the number of underrepresented individuals in the STEM work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing direct variational
formulations to solve inverse problems governed by differential equation models
where full field data are available. Specifically, the main focus is on
developing the direct error in constitutive equations formulation (DECE) for a
scalar wave inverse problem to solve for the wave speed of a material, given
observations of time harmonic wave fields. Current inverse problems formulations
for wave propagation problems either do not make full use of full field data
when it is available, and are hence computationally expensive, or they
completely fail for wave propagation problems with multiple observations and
unknown parameters. The project is expected to advance the mathematical analysis
of the DECE formulation for the complex scalar wave model by i) examining its
well-posedness, and ii) determining the number of wave fields needed to find a
unique solution. The DECE formulation will be especially useful in medical
imaging fields, where full field interior data are increasingly available, and
solving inverse problems efficiently is critical for practical detection and
diagnosis of disease. The research conducted will be done with the help of
students at all levels. Special effort will be made to recruit graduate students
from groups underrepresented in the STEM fields to help grow the math modeling
PhD program at Rochester Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.