* 2213694
* PFI-TT:  Using artificial intelligence to improve the accuracy of automated pavement condition data collection
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Feng Wang, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in enabling engineers to make sound
maintenance decisions through a novel, cost-effective, accurate and reliable
automated pavement condition data collection system. The proposed technology
should reduce the costs and improve the quality of pavement data collection. A
successful application of the new technology is expected to benefit society by
improving the maintenance of transportation infrastructure and, subsequently,
other infrastructure systems. One societal contribution of this project is the
acquisition, accession, management, and public sharing of pavement distress
images using industrial standards. Sharing the image data generated under this
project may ultimately improve pavement image processing abilities. Furthermore,
this project will provide entrepreneurial education and leadership development
opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher and graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is aimed at prototyping a
cost-effective, automated pavement condition data collection system. To overcome
the inaccuracy and reduce the costs associated with existing methods, the
proposed technology will use machine learning-based image processing algorithms,
which are more sophisticated than current rules-based methods. In addition, the
proposed system is expected to improve data quality assurance by using
analytical capabilities to identify problematic data and reduce errors. Finally,
the proposed system is expected to reduce the use of costly hardware, thereby
ensuring the financial sustainability of pavement and infrastructure management.
The core components of this system are: (1) cost-effective 3D (three
dimensional) image acquisition; (2) machine learning-based pavement image
processing algorithms; and (3) systemic design- and optimization-driven data
quality assurance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.