* 2213794
* CCRI: Planning-C: A Community Research Infrastructure for Integrated AI-Enabled Malware and Network Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,424.00

The severity, frequency, scope, and sophistication of cybercrimes and
cyberattacks have exploded in recent years, which resulted in huge financial
damages to organizations, and threatened the critical infrastructures (e.g.,
energy grid, water safety, transportation, health care) and the most basic
foundation of our society. While a host of open-source technologies for
cybersecurity and for artificial intelligence have been developed and used by
researchers in each community; research opportunities that leverage both of
these technologies to tackle problems at the intersection of cybersecurity and
artificial intelligence are not broadly accessible to cybersecurity community
and AI community due to challenges, such as protection of sensitive information
in network data, limited ground truth data, zero-day vulnerabilities, evasive
malware, and processing voluminous and high-dimensional network
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Planning-C project, conducted in collaboration
between Pennsylvania State University, Merit Network, and University of Texas at
Arlington, aims to broadly solicit inputs from the cyber security and AI
research communities regarding (1) research opportunities of cybersecurity that
can be addressed using artificial intelligence, and (2) associated
infrastructures needs that are not broadly available to the research
communities. A tangle output of the planning workshop is to generate and publish
a report in a suitable venue. The outcome of this planning project will identify
critical cybersecurity problems that can benefit from AI-enabled solutions as
well as infrastructure requirements for these AI-enabled cyber security research
that are not broadly accessible to the cybersecurity community and the AI
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identification of these research
opportunities and infrastructure needs at the intersection of cybersecurity and
artificial intelligence will expedite the selection, integration, and adaptation
of relevant open-source software tools and infrastructures, as well as the
creation of new tools, as needed. These tools and infrastructures will not only
accelerate the critically needed advancement of cyber security solutions using
AI, but also broaden the participation of early career scholars and students
from under-represented groups in STEM in these research opportunities to further
enhance the diversity of next-generation cybersecurity and AI
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.