* 2213255
* I-Corps: Edge Intelligence Platform for Continuous Monitoring in Smart Infrastructures
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Salah Aldin Faroughi, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sensor-based surveying used by both mature and emerging
industries to solve complicated problems. The proposed solution will improve
edge data intelligence efficiency in the most-needed sectors, such as mining and
construction, where continuous hazard monitoring is needed to protect people
from fatal disasters; geothermal and carbon capture and storage (CCS) facilities
where a cost-effective continuous site monitoring is required to scale up; naval
applications where real-time and continuous structural monitoring can
dramatically reduce vessel sinking causing deaths and catastrophic pollution.
When looking at CCS, important considerations include proper site selection and
characterization (technical issues) and the overall cost of continuous
monitoring (economic issue). These issues hinder scaling up both the volume and
the number of injection sites that are required for successful CCS projects. Our
solution can significantly reduce uncertainties in site selection and reduce
cost by managing large volumes of monitoring data intelligently. This project
minimizes a myriad of technical and economic concerns and makes the federal
government and private and/or public companies more interested in CCS, which can
promote carbon storage towards the number one climate change mitigation
approach. Thus, this project will greatly boost the market of continuous
monitoring and potentially will deepen our capability to detect, forecast, and
prevent environmental and life-threatening risks in many
industries.â€‰&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a turnkey system with real-time diagnostic and prognostic
capabilities. A series of advanced data intelligence modules at the edge (i.e.,
light-weight data reduction and fusion algorithms), secure sensing architectures
(i.e., hardware and edge computing optimization) and cloud-deployable software
(i.e., interactive visualization) will be designed to minimize the rigorous
setup, time, cost, and complexity that the industry is currently facing when
handling, modeling, and visualizing multidimensional data, especially
distributed sensing data. This secure and reliable pipeline for high data
throughput will satisfy minimum computational complexity, memory consumption,
and run-time. The proposed solution is novel and can penetrate the market,
because all current technologies are limited as a result of the extremely large
data volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.