* 2213733
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: NEW: Open Community Platform for Sharing Vehicle Telematics Data for Research and Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Christos Papadopoulos, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 887,098.00

The University of Memphis, Colorado State University, and SRI International are
collaborating with commercial telematics service provider Geotab to build PIVOT
(Platform for Innovative use of Vehicle Open Telematics), a community-based
platform intended to catalyze the production and consumption of automotive and
heavy duty datasets and associated tools to support the CISE community pursuing
research in vehicle system cybersecurity, intelligent transportation, and smart
and connected communities. The platform component of PIVOT is the hardware and
software infrastructure needed to host the datasets, tools, and services. PIVOT
will provide the CISE community with in-vehicle datasets, telematics data, an
open source data repository, and new open source tools to help collect, process,
and analyze data. The user services will employ existing privacy controls as
well as enable researchers to further advance privacy approaches using PIVOT
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIVOT system contains five pillars of merit:
(a) a robust and reliable hardware/software platform upon which the system runs,
(b) the curation and sharing of the data and contextual information, (c)
researcher-centric services for sharing, securing, and evaluating datasets, (d)
common software-based tooling to collect, transform, combine, filter, and
visualize the data, and (e) extensive community outreach and engagement to
improve the data utility using design feedback mechanisms. The community will
benefit from access to new, hard-to-get CAN and telematics datasets, new tools
and tool add-ons to enhance researcher capabilities, and telematics from
millions of vehicles through our commercial collaborator. The project will also
strengthen the community by providing a forum to exchange ideas and resources,
and help researchers form and expand collaboration
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The community component of PIVOT focuses on
engagement, outreach, and feedback to create a synergistic system to support
research efforts. Successful execution of this project will result in new
datasets and tools available to the CISE community that will enable new,
innovative research in automotive and transportation-related areas, and
strengthen the research community through collaborations built around common
datasets, tools, and industry involvement. PIVOT will provide artifacts to
educate the next generation of automotive cyber engineers through classes in
computer science (networking, security, machine learning, digital forensics) as
well as classes in transportation and smart and connected communities. The
project will emphasize diversity through efforts targeting minority institutions
and underrepresented groups and by reaching out to students participating in the
industry-sponsored CyberAuto and CyberTruck Challenge events. PIVOT will
organize annual workshops to build and enhance community and support strong
advances in automotive security, smart transportation, smart cities and
communities, security, safety, privacy, sustainability, and energy.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PIVOT will be hosted at http://pivot-auto.org for the foreseeable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.