* 2213969
* Biodegradable Polymer Nanodiscs as Novel Lipoprotein-Mimicking Nanocarriers for Anticancer Drug Delivery with High Stability and Long Circulation Time
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Hongjun Liang, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 475,726.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;A disc-shaped flying saucer that presumably
navigates to Earth from a far away galaxy is awe-inspiring. Navigating through
the human blood stream is no small feat either. To efficiently deliver drugs
through blood circulation to reach deep-seated disease sites is one of the most
critical challenges in treating cancer, the second largest cause of fatality in
US and globally. Although significant strides have been made on developing
various nanocarriers to help with that, efficacious patient responses remain
modest compared to conventional drug formulations. The somewhat less stellar
performance of nanocarriers is attributed to their poor transport inside the
body. To address the deficiency, this project aims to develop a new family of
nanocarrier called polymer nanodiscs that mimic the high-density lipoprotein
nanoparticles (HDL) in human blood. The nascent form of HDL is well-known lipid
nanodisc that mediates highly efficient cholesterol transport from peripheral
cells back to the liver. Intriguingly, disc-shaped particles have been shown to
outperform spherical ones with prolonged blood circulation half-lives and higher
cellular internalization rates. Most nanocarriers under development are
spherical in shape because it is technically challenging to prepare disc-shaped
nanoparticles through chemical synthesis. This project will elucidate the design
principles of biocompatible block copolymers that self-assemble with membrane-
scaffold proteins (or membrane-scaffold polymers) into well-defined polymer
nanodiscs to carry tumor-specific targeting and drug release moieties. If
successful, it may bring forth another advance in harnessing nanotechnology for
cancer diagnostics and treatment. The design concepts may have broad impact in
other related fields, such as nanodisc-based immunotherapy, nanodisc-based
structural and functional studies of membrane proteins, and the development of
biomimetic 2-dimensional materials for applications in human health, clean
energy, and environment. Through the integrated education and outreach
activities, this project will help motivate graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students to pursue career paths in the interdisciplinary area of materials
science, nanoengineering, and biomedical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology has been widely anticipated to benefit the
diagnostic and treatment of cancers. Despite the significant strides in
nanocarrier development, efficacious patient responses remain modest compared to
conventional drug formulations. Clearly, a gap of knowledge exists on
nanocarrier design beyond simply controlling their sizes. The lipoprotein-
mimicking nanodiscs represent a novel family of 2-dimensional materials with
great potential for drug delivery, as mounting evidence has suggested that disc-
shaped particles outperform spherical ones with prolonged blood circulation
half-lives and higher cellular uptake. Adapting lipid nanodiscs (LNDs) for
anticancer drug delivery has attracted lots of attention, but as drug carriers
LNDs suffer from low stability, short shelf life, limited drug loading capacity,
and difficulty for chemical modifications. The objective of this project is to
elucidate the self-assembly principle between amphiphilic block and random
copolymers toward the formation of novel lipoprotein-mimicking polymer nanodiscs
(PNDs) with excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability, long-term
stability, high drug loading capacity, and facile modification chemistry for
anticancer drug delivery. Synthetic strategies to prepare well-defined
amphiphilic block copolymers that carry tumor-specific targeting and drug
release moieties will be developed, and the self-assembly behavior between model
block copolymers and membrane-scaffold proteins (MSPs) into PNDs will be
elucidated. De novo designed synthetic membrane-scaffold polymers (MSPols) that
potentially overcome the limitations of biologically-derived MSPs will also be
explored to develop fully synthetic PNDs for anticancer drug delivery. PNDs are
expected to break the limitations of LNDs without compromising their highly
sought-after size and shape that favor prolonged circulation half-lives and
enhanced cellular uptake, hence potentially bringing forth another advance in
harnessing nanotechnology for cancer treatment. Besides anticancer drug
delivery, this study will also fill a critical gap of knowledge on the rational
design of synthetic biodegradable MSPols that rival MSPs in encasing
nanodiscs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.