* 2213526
* LEAPS-MPS: Production of Solvated Electrons by Atmospheric Pressure Plasma Jets
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Adam Light, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,434.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Contamination of groundwater by poly-fluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) is increasingly recognized as a major environmental issue.
Sometimes called “forever chemicals,” these compounds bioaccumulate, can cause
adverse health outcomes, and are difficult to break down. Plasma technologies
offer promising avenues to remediation, especially via the production of free
electrons dissolved in water (“solvated electrons”). This award supports Dr.
Light at Colorado College in a project to study the production of solvated
electrons by atmospheric pressure plasma. The award will also provide the
resources to involve a significant number of undergraduates from minoritized
backgrounds in cutting edge research through a “research incubator” course and
funded summer research positions.

The overarching goal of this research program in the next five to ten years is
to understand the physics and chemistry involved in using low-temperature plasma
(LTP) to break apart and extract recalcitrant contaminants from water. The
project seeks to measure the time-dependent concentration of solvated electrons
at the water’s surface by adapting an existing spectroscopic technique.
Supercontinuum transient absorption spectroscopy is a well-established method
for studying time-resolved chemical and physical processes, but it has not yet
been applied to LTP or to the plasma/water interface. The development of this
diagnostic would open new avenues for time-resolved studies of LTP and of the
chemistry they drive. The proposed study will also illuminate the landscape of
atmospheric pressure plasma jets as sources for solvated electrons, yield
information about what plasma parameters are important to the process, and guide
efforts to optimize plasma sources for remediation applications. This award
funds a pilot “research incubator” course designed for first- and second-year
students from underrepresented backgrounds in order to lower the entry barrier
into undergraduate research positions. The course will run twice during the
grant period, with a cap of ten students each time. The award also establishes
six dedicated research stipends for low-income, minoritized, and first-
generation college students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.