* 2213054
* LEAPS-MPS: Molecular Engineering and Synergic Integration of Perovskite Nanomaterials with Thermoplastic Elastomers for Flexible Multifunctional Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Weinan Xu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,979.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft and stretchable displays, lighting, and other
optoelectronic devices are critical components in today’s world to improve the
quality and productivity of life, society, and industries. The development of
new and more powerful devices requires new functional materials. Semiconducting
perovskite nanomaterials are among the most promising ones to be used in next-
generation optoelectronic devices. Their further application, however, is
constrained by their poor stability and processability. With this LEAPS-MPS
project, Professor Weinan Xu at the University of Akron proposes to overcome
those limitations by designing soft and stretchable hybrid materials composed of
perovskite nanomaterials and thermoplastic elastomers. The soft copolymer matrix
protects the perovskite nanomaterials and at the same time controls their
alignment and assembly, so that multifunctional, highly stable, and stretchable
optical materials will be generated. This project will also contribute to the
education of next-generation polymer and materials scientists and engineers and
promote STEM education to the general public. Educational programs on
nanomaterials and polymers will be implemented with local schools and science
centers. The hands-on activities and demonstrations of nanomaterials and
polymers in our daily life will stimulate younger generations’ interests in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting perovskite nanomaterials have
promising applications in optoelectronics, energy conversion, advanced lighting
and displays. But several major challenges need to be addressed before their
full potential can be achieved, which include poor stability and the lack of
efficient nanopatterning methods. This LEAPS-MPS award aims to address those
challenges by integrating perovskite nanoparticles with block copolymer
thermoplastic elastomers in a molecularly precise and synergistic way. The
surface chemistry of the perovskite nanoparticles and the ionic state of the
polymer blocks in the thermoplastic elastomers will be designed and customized,
so that high compatibility and strong preferential interactions between the
perovskite nanoparticles and a particular polymer block will be achieved. Two or
multiple types of perovskite nanoparticles with different optical properties
will be simultaneously patterned based on their selective affinity with the
functionalized polymer blocks in the copolymers. Multifunctional, highly stable,
and stretchable perovskite-copolymer composite materials will be created and
systematically investigated with high-resolution microscopies, spectroscopies,
and multiscale simulation. This project is interdisciplinary, and it provides
opportunities for training students in different areas of materials chemistry,
colloidal science, microfabrication, and device
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.