* 2213451
* LEAPS-MPS: Braids and Mapping Class Groups: Investigating Left-orders, Twisting, and Positivity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Diana Hubbard, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 122,662.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns several
research questions in topology, which is the study of shapes. Topology can help
us investigate difficult and interesting questions, such as what the shape of
our universe is, how we can extract meaningful information from noisy data sets,
or how human DNA, which unravels to be several feet long, can fold up to fit
inside a cell. The project investigates mathematical properties of knots, which
are knotted up loops in three-dimensional space, and three-manifolds, which are
objects that locally look like the three-dimensional world we live in. The
central theme is to investigate how information about knots and three-manifolds
is dictated by two-dimensional information, namely, maps on surfaces. Turning a
three-dimensional question into a two-dimensional one is a powerful tool
throughout topology and geometry. In this project, knots can be represented by
objects called braids, and three-manifolds can be represented by objects called
open book decompositions, both of which give ways of associating a map on a
surface to a knot or three-manifold, respectively. One can ask how properties of
these maps dictate properties of the corresponding knot or three-manifold. The
investigator also plans to hold career preparation events, math circles in areas
of broad interest such as public health, and a distinguished speaker series at
her institution, with the goal of increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM and enhancing the research environment at her
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will undertake three
projects that investigate how properties of three-manifolds and knots are
dictated by two-dimensional information. The first project explores whether
results about braids relating to left-orders and twisting can be extended to
more general maps on surfaces, with potential applications to the study of
three-manifolds and the L-Space Conjecture. The second project asks whether the
Euler characteristics of open book decompositions for a given fixed three-
manifold are bounded, with potential applications to an open question in contact
geometry. The third project is an investigation of the notion of braid
positivity and knot cables, with potential applications to an open question of
Yasui.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.