* 2213622
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of context on emotional word processing in healthy younger and older adults
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Li-Chuan Ku, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 17,062.00

Emotional representations of a word depend on different sentential contexts. For
instance, “holiday” feels pleasant when it appears as a single word. But when it
is embedded in a sentential context, e.g., “holidays are stressful”, the
emotional connotation of the word can be instantaneously changed into something
negative. This project investigates the effect of context on the emotional
connotations of words in older adults, in two ways. First, older adults
typically show a positivity bias--i.e., the tendency to focus on positive
information. How do older adults update the emotional connotations of words in
positive or negative contexts, compared with younger adults? Second, in
emotionally ambiguous scenarios, would older adults predict positive endings, as
a result of their positivity bias? These findings shed light on the link between
sentence processing and emotion regulation, and how such age-related positivity
bias can be leveraged to improve older adults’ emotional well-being, which is a
pressing issue in this aging society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
web-based surveys and electroencephalography (EEG) to investigate how the
emotional representation of a word is retrieved, updated, and pre-activated
during language comprehension in older and younger adults. The overarching
hypothesis is that age-related positivity bias influences the affective features
of a word, not only during the reading of the target word given its preceding
context, but also the prediction or predicted features prior to reading the
target word. Two studies are conducted. One study examines whether and how age-
related positivity bias influences the updating of emotional features of a word
during sentence comprehension. Target words are embedded in positive or negative
sentences, e.g., "Holiday is stressful/wonderful", first and then are presented
again, e.g., "holiday". Brainwave analyses are performed at the first and the
second occurrences of the target word, to identify changes of emotional
representations of the word. The expected outcome is that older adults will be
more effective in contextual updating in a positive context than in a negative
context, in comparison to younger adults. The other study investigates whether
and how age-related positivity bias influences prediction of affective features
in emotionally ambiguous sentences, e.g., "Mary received the exam results".
Participants read such sentences first, and then an emotionally congruent or
incongruent target word, e.g., "pass" or "fail". The expected outcome is that
older adults will pre-activate positive features congruent with the positive
target, but incongruent with the negative target. These results will contribute
to emotional language comprehension and predictive mechanisms in language across
the lifespan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.