* 2213428
* I-Corps: Virtual Display Creation and Demonstration for Industry and Individual Designers
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Daniel Smalley, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a virtual display technology for media, science education and
other industries. This technology may have applications beyond traditional
display markets, and include volumetric mobile platforms, telepresence solutions
in autonomous vehicles, and educators using immersive classroom experiences.
Three-dimensional images and media cannot currently be projected onto a screen
at large distances. The proposed technology projects 3D media and augmented
reality without goggles, telepresence without screens, and large images from
small devices. The proposed optical trap display may make it possible for
scientists, designers, and engineers to customize designs for 3D visualization
at lower costs. Democratizing this technology may accelerate the pace and
diversity of augmented reality projects. Through these efforts, humans can
interact with digital data as a physical part of the world around
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
display that creates full-color, projected 3D images that can be seen from every
angle. The technology can make images larger than currently available. The
projected images can wrap around the user without use of imaging goggles and can
be generated with relatively low bandwidths compared to other 3D display
technologies. This technology seeks to create free-space volumetric display.
This solution uses a nearly invisible laser to move a micron-scale particle
where it is illuminated by red, green, blue light to form an aerial 3D image.
This technology is automatic and reusable. A prototype has been adapted for both
experienced and novice designers and engineers. This technology can be applied
to several industries and may become a valuable research tool to advance
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.