* 2213684
* PFI-RP: Artificial colors made sustainable
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* L. Jay Guo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project explores a sustainable way to color the
world around us. This technology has both commercial and sustainability
potential as an application for vehicle body paint, structural and non-
structural trim (including trim with complex geometries such as static sealing,
emblems, etc.), as well as chrome replacements. The proposed technology is
applicable to exterior and interior trim surfaces for transportation,
infrastructure, and many other applications. Currently, humans use about 30,000
tons of chemical colorant pigments every day, creating environment impact. Some
colorant products or processes are hazardous. Natural colorant pigments cannot
satisfy all the requirements for certain applications. Artificially-made
structural color may address some of the issues associated with natural pigment
including long-term sustainability. A proposed partnership with industry will
provide the opportunity to conduct extensive customer discovery, offering much
needed information and guidance to translate the technology to real world
applications, especially in selecting the best market-fit and most probable path
toward commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project explores
light interaction with a man-made physical structure that produces strong color
reflection or transmission. Such structural colors have received interest due to
their various advantages over the natural colorants and can complement
traditional pigments with enhanced visual effects and increased durability. Such
artificial “color” can be designed at virtually any spectrum band, providing
design freedom for the targetted products and applications. Layered thin film
stack structures can create a wide-range of colors with high brightness and high
chroma. The fabrication procedures only require thin film deposition, which
offers scalability. Machine learning-based inverse optical design facilitates
the generation of the “digital code” that can be reproduced with layered
structures to generate the desired color. Most of the colors can be produced
this way, including those with a highly desirable chrome look used in a vast
number of applications. To lower the manufacturing cost, cost-effective,
solution-based methods will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.