* 2213312
* MPS-Ascend: From Directly Imaged Planets to Directly Characterized Planets: A Multi-pronged Approach to Understand Planet Formation Processes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Raquel Martinez, Martinez, Raquel Angelina
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Raquel Martinez is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Martinez supports her
research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: From Directly Imaged Planets to Directly
Characterized Planets: A Multi-pronged Approach to Understand Planet Formation
Processes", under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution
for the fellowship the University of California, Irvine (UCI), and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Steph Sallum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will advance understanding of the origin, evolution, and demographics of gas
giant exoplanets and wide-orbit planetary-mass companions (PMCs). Current
theories of planet and star formation are unable to explain the observed
characteristics of PMCs largely because of inadequate statistics. The proposer
will reveal the dominant formation pathways of PMCs by efficiently building the
wide-orbit planetary-mass and substellar companion sample, then pursuing
detailed observational followup of new and known wide companion discoveries. The
PI will also be a member of the SCALES (Santa Cruz Array of Lenslets for
Exoplanet Spectroscopy) instrument team. SCALES is a mid-infrared high-contrast
integral-field spectrograph designed to detect and characterize
exoplanets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Martinez will organize weekly seminars and
implement a near-peer mentorship program for the Summer Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Fellowship (SURF) and Cal-Bridge/CAMPARE programs at UCI. She will
also mentor a SURF or CAMPARE student in a research project related to the
proposed work each summer during the MPS-Ascend Fellowship. The educational
activities will reach 5-10 undergraduate summer researchers each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.