* 2213690
* Energy-efficient phase-locked arrays of spin torque nano-oscillators based on current-induced torques in magnetic metals
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ilya Krivorotov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2025
* USD 405,000.00

Further advances in energy-efficiency and speed of computing require new
revolutionary approaches such as brain-inspired (neuromorphic) signal
processing. Neuromorphic devices based on conventional semiconductor components
are power-hungry. Therefore, new types of components are needed for neuromorphic
signal processing. One such promising component is a spin torque nano-oscillator
that consists of a magnetic and a non-magnetic metallic layer, electric current
flowing in the non-magnetic layer generates microwave electric signal in the
magnetic layer. The goal of this research project is to significantly improve
energy efficiency of spin torque nano-oscillator via demonstration of a new
method of microwave signal generation by electric current that flows in the
magnetic layer rather than the non-magnetic layer. It is expected that the
proposed method will reduce power consumption of spin torque nano-oscillators by
over 90 percent thereby enabling the advancement in computer technology.
Graduate and undergraduate students, including persons from underrepresented
groups, will be trained in device nanofabrication and characterization
techniques. This will contribute to training of the qualified workforce needed
for reestablishing the United States leadership in semiconductor chip
development and manufacturing. The PI will participate in middle school outreach
activity held twice a year. As a part of this activity, middle school students
will visit the PI’s lab and participate in hands-on experiments on magnetism,
superconductivity, vacuum technology and plasma
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-orbit torques are at the core of several
promising spintronic technologies, including non-volatile magnetic memory, spin
torque nano-oscillators for non-Boolean signal processing and ultrasensitive
microwave detectors. Fundamental understanding of spin-orbit torques is crucial
for the development of these devices. In this project, a new class of spin-orbit
torques – universal self-generated spin-orbit torques in ferromagnetic metals
will be studied. These torques are self-generated because they are applied to
magnetization of the ferromagnet in which they are produced, and are universal
because their presence is expected in all types of ferromagnetic metals
independent of their crystal structure. The torques will be measured by spin-
torque ferromagnetic resonance in nanowire- and nanocross-based structures
prepared using e-beam lithography from epitaxial and polycrystalline magnetic
multilayers deposited by magnetron sputtering. Two major types of self-generated
torques, anomalous Hall torque and planar Hall torque, will be studied, and
ferromagnetic systems maximizing the magnitude of these torques for
technological applications will be determined. To illustrate the transformative
potential of the novel torques, highly energy-efficient phase-locked arrays of
spin torque nano-oscillators will be demonstrated. Potential of these devices
for neuromorphic signal processing will be evaluated. Operation of such spin
torque oscillator arrays in zero magnetic field will be demonstrated in
structures with interfacial and strain-induced magnetic anisotropy. Energy
efficiency of spin torque nano-oscillators driven by universal self-generated
spin-orbit torques will be compared to that of spin torque nano-oscillators
driven by spin-orbit torques from topological insulators and Weyl
semimetals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.