* 2213827
* CCRI: Planning-C: Developing a Minecraft-based Testbed for Evaluating Human-AI Teaming Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Ashish Amresh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,996.00

Human AI Teaming (HAT) is an emerging and rapidly evolving field where physical
and virtual spaces require rapid strategic and tactical decision-making. In the
context of national security, it is imperative to develop tools that can
accelerate what is known as the observation to action loop, enabling decision
makers to take swift and effective action that can reduce the impacts of our
adversarial threats. It is common for teams to operate in dynamic and uncertain
environments and they will require not only cooperation between human and
artificial agents, but the use of artificial intelligence (AI) to help structure
those teams, create plans of actions, execute those plans, and adapt plans as
the environment and goals change. This integration between human and artificial
agents can be used to enhance the speed and accuracy of human decision makers;
automate the generation, evaluation, and execution of mission plans; and improve
training effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CISE Computing Research
Infrastructure (CCRI) planning grant will undertake an exhaustive community-
centric requirements gathering, testing and finalization process that would
result in a comprehensive set of features necessary to build a software suite
comprising of tools that would improve the effectiveness of human AI teams.
Specifically, the proposed software testbed would be flexible and customizable
to meet the needs of a broad community of AI researchers and helps them
accelerate the development of AI agents that are designed to work in Human AI
teams. By organizing the AI community into multiple working groups and
disseminating the results via a workshop, the project aims to develop the
requirements for modifying the popular Minecraft gaming platform including the
data engineering, testing and evaluation requirements for tools that would
achieve the desired goals within the HAT community of researchers. The team
builds upon prior success in using Minecraft for conducting HAT experiments in
Urban Search and Rescue (USR) based settings and broaden its use among AI
researchers who would be interested in developing and testing HAT experiments.
The resulting community feedback would be integrated into a CCRI full proposal
that aims to build the software suite based on the requirements arising from the
activities conducted via the planning grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.