* 2213695
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimization of a Novel Compliant Mechanisms-Based Laparoscope Cleaning Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jacob Sheffield, BLOOM SURGICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel product for ensuring proper
visualization through intraoperative scopes during laparoscopic procedures.
Worldwide, 13 million laparoscopic surgeries are performed each year. Surgeons
require proper visualization of the operating site which entails continually
wiping the lens, reinserting the scope, relocating the surgical site, and then
resuming the surgery. This difficulty in visualization results in the need to
temporarily halt the operation and potentially lose critical focus of the
surgical area in order to restore the surgical field of view. Surgeons repeat
this process an average of six times per hour, accounting for nearly 1/3 of the
operating time. This time delay results in an estimated loss of 336,000 hours of
operating room procedure time and $1.25 billion in productivity losses in the
United States alone each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase 1 project
will develop operating prototypes of a novel, flexible, micro-mechanical
mechanism with multiple degrees of freedom. The device integrates flexible and
conforming mechanisms with a wiping blade to enable real time wiping of surgical
scopes and ports. This technology enables surgeons to quickly and
intraoperatively re-enable laparoscope vision within the patient. The technical
challenges of the project include the development of a computational engineering
model that optimizes user control of off-axis stiffness, force response, and
stress. The team will also need to ensure the solution has sufficient fatigue
life and predictable mechanical response throughout the duration of the
procedure. Computational engineering models will be used to design and develop
several manufacturable prototypes, which will be tested and validated with
several currently available laparoscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.