* 2213097
* MPS-Ascend: The C*-Algebraic Mackey Bijection for Real Reductive Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Angel Roman, Roman, Angel R
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Angel Roman is awarded a National Science Foundation
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities related to
broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to
Dr. Roman supports the research project entitled "The C*-Algebraic Mackey
Bijection for Real Reductive Groups", under the mentorship of a sponsoring
scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is Washington University in
St. Louis, Missouri, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Xiang Tang.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to examine the Mackey bijection between tempered,
irreducible unitary representations of a real reductive group and the unitary
irreducible representations of its Cartan motion groups in greater detail
through the theory of C*-algebras and through continuous fields of C*-algebras.
Building on PI’s prior research, the PI will work with collaborators to better
understand the cyclic homology of Harish-Chandra Schwartz algebras, an object of
study in noncommutative geometry, using the embedding result and Mackey
correspondence. The broadening participation activities are three-fold. The PI
will collaborate with researchers in Puerto Rico to organize student-oriented
conferences in Puerto Rico and help mentor Latin American students. Using the
leadership development skills the PI used as a Taekwondo coach at Penn State,
the PI will engage in graduate student and postdoctoral scholar's professional
development through a working seminar on “Noncommutative geometry and
Representation Theory.” Last but not the least, as a Hard-of-Hearing
mathematician, the PI brings valuable insight to the issues faced by this
community with transcription and captions for technical terms in mathematics.
The PI will work with Gallaudet University, a premier university for the Deaf
and Hard-of-Hearing with an undergraduate program in mathematics, in developing
better resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.