* 2213275
* MPS-Ascend: Can the Protostellar Magnetic Field be Used as a Signpost for Binary Formation Pathway?
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Erin Cox, Cox, Erin
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Dr. Erin Cox is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Cox supports her
research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Can the Protostellar Magnetic Field be
Used as a Signpost for Binary Formation Pathway?", under the mentorship of a
sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is Northwestern
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Giles
Novak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The star formation rate of the Milky Way is
extremely inefficient (~ 1-10%) and the only way to account for this
inefficiency in simulations is when magnetic fields are included. Magnetic
fields are difficult to observe and thus they remain one of the least understood
aspects of the star formation process. This project will establish a new
millimeter-wave Legacy Survey-- The Collapsing Magnetic Cores (CMC) Survey--
which will map the magnetic field of ~20 protostellar cores with unprecedented
resolution. The CMC survey will provide the field with a revolutionary dataset
showing exquisite maps of this unobserved area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
develop an Introduction to Computational Logics class for the Northwestern
Prisoners Education Project (NPEP). Black and Hispanic men are
disproportionately represented in the US prison population. By developing and
teaching this new class to the cohorts in NPEP, the PI will be contributing to
the education of these students. NPEP is a degree granting program, and this new
class will be directly involving these students in mathematical and physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.