* 2213658
* New Approaches for Dynamic Graph Anomaly Detection, Prediction, and  Explanation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shen Shyang Ho, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 273,047.00

Anomaly detection is a machine learning task which has many practical
applications such as intrusion detection, fraud detection, medical diagnosis,
defect detection during manufacturing process, suspicious behavior detection,
etc. Some of these real-world applications exist in a dynamic environment which
require real-time detection of anomalies in a data streaming setting. Detecting,
explaining and predicting anomalies (e.g., likely outages in a power grid, rapid
spread of virus, etc.) are important tasks that affect the life of people and
organizational decision making. The main significant impacts of our project to
society are: (i) new capabilities to provide accurate early warnings for
anomalies and (ii) previously unavailable explanation capability to provide
trustworthy warnings of anomaly to decision makers and general public. Early
detection and prediction of anomalies allow decision makers and first responders
more time to prepare and overcome the anomalies' adverse effects. The success of
our project benefits agencies and local governments that require the planning
and allocation of resources to handle anomalies in a timely manner. Moreover,
well explained anomaly leads to better mitigation solutions and resource
allocation by government agencies and also better individual decision by the
general public. Towards this end, every stakeholder will benefit from early
detection and prediction together with a clearer understanding of the anomaly to
develop better responses to the imminent abnormal event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing interest in real-time anomaly detection
applications involving interacting entities such as sensor network, social
network, computer network, and power grid that can be modeled using evolving
graphs. The major research gap in dynamic graph anomaly detection is that there
is no existing framework that can handle real-time dynamic graph anomaly
detection, prediction, and explanation tasks within a single system. Moreover,
there is a lack of theory to justify anomaly detection performance (i.e., false
positive rate, delay time) for existing methods. The proposed three-year
research aims to: (i) design an effective computational strategy for false
positive control and reduction by multi-view martingale decision process for
dynamic graph anomaly detection, (ii) design a computational strategy for delay
time reduction using real time dynamic graph anomaly prediction, and (iii)
explore a new time-dependent anomaly explanation model driven by the multi-view
decision process together with anomaly identification in graph. The long-term
objective of this project is to design a reliable and effective integrated real-
time anomaly detection and explanation framework for a complex
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.