* 2213919
* STEM Pathways for Rural Youth: Developing STEM Identity Through the Outdoors
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sam Catherine Johnston, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

For some rural communities, the outdoor recreation ecosystem is an integral part
of the STEM learning ecosystem that connects rural youth with STEM and STEM
career pathways. Landowners and forest managers construct and fly drones to
inventory, map, and monitor resources. Hatcheries monitor fish levels and
sustain populations for recreational fisheries. Backcountry skiers depend on
snow science and avalanche forecasts to assess conditions. Outdoor recreation
that youth in rural communities are currently engaging in can be sources of
opportunities and experiences for cultivating their STEM identities and career
aspirations. Existing studies have shown the promise of specific, one-time
interventions and discrete activities, none have situated activities in a
broader ecosystem framework comprising a nascent and growing economic sector
that is currently shaping rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilot and
Feasibility project brings together CAST, a non-profit education research
organization, the University of New Hampshire (UNH), and outdoor-recreation and
informal STEM community-based youth-serving organizations in New Hampshire (NH).
In particular, this study will investigate the contributions of youth's
participation in (or aversion of) outdoor recreation on developing high school
aged students' STEM identities and considerations of careers in STEM through
outdoor recreation. Researchers seek to address three questions: How can outdoor
recreation be used as an informal STEM learning context to broaden participation
for underrepresented rural youth who face known barriers to the traditional
learning experiences necessary for developing positive STEM identities? How can
outdoor recreation be used to increase the STEM career pathways for
underrepresented rural youth? How do people in different positions in the STEM
ecosystem view STEM as part of the future OR economy? In this qualitative
dominant research study, investigators will employ experience sampling to
involve 30 youth and 10 adults in rural communities in collecting their moments
of engaging in outdoor recreation, and photovoice to encourage them to examine
and reflect on these moments. Another group of 20 youth and 30 adults from the
community will be interviewed to consider how members of the community perceives
viability of outdoor recreation as a part of future STEM career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.