* 2213341
* LEAPS-MPS: CAS: Photoactivation of Metal-Oxo Bonds in Heterobinuclear Systems for Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Shabnam Hematian, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,988.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Shabnam Hematian and her research team at the University of North Carolina at
Greensboro will study catalytic processes to generate value-added chemicals from
light, air, and simple compounds. As the demand for green chemistry and
sustainable chemical design increases, the use of green energy sources such as
light, rather than high energy chemical reagents, offers an energy-efficient
means to transform cheap and unreactive raw materials into chemicals with higher
molecular complexity and value. A photocatalyst must be used to capture the
light and then act as an intermediary in the bond rearrangement reaction to form
target products. Also, harnessing the oxidizing power of oxygen in the air
(i.e., dioxygen) as a green terminal oxidant is of great interest. In this
project, Professor Hematian and her team will attempt to develop new
photocatalysts that can utilize dioxygen and absorb light to drive the air-
oxidation of hydrocarbons, such as those found in petroleum products, to form
alcohols, epoxides, and other valuable chemical products. The project will also
provide research opportunities for local high school and community college
students at earlier stages of their academic life as well as homeschooled high
school students that typically have no access to these opportunities. A primary
objective of the project to recruit students who are historically
underrepresented in STEM, thus broadening participation and retention in the
chemistry field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on development of
oxo-bridged heterobinuclear systems, in which the two different metal centers,
such as iron and copper, are attached through an oxo ligand, via dioxygen
chemistry. This class of oxo-bridged assemblies will then be investigated for
the photoactivation of their metal-oxo bonds and overall catalytic activities.
This effort and the modularity of the oxo-bridged assemblies will provide deeper
insights into the reaction pathways to guide the design of next-generation
aerobic photocatalysts in the pursuit of developing green oxidation processes.
The project will also introduce research opportunities to homeschooled high
school students and low-income first-generation community college students and
will encourage high school students, particularly females and underrepresented
minorities, to partake in the research experience as early as their Sophomore or
Junior years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.