* 2213137
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel handheld spectroscopy for the early detection of crop afflictions
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Robert Pellegrino, ADVANCED GROWING RESOURCES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,786.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on
development of a handheld optical scanner that integrates precise imaging with
optical spectroscopy. Although this technology has broad applications ranging
from industrial quality control to education, the beachhead sector to be
addressed is precision agriculture. To feed a growing population of 10 billion
in 2050, agricultural production will need to increase by 70% over the next 30
years. Critical to this mission is the development of innovative tools and
strategies for crop protection and health management to preserve the worldâ€™s
food supply. The potential customers in this segment are crop growers,
consultants, and field scouts aiming to act early while reducing the use of
harmful and costly chemicals. The global crop monitoring market was estimated at
$2 billion in 2019 and is anticipated to reach $6 billion by 2027, growing at
15.3% annually. The sensing and imaging segment accounted for 49.3% of the
market in 2019. This technology has the potential to support the adoption of
more sustainable agricultural practices as well as the economic viability of
small- to medium-scale farm operations in the U.S. by providing an accessible
and affordable tool for disease detection and crop health
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
commercial development of novel and affordable imaging spectroscopy technology
in addition to application-specific analytics for the early detection of crop
afflictions. Optical components of the scanning device that will be designed-
for-manufacturing in this project bridge the current gap created by systems that
trade the detection capabilities of spectral resolution for spatial resolution.
The scanner will be deployed to collect data on grapes, a key, high-value crop
that is susceptible to a number of afflictions that destroy yields before the
human eye can detect them. Machine learning algorithms will be developed from
this data to detect stressed and diseased states in the plant before they become
apparent to visual inspection. These models will then be validated in the field
with user feedback from horticultural experts and customers. Successful
implementation of this technology will facilitate the detection of crop diseases
before they spread. This detection capability can increase yields while reducing
the use of costly and environmentally-harmful pesticides and
fertilizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.