* 2213288
* MPS-Ascend: Spearheading Inclusive Mentoring and Multimessenger Training with a Census of Potential Counterpart Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aaron Stemo, Stemo, Aaron
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Aaron Stemo is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Stemo supports his
research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Spearheading Inclusive Mentoring and
Multimessenger Training with a Census of Potential Counterpart Galaxies", under
the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the
fellowship is Vanderbilt University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jessie
Runnoe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inspiral and merger of massive black hole
binaries (MBHB) - those with masses around 10 million solar masses - will
produce strong Gravitational Waves (GW) that will be detectable by the upcoming
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) satellite. LISA will be able to detect
GWs from MBHB up to a month before the black holes coalesce and provide
parameters to identify electromagnetic counterparts in galaxy surveys. The
uncertainty on these parameters is called an error volume. The PI will create a
census of potential counterpart galaxies to LISAâ€™s GW detections using an
ensemble of survey data. This will address three key science goals: 1) create a
framework to identify galaxy counterparts to LISA MBHB GW detections in survey
data, 2) establish how depth, area, and wavelength coverage affects the ability
to isolate EM counterparts to LISA MBHB GW detections, and 3) determine the
likely properties of the first multimessenger detected
MBHBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMIT (Establishing Multimessenger Astronomy
Inclusive Training ) program builds on the success of the Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge
Program by incorporating a cross-discipline curriculum, transferable skill
development, and a breadth of technical expertise training required for the
future workforce, all built around a foundation of inclusive practices. Stemo
will join EMIT as an MPS-Ascend Postdoctoral Fellow and will contribute to
recruitment, mentoring and training of graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.