* 2213693
* PFI-TT: Development and Commercialization of a Microscale Three-Dimentional (3D) Printer for Multi-materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Heng Pan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in addressing the rapidly growing
need in manufacturing smaller devices to support miniaturization of systems and
products. An increasing number of devices require smaller designs and
incorporate miniaturized components. The demand for miniaturized devices is
often unfulfilled due to the high costs associated with traditional
manufacturing methods and the lack of high-precision three dimensional (3D)
printing technology. The proposed micro- and nanoscale 3D printing technology is
expected to better enable miniaturization and the design and manufacture of
small components in different industries as diverse as medicine,
microelectronics, optics, biosensors, aerospace, defense, and high-frequency
communications. The graduate student will be simultaneously exposed to cutting-
edge research and entrepreneurial endeavors, which provides a strong training
opportunity for a future innovator and/or entrepreneur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to develop and demonstrate the scale-up of laser-based
micro and nanoscale printing process with the goal of commercializing the
technology. An ultrafast laser can be used to non-equilibrium heat nanocrystals,
trigger the spontaneous and localized fusion of the nanocrystals, and 3D print
micro/nanostructures. In this project, use-inspired and applied research will be
performed to increase the printing rate by orders of magnitude such that the
technique can be further evaluated against the various needs of potential
customers and basic scientists alike. The proposed micro/nano 3D printer will
allow direct metal printing with submicron resolution and multi-material
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.