* 2213411
* LEAPS-MPS: Precision Measurements of Neutron Beta Decay to Test Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jason Fry, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2024
* USD 211,202.00

This award supports Dr. Fry at Eastern Kentucky University in a project that
will impact science and society through research activities aimed at precisely
determining the neutron lifetime and two of its decay parameters (known as “a”
and “b”), as well as training and mentoring undergraduate students in technical
areas that will prepare them for careers in STEM fields. Precisely determining
the neutron’s decay parameters can provide sensitive tests of the Standard Model
and achieving that has been identified as a high priority in the current Long-
Range Plan for Nuclear Science by the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee.
Exciting preliminary results have already generated public interest and will
continue to do so with further results from this work. The scales of the neutron
“a” and “b” (Nab) experiment and the Beam Lifetime 3 (BL3) and its use of
techniques from many subfields of physics lends itself to hands-on student
participation and the development of a broad understanding of physical
principles and experimental techniques. The project will help train motivated
students at EKU, provide research opportunities in larger scale collaborations,
and conduct team-based science. The award will employ students at a living wage
at EKU, which will help retain students and increase future student success by
keeping them engaged in activities in their major, therefore further adding to
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the cornerstones of the
Standard Model of physics is the unitarity of the quark mixingmatrix (CKM
matrix). This symmetry can be tested by combining precise measurements of the
ratio of the axial-vector and vector coupling constants, and the neutron
lifetime. Currently, measurements of the neutron lifetime using different
methods are in conflict with each other and resolving this discrepancy is of
high intellectual priority. Additionally, the neutron lifetime has cosmological
implications as it was a key factor in the formation of the light elements
during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN). The uncertainty in the neutron lifetime
is the largest contribution to the uncertainty in the primordial helium
abundance, YP. In these cosmological models, YP is related to important
parameters such as the expansion of the universe and the number of effective
neutrino species; resolving the neutron lifetime puzzle is top priority in
nuclear science with implications in the interplay of cosmology and particle
physics. The award will involve students in hands-on experiences in the lab at
Eastern Kentucky University and at Oak Ridge National Lab. Student-centered
projects will include addressing an important systematic effect in the Nab
experiment by conducting an in-situ timing study to characterize silicon
detectors to less than or equal to 1 ns, developing complex Monte Carlo
simulations for systematic studies in the Nab and BL3 experiments, and to
develop a data analysis server for the BL3 experiment. This work will give
students an extraordinary experience at a regional university, travel to a
national lab and experience with a larger collaboration and help them carve out
meaningful roles in the scientific workforce. This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Physics within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.