* 2213116
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Pressure Stopped-Flow Instrument for Studying Biological Systems under Extreme Conditions
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 174,769.00

An award is made to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to support the purchase of
high-pressure stopped flow (HPSF) spectrophotometer/fluorimeter system. The
instrument is the first of its kind in the US and will be housed in the RPI
Analytical Biochemistry Core Facility. This will ensure that the unique cutting-
edge capabilities of the instrument will be accessible to undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, not only at RPI but also
to a broader community in the NY Capital Region and beyond. A number of
laboratories will use the instrument to address questions of basic biochemistry,
biology and evolutionary adaptations to extreme environments. The instrument
will also be used in a number of hands-on workshops that will include
undergraduate and graduate students. The participation in these workshops will
be extended to the laboratories from NSF-supported Research Coordination Network
on Extreme Biophysics (RCN-EB). In addition, the research that is enabled by
this instrument will be incorporated in community outreach programs to encourage
students into STEM fields and reaches out to talented underrepresented
minorities and young women in the NY Capital Region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrostatic pressure is an important environmental
variable that plays an essential role in biological adaptation for many
extremophilic organisms that inhabit the depth of the oceans and subsurface
crusts. The HPSF instrument will support research activities of a group of
investigators interested in understanding the molecular details of the effects
of high hydrostatic pressure on the biological function and functional dynamics
of biological macromolecules. The ability to experimentally monitor enzyme
kinetics as a function of temperature and pressure using the HPSF instrument is
critical for understanding of how hydrostatic pressure modulates the activity of
the enzymes. This in turn will lead to a better understanding of adaptation of
organisms to extreme pressures. High-hydrostatic pressure can also influence the
energy landscape for protein folding. High-energy states of proteins are
implicated in catalysis, binding, aggregation, allostery, and folding, thus
connecting the enzymatic function with their dynamic properties. The results of
these research efforts will be disseminated through active participation of
students and faculty at scientific conferences, symposia and workshops, through
peer-reviewed publications and public outreach
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.