* 2213250
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost Autonomous Sailboats for Long-Term Ocean Missions
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Andy Ruina, DYNAMIC LOCOMOTION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 248,418.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of new technologies to
facilitate ocean data collection. Understanding the oceans is important for
climate research, naval operations, maritime domain awareness, and ecosystem
preservation, yet traditional data collection methods using research ships,
commercial vessels, and buoys are cumbersome, expensive, and limited in their
scope of discovery. While satellites have enabled remote data collection, they
are affected by weather and limited in the types of data they collect. Uncrewed
Surface Vessels (USVs) - robotic boats - are promising, but even today’s
smallest oceangoing USVs are too costly for many applications. Thus, many
regions of Earth’s oceans are rarely studied. The technology developed here aims
to meet this need by enabling low-cost deployment of sensor-equipped robotic
fleets. Better access to ocean data may improve understanding of the ocean and
its resources, leading to better climate modeling, improved safety, economic
gains, and more effective regulations. Further, ocean monitoring and
surveillance is key to understanding ocean water quality, identifying
contaminants, and devising strategies to prevent future contamination and
pollution of the ocean’s waters. Ultimately, cost-effective oceanic data
collection may help sustain and grow the ocean
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project aims to develop a small, low-cost, autonomous robotic sailboat
that uses an innovative sail arrangement and weather-optimized navigation
system. With a combination of affordability and utility, the technology
represents a new approach for widespread oceanic data collection. This
technology can be deployed virtually anywhere in the ocean, can be small (2
meters or less), and is 100% wind- and solar-powered. The research in this
project seeks to further this technology by advancing two innovations: passive
directional stability and weather-optimized navigation. Unlike most other
robotic sailboats, the proposed USV does not need active steering to hold a
course, once set. Further, the proposed USV has a navigation system that
exploits the spatial and temporal variance in the weather and uses local weather
data to direct the boats to navigate more efficiently. This STTR proposal seeks
to address areas of high technical risk including stability of the steering
system under various wind and water conditions, resistance to traveling
excessively downwind during storms, effectiveness of the optimized navigation
system in both actual and simulated weather conditions at locations worldwide,
construction and performance of prototypes in lakes and oceans, and long-term
resistance to marine environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.