* 2213107
* SBIR Phase I:  Dual-Modality Tomography Core Scanner for Oil Saturation Estimation at the Wellsite (iTomoSoS)
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Michael Frenkel, ITOMOGRAPHY CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make oil exploration and production
(E&amp;P) operations less risky and economically and technically more efficient.
The new technology has the potential to achieve significant reductions in oil
exploration drilling costs. The technology will also increase long-term
commercial benefits for exploration and production companies due to more
accurate and reliable estimates of the recoverable reserves and production
planning over the decades-long reservoir lifecycle. These benefits will support
global economic growth by ensuring a continued supply of hydrocarbons for the US
and internationally during the critical transition to renewable energies. The
new technology being developed under this SBIR project will also reduce the
environmental impact, energy consumption, and overall carbon footprint of
offshore/onshore E&amp;P operations by reducing waste, pollution, and carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions, thereby directly benefiting future generations.
Successful completion of the project will further reinforce the leadership of
the US in utilization of advanced hydrocarbon E&amp;P technologies and support
the goal of energy independence from global markets by making US producers more
effective and competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of determining volumetric (3D)
hydrocarbon distribution throughout large-diameter long cores with high spatial
resolution (10 mm3), 95% accuracy, and 1 meter/hour throughput at the
offshore/onshore wellsite. Today, this is not possible with any technology,
i.e., logging data can be used to derive hydrocarbon estimates on a sparse set
of points along the wellbore, while “special core analysis” at onshore
laboratories takes weeks to complete. Neither of the current techniques can
closely match the resolution and accuracy offered by the proposed solution. The
disruptive innovation of this development is to combine 3-dimensional (3D) X-ray
Multi-Energy Computed Tomography (MECT) and Electrical Impedance Tomography
(EIT) in one wellsite core scanning instrument, thereby allowing for novel,
synergistic combination of the information provided by the MECT and EIT
modalities. Algorithms will be developed to combine the complementary datasets
to yield 3D hydrocarbon distribution in the cores in near real-time. These
algorithms will be tested on realistic digital core models. The ultimate goal of
Phase I is to demonstrate that the specified target accuracy, spatial
resolution, and scanning-imaging throughput for assessing 3D distribution of
hydrocarbons in large cores can be achieved with the new wellsite
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.