* 2213841
* Collaborative Research: From phylogeny to biomolecules: a cross-scale approach to understand the making of a unique carbon-concentrating mechanism in hornworts
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Fay-Wei Li, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2025
* USD 503,654.00

Nature’s carbon fixing enzyme, Rubisco, is notoriously inefficient - often
limiting the growth rate of photosynthetic organisms, including crop species.
Some organisms have found a way around this problem by packaging Rubisco into
compartments, called pyrenoids, which concentrate substrate CO2 around Rubisco
active sites. Hornworts are the only land plants that have a pyrenoid. This
project seeks to identify the hornwort pyrenoid components, characterize the
hornwort carbon-fixing enzyme (i.e. Rubisco) housed within the pyrenoids, and
determine how the various pyrenoid components interact with each other. The
results of this study will provide evolutionary, biochemical, and mechanistic
insights into the hornwort pyrenoid, and make a first step towards gathering the
requisite understanding to transplant hornwort pyrenoids into crop plants to
boost carbon fixation. This project will also train diverse undergraduates in a
range of computational and experimental techniques, including plant tissue
culture and transformation and bioinformatics. In addition, a three-part video
series will be produced to provide a fun and informative introduction to
hornwort diversity, evolution and pyrenoids, and distributed on YouTube and
other online platforms. The importance of hornwort and Rubisco research will be
further promoted through established podcast
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthesis is the source of energy for almost
every life on earth, and is often limited by the carbon fixing enzyme, Rubisco.
Some organisms have evolved ingenious ways to circumvent these limitations, such
as pyrenoids, which are a kind of membrane-less organelle that liquid-liquid
phase separates Rubisco from the stroma. Pyrenoids actively concentrate
substrate CO2 around Rubisco active sites, thereby greatly enhancing the
efficiency of carbon fixation. Hornworts are the only land plants with a
pyrenoid, and these have translational potential for improving C3 crop
efficiency. The fact that hornwort pyrenoids have been gained and lost over the
course of evolution offers a unique phylogenetic replication for comparative
studies. Putative pyrenoid components will be identified using comparative
genomics, RNA-seq, and proteomics, while leveraging repeated pyrenoid-
present/absent transitions. The subcellular localization of putative pyrenoid
components and Rubisco subunits will be validated using in vivo localization
approaches, and Rubisco populations structurally characterized. A
constructionist biology approach will identify and characterize interactions
between Rubisco and recombinantly-produced putative pyrenoid components in
vitro, and will be used to assess the potential for Rubisco phase
separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.