* 2213017
* SBIR Phase I:  Next-Generation Maximal Extractable Value (MEV) Proof Distributed Ledger Architecture
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Theresa Garcia, STARDUST LABS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,532.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to ensure robust consumer protection for financial
applications using distributed ledger technology (DLT). This project aims to
improve upon existing global financial infrastructure by replacing it with a
safe, open, accessible network powered by the proposed next-generation
distributed ledger architecture. Accessing traditional financial networks is a
major challenge, and often requires significant capital coupled with deep
industry connections. As DLT stands today, there are still challenges for it to
safely support financial applications. DLT vulnerabilities can cost users
billions of dollars and is leading to the same monopolistic dynamics that are
characteristic of traditional financial infrastructure. This project aims to
advance the foundation of distributed ledger technology to address these issues,
and deliver an accessible, safe, democratized financial infrastructure that can
operate on a global scale and support the untold myriad of value-added use cases
from companies that cannot sustain the high economic costs, or overcome the
accessibility barriers, of traditional financial
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project seeks to advance
distributed ledger technology to safely support financial primitives.
Transaction information in modern distributed ledgers is public during
origination, allowing validators to exploit this information and at times their
privileged position to attack every financial primitive. As an example, there
are issues with validators taking arbitrage opportunities and sequencing their
own transactions first. Financial best practices are to silo transactions into
distinct lifecycle stages to ensure consumer safety. This solution brings these
best practices to DLT through a cryptographic commitment scheme. Cryptographic
commitment schemes allow users to commit to an action without disclosing
sensitive details, however, the traditional process requires centralization to
coordinate the timing for disclosure. The primary research goal and objective
for this Phase I project is proving the viability of a decentralized commitment
scheme with real world latency and no centralized timekeeping or coordination
mechanism. The proposed architecture will allow users to initiate transactions
without including sensitive transaction details at origination. Without
sensitive transaction details, validators can no longer exploit this information
for their own gain, allowing this architecture to provide the security and
privacy necessary for improved safety for financial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.