* 2213875
* Climate and Cryosphere International Project Office of the World Climate Research Program
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2027
* USD 490,113.00

This project will support the establishment of the Climate and Cryosphere (CliC)
International Project Office of the World Climate Research Programme in the
United States and promote US leadership in this crucial research field. CliC is
currently located at the Bjerknes Centre for Climate Research in Norway until
the end of 2022; this project will establish the subsequent International
Project Office at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. The focus of CliC is
on organizing and implementing international research that improves
understanding of the cryosphere (the frozen part of the Earth, which includes
sea ice, icebergs, glaciers, ice sheets, lake ice, permafrost, and snow cover)
and its interactions with the global climate system. To this end, the CliC
International Project Office supports the underlying convening and
communications activities of CliC and ensures broad participation of the
cryospheric science community. The Broader Impacts of this project include
outreach to the science community, educational community, and general public
through workshops, seminars, meetings, publications, newsletters, and web-based
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CliC International Project Office (IPO)
will focus on engaging a diverse cryosphere research community, making
assessments of cryosphere loss and the impacts of that loss, making improvements
in model projections, and communicating cryosphere-related research, knowledge,
and projections with stakeholders. CliC will be led by a Director with
assistance of an Executive Officer and a part-time Communications Specialist.
The primary role of the IPO is to support the planning and implementation of
cryosphere-related activities of the World Climate Research Programme, as well
as research activities focused on cryosphere and climate (primarily through CliC
working groups and panels). The IPO assists in the planning, organization, and
management of CliC meetings, workshops, and conferences; develops and promotes
communication through a website and other social media; and initiates
international correspondence and carries out international liaisons at the
working level. A key element of its work is ensuring the widest possible
participation of all interested nations and persons in CliC activities, and
identifying and soliciting resources and logistical support to CliC project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.