* 2213823
* CCRI: Planning-C: TopoCloud: A New Community Testbed With Unique Network Topology Flexibility
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Ricci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 98,797.00

This project is focused on community formation and planning activities related
to TopoCloud, a new testbed for network experimentation. Compared to earlier
network testbeds, TopoCloud will give experimenters the ability to see and
modify a datacenter network's topology -- that is, the way in which its
components are interconnected. To provide experimenters with exclusive, low-
level access to programmable networking devices, all user-controlled networking
devices in TopoCloud will be connected to an operator-controlled network. This
network will be used to dynamically “rewire” servers and devices to physically
create private networks that are guaranteed to run at full
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Services provided by clouds and datacenters are at
the core of much of the online world, supporting websites, apps, and even
medical devices. The networks inside of these datacenters are critical
determinants of the datacenter's performance, robustness, and cost. TopoCloud
will be a unique resource that enables transformative research on the ways that
datacenter networks are built and managed. As a result, it aims to enable
research that will improve performance and lower costs in the networks that form
the foundation for many of the services used in people’s daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.