* 2213155
* SBIR Phase I:  An extravascular bipolar catheter for targeted nerve ablation with minimal collateral damage to surrounding tissues
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Tyler Melton, CARIDIAN MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 255,841.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel and emerging method for treating a
subset of heart failure patients. Despite modern medical regimen and device
therapies, heart failure affects 6 million Americans and remains a leading cause
of death and hospitalization in the United States. The proposed system and
approach aim to provide a novel procedure and treatment paradigm by leveraging
an established clinical access procedure for performing Greater Splanchnic
Ablation (GSN). The system would enable rapid and wider clinical adoption of the
emerging therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will develop a novel, minimally invasive, catheter-delivered,
venous procedure for performing extravascular Greater Splanchnic Ablation (GSN).
The proposed catheter system utilizes a clinically accepted venous approach in
order to perform extravascular denervation, while minimizing collateral (off-
target) damage to the other surrounding tissues. The objectives of this project
include designing and prototyping new devices that will enable localized energy
delivery and incorporate a detection system indicative of procedural success.
Both benchtop testing and pre-clinical animal model studies will be used to
access and ablate, verifying the function and performance of the
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.