* 2213518
* LEAPS-MPS:High Resolution Studies of Interacting Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Ryan Norris, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 248,151.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Symbiotic stars are a type of interacting binary system
consisting of a red giant that donates material to a white dwarf or neutron star
companion via winds and/or Roche-lobe overflow. They offer important insights
into stellar evolution in binary systems and the formation of binaries
containing neutron stars and/or black holes, and are believed to contribute a
not- insignificant fraction of Type Ia supernovae, which currently provide our
best means of measuring cosmic distances and the acceleration of the universe.
Determining the method and rate of mass transfer is key to answering questions
about their evolution and role as Type Ia progenitors. The principal
investigator (PI) will lead a team of students using optical interferometry to
measure precise shapes and radii of the red giant stars in a sample of known
symbiotic stars to observe the transfer of mass to the white dwarf/neutron star
companion. Few interferometric studies of symbiotic stars have been done to
date, and the proposed work promises to make a significant contribution to the
field by systematically obtaining some of the highest resolution images of any
star (apart from the sun) over a multi-year timeline. The project will provide
material for a Masterâ€™s Thesis and research mentoring for underserved student
populations and will support outreach initiatives to local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use the MIRC-X (H-band and J-band),
MYSTIC (K-band), and SPICA (optical) combiners on the Center for High Angular
Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) Array to collect optical interferometric data for
image reconstruction of these systems. In order to look for evidence of mass
transfer, they will need to observe these systems at different orbital
positions. As a result, these data will be collected regularly over the course
of the grant, with cadence depending on the orbital parameters of each system.
Systems with primary stars of angular diameter greater than 2 milli-arcseconds
will be used to facilitate imaging and search for elongation due to Roche-lobe
overflow. In order to determine the fundamental parameters of the primary and
identify the presence of dust, facilities such as SpeX on the NASA InfraRed
Telescope Facility (IRTF) will be used to obtain near-infrared spectroscopy. The
proposal will use advances in image reconstruction to improve the quality of
images produced using the data. New modelling techniques will also be developed
to search for elongation and disk formation in the
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.