* 2213299
* SBIR Phase II:  Multi Sub-System Miniaturization and Development for Semi-Truck Fuel Savings Device
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Sandra Manosalvas-Kjono, AEROMUTABLE CORPORATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is reducing fuel consumption, improving safety
and stability, and reducing the carbon footprint of the trucking industry while
increasing profitability. Over 70% of US freight tonnage is moved by trucks. At
highway speeds, aerodynamic drag uses over 65% of the total vehicle energy. The
proposed device modifies the aerodynamic behavior of semi-trucks using air
injection by allowing continuous optimization of aerodynamic performance. This
project will bring the pneumatic, sensor and artificial intelligence (AI)
control systems from proof-of-concept to commercialization. Having a commercial
product capable of determining and delivering the trailer’s best aerodynamic
profile based on real-time operating conditions may be a game-changer for the
trucking industry, as fuel is a significant operating cost. Commercializing this
system has the potential to create an energy savings for all US fleets, saving
more than 3 billion gallons of diesel fuel, reducing the release of more than
33.5 million tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, tripling trucking
company profits, and saving an annual $22 billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase II project proposes development of an aerodynamic add-on prototype
for semi-trucks to save fuel by dynamically changing the trailer’s aerodynamic
profile to accommodate diverse operating conditions. Objectives of this SBIR
Project are to evolve the device from prototype to the first commercially viable
release through system miniaturization and encapsulation, controller
optimization, and improved overall system performance, reliability, and safety.
Research conducted to miniaturize the overall system footprint will minimize any
additional operational impacts, ensuring widespread adoption and utilization
that maximizes fuel savings. Research to optimize the Artificial Intelligence-
Controller operation will maximize fuel savings because it will allow the device
to operate under a broader set of operational conditions. Further development to
improve system performance, reliability, and the addition of a safety assist
will improve the profit margins of the trucking industry while simultaneously
improving on-road safety for the public. The project seeks to deliver 10%
savings in operational costs for the trucking industry while improving the
efficiency and safety of their country-wide
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.