* 2213261
* MPS-Ascend: Structure-Preserving Algorithms and Their Applications in Plasma Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Allen Alvarez Loya, Alvarez Loya, Allen
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Allen Alvarez Loya is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Alvarez Loya supports the research project entitled "MPS-
Ascend: Structure-preserving algorithms and their applications in plasma
physics", under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution
for the fellowship is the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Qi Tang.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project PI Alvarez Loya
will consider two approaches to developing highly efficient and accurate
algorithms which preserve important physical or mathematical structures in
numerical simulations. The first approach is a divergence-free scalable MHD
solver. The second approach is based on structure-preserving NNs for
parameterized Hamiltonian systems. The critical piece of the proposed work is a
parameterized symplectic neural network that has a provable approximation
property significantly generalizing previous work in the area. To broaden
participation in MPS fields, the PI brings his own experience as a participating
student in programs such as University of Colorado's BOLD (Broadening
Opportunity through Leadership and Diversity) program and California State
University's PUMP (Preparing Undergraduates Through Mentoring towards PhDs) as
well as a substantial track record in mentoring students from under-represented
minority groups. Along with the sponsoring scientist Dr. Tang, the PI will co-
mentor undergraduate and graduate students at LANL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.