* 2213486
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: IC-Cloak: Integrated Circuit Cloaking against Reverse Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Fadi Kurdahi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Outsourcing the design and manufacturing of integrated circuits (ICs) has
minimized the operating and maintenance costs for a plethora of electronic
design companies with reduced time-to-market. However, such outsourcing and
benefits lead to complex verification of the fabricated ICs. Additionally, the
security threats in terms of reverse engineering the design have surfaced. To
address such reverse engineering of ICs, this project proposes insertion of
noise in the IC layout that minimizes the probability of success in IC reverse
engineering. The insertion of noise must also meet the standard IC design flow
requirements and pass the verification and validation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve this goal, this project integrates the adversarial machine learning with
the IC design flow to enable efficient IC design protection despite attacker
obtaining the scanning electron microscope (SEM)/layout images of a given IC. In
the first phase, the project develops a surrogate machine learning model to
detect the gates in SEM images, followed by incubation of novel adversarial
perturbations under spatial constraints on the SEM images. The perturbations
obtained through the adversarial learning will be evaluated and embedded in some
of the available open-source standard cell libraries, guaranteeing compatibility
with existing IC design flow tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion
of the project will result in a suite of secure IC cell libraries that are
compatible with IC design flows. Specifically, this project (i) develops novel
IC cell layouts that cannot be identified by an adversary despite obtaining the
images through reverse engineering; (ii) introduces novel adversarial
perturbation generation under spatial constraints. Due to the interdisciplinary
nature, the outcome of the project impacts a broad variety of researchers in the
domains of IC design and adversarial machine learning. The development of
library cells from this project will be outsourced with relevant licenses to
academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to
generated multiple types of data including IC layouts, SEM images, and cell
models. All the codes will be written using Python, and SystemC/Verilog (If
required). Fully functional and tested codes will be documented and will be made
available through GitHub. The website of PIs (http://mymason.gmu.edu/~spudukot)
will add a new page for downloading the source codes. Data will be retained at
GMU, UC Davis, and UC Irvine for a minimum of three years after conclusion of
the award. Data related to studentsâ€™ research work will be retained for four
years after the degree is awarded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.