* 2213699
* Compounded Disadvantage: Race, Criminal Record, and Access to Justice in Immigration Courts
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Emily Ryo, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2025
* USD 331,343.00

For immigrants, even minor and relatively routine interactions with law
enforcement—such as a traffic stop—can dramatically increase the chances of
detention and deportation. This is true even for lawful permanent residents and
those with deep social ties to the United States. Detention and deportation are
widely recognized as devastating life events with enduring negative consequences
not only for the individuals, but also for their families and surrounding
communities. Yet because there is no right to government-appointed counsel for
immigrants in removal proceedings, most immigrants lack legal representation. As
a result, immigrants in removal proceedings are one of the most vulnerable, yet
least legally protected groups in our justice system. This project investigates
how these immigrants fare in our immigration court system once they enter the
immigration adjudication process. Such an investigation is critical to
developing policies that promote a more fair and equitable justice system that
ensures access to justice for all individuals in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three key questions.
First, are there racial/ethnic disparities in case outcomes in removal
proceedings for immigrants with criminal history? Second, what is the role of
judicial bias in generating racial and ethnic disparities in these case
outcomes? Third, are immigrants of color less likely to have legal
representation in these proceedings, and are the benefits of legal
representation smaller for them even when they are represented? To address these
questions, this project will collect and analyze several major datasets on
immigration court cases and immigration judges in the United States. This unique
dataset will widely expand the study of immigration adjudication across multiple
disciplines including law, public policy, sociology, political science,
criminology, and other related fields. In addition, findings from this research
will generate new insights about how racial disparities across multiple legal
institutions can have mutually reinforcing effects that generate compounded
disadvantage for marginalized communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.