* 2213062
* SBIR Phase I:  Single broadband detector from visible to near infrared using the spin Seebeck effect
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Joshua Heiner, SLD PHOTONICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project will provide the medical field
with a broad response detector capable of pairing with cheaper disease
diagnostic tools for improved healthcare. Currently, there is not a commercially
available broadband detector that can capture visible light and near infrared
light. The Phase I SBIR effort will lead to an advanced detector capable of
spanning this light range and fulfilling this unmet need. As a commercial
product, this detector can be used in multiple commercial sectors including
unmanned vehicles, the medical field, and for the defense and security of the
nation. For example, in the medical field the ideal light for tissue penetration
is between visible and near infrared. The detector developed in this project
would permit optical scans of human bodies for disease diagnosis. The optical
scan will provide a cheaper and safer alternative in comparison to expensive MRI
technology and high-energy sources, such as x-rays, that result in radiological
exposure. The size of the global medical imaging market is currently valued at
$16 billion and the proposed work would help healthcare services in rural areas
have access to optical diagnosing services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor-
based detectors are limited to absorbing photons whose energy is equal to or
slightly greater than the electronic band gap of the semiconductor. As a result,
there is not a commercially available detector that can span 400-2200nm with
fast detection. The expected outcome of this project is a single broadband
detector, based off of the quantum spin Seebeck effect to generate a spin
current, that can span 400-2200nm with a flat quantum efficiency and a high
response time. The quantum efficiency (QE) of the patent-protected detector is
almost three orders of magnitude lower than semiconductor-based detectors and
the largest portion of the project is devoted to improving the QE to commercial
levels. The project will accomplish the following goals: 1) prove the
feasibility of increasing the quantum efficiency by two orders of magnitude, 2)
make a readout circuit board, 3) show detector capabilities through building a
benchtop-working prototype, and 4) design a compact prototype to be built during
Phase II. As a commercial product, this detector can be used in unmanned
vehicles, in the medical field, and for the defense and security of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.