* 2213634
* CCRI: Planning-C: Federated Cloud Platform for Networked Cyber Physical Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Ali Akoglu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,999.00

Networked Cyber-Physical Systems (NCPS) play an essential role in modern society
by efficiently controlling and managing critical services. Such N-CPS' have
noticeable advantages over traditional Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), including
ease of use and control, better services and system management, better resource
utilization, ability to use Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) components, and
improved reliability and fault-tolerant services at the cost of increased
complexity. Adopting N-CPS adds challenges in cybersecurity, system development,
systems management, and training, necessitating a federated cloud platform to
support collaborative N-CPS research. This Federated Cloud Platform for
Networked Cyber-Physical Systems (FCP-NCPS) will enable researchers to address
N-CPS security, interoperability, management, and training challenges while
enabling the creation of realistic datasets for research in data analytics and
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will enable: 1) to
organize research community and industry workshops in the Tucson Area, Baltimore
Area, and Detroit Area to discuss the needs and exchange research ideas
addressable through the FCP-NCPS; 2) Organizing workshops with teaching and K-12
schools in Tucson, Baltimore, and Detroit areas to discuss and understand their
needs to impart training in CPS to their students. These activities will allow:
1) Creation of a community cloud platform for seamless integration of diverse
CPS testbeds that are syntactically, semantically, and geographically separated
for realistic experimentation to address N-CPS security, interoperability,
management, and training challenges; 2) to develop a dataset collection
framework integrated into the federated system to address the scarcity of
realistic datasets in the fields of cybersecurity, and data analytics; 3) to
provide a community infrastructure for imparting realistic, practical (hands-on)
training to students to address the nation's N-CPS workforce
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FCP-NCPS being a scalable community
research platform, will also find applications in different fields, including
expanding interpretability and the trustworthiness of Artificial Intelligence
(AI), experimentation of medical devices and medical training practices, and
experimentation and evolution of autonomous systems, to name a few. Moreover,
the proposed Federated Cloud Platform will aid the global research community
(especially in the developing world) in performing realistic experimentation and
evaluating their research ideas to advance the frontiers of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information on FCP-NCPS is available at
https://fcpncps.arizona.edu. This site will host all the content for the FCP-
NCPS, including the project information, APIs, documentation, and datasets, for
the duration of the project and three years after its termination. This project
is a collaboration between the University of Arizona, University of Detroit-
Mercy, Johns Hopkins University, and Riverside
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.