* 2213000
* SBIR Phase I:  Renewable Cellulosic Emulsions
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Patricia Ferreira, Silvis Materials
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,810.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in unlocking the potential to use aqueous
colloidal emulsions instead of petroleum-based materials currently used to
manufacture a multitude of products including packaging, building materials,
coatings, paints, adhesives, cosmetics and even pharmaceuticals in the $26B
polymer emulsion industry. Such a replacement would address the emerging
national and global need to use sustainable raw materials and deliver net zero
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG). The resultant cleaner and greener products are
likely to accelerate the chemical industry's shift towards bio-based products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase I project proposes to create industrial
cellulosic emulsions using solvated cellulose with the use of ionic liquids. The
project aims to develop a high value, sustainable, recyclable solution that can
be offered at the same or lower price as an acrylic emulsion, minimizing cost
and maximizing throughput. The research will focus on the selection and pre-
treatment of cellulose, the selection of ionic liquids and surfactants, emulsion
process development, and optimization. Significant technical challenges are
posed by the requirements for higher cellulose loadings, control of emulsion
particle morphology, and emulsion stability, as well as the need to achieve an
economically attractive cost structure. Additional challenges come from tuning
these parameters for specific industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.