* 2213339
* LEAPS-MPS: Developing a Spectroscopic Map for Terminal Alkynes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Clyde Daly, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,989.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Raman spectroscopy is an important tool for the
investigation of a diverse array of molecular systems. Effective use of this
tool requires a clear and deep understanding of the vibrations within molecules
that are associated with the absorption of light with specific amounts of
energy. Alkynes, molecules with carbon-carbon triple bonds, have recently been
used in Raman spectroscopy to understand the structure and dynamics of proteins
that cells use to make new molecules. This new use of alkynes highlights the
need to more deeply understand alkyne vibrations and thus their Raman
spectroscopic signals. In this project, funded by the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor Clyde Daly
and his students at Haverford College will develop relationships called
“spectroscopic maps” between the Raman absorption of alkyne molecules and their
molecular environments. These maps can be used in molecular simulations to
better understand how cells make new molecules, relevant to the design of new
drugs and materials. This project will also advance computational and
experimental uses of Raman spectroscopy. The methods developed during this
project will be used to build educational materials for advanced and first year
courses related to vibrational spectroscopy. Engagement in the research of
students from backgrounds underrepresented in Mathematical and Physical Sciences
fields will be prioritized through avenues such as payment for work-study
(disproportionately low-income or first-generation college students) and
recruitment of students from disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage undergraduate
students in the development of a vibrational spectroscopic map for terminal
alkyne containing molecules at Haverford College. The carbon-carbon triple bond
stretching vibration of terminal alkynes has been increasingly used as a Raman
vibrational probe to understand proteins, other biological molecules, and
materials. A spectroscopic map will enable the calculation of Raman spectra from
molecular dynamics simulations. The process of building the spectroscopic map
will also uncover the reasons for the substantial Raman frequency shift of the
vibration of interest between different solvation environments. The aims for
this project are threefold: (1) create a spectroscopic map that is appropriate
for answering biophysical questions related to the acyl carrier protein relevant
to our collaborators; (2) advance the paradigm of spectroscopic map design to
include machine learning more fully as a tool and universality as a goal; (3)
understand the factors that lead to Raman frequency shifts in terminal
alkynes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.