* 2213839
* CCRI: Planning-C: A Framework for Development of Robots and IoT for Precision Agriculture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Wei Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Agriculture is one of the least digitized industries. The US can gain a drastic
advantage in this field by adopting automation for agriculture. Precision
agriculture consists of using robotics and automation to increase economic
benefits. Automation using robots and Internet of Things is a key enabling
factor for precision agriculture and can cut down greenhouse gas emissions and
minimize impact on soil, water, and air. Robotic technologies can save tens of
billions of dollars every year in herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer, and
irrigation costs. They can eliminate the use of billions of pounds of chemicals
that are harmful to the ecosystem. In this project, a team of researchers from
California, North Dakota, Texas, and New Hampshire, will plan and design a
computer modeling software for robots and Internet of Things for precision
agriculture. This software will enable scientists and engineers to deploy and
test new robots and devices virtually in a computer without physically building
them. Using this award, the project team will collect a large amount of data
(e.g., videos and images) from real-world farms and use this data to plan the
aforementioned software. This data and open-source pedagogical tools will be
made available to the public on the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourth
industrial revolution - characterized by smart automation and inter-connectivity
- is about to change farm management practices forever. To hasten this positive
change, the project team envisions an infrastructure that enables rapid
development of robotic hardware, sensing technologies, software tools, and
machine learning algorithms. While computer scientists and roboticists are
developing novel software and hardware every day with great potential for
precision agriculture, these tools typically fall short of real-world
application. The envisioned simulation environment for testing such tools will
bridge the gap between fundamental research and real-world deployment. These
tools can enable autonomous farm management, including precision weed/pest
management, precision irrigation, autonomous crop health monitoring, and
precision crop protection. This can dramatically cut down labor costs, reduce
chemical usage, lower the impact on water resources, conserve the fertility of
soil, and increase the yield of crops. Computer scientists and roboticists will
be able to get familiar with real-world challenges of precision agriculture,
e.g., dramatic effects of precipitation on agriculture. The project team will
collect preliminary data to prototype the infrastructure, organize workshops
with interested researchers to plan the infrastructure, and connect with farmers
and agronomists to gather feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.