* 2213139
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Propellant-less propulsion system for spacecraft based on the Unresolved Longitudinal Ampere Tension Forces in Conductors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Richard Banduric, FIELD PROPULSION TECHNONOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop an advanced propellant-less propulsion
system and compact ultra-high-energy storage devices using the unresolved Ampere
Tension forces in composite conductors. Currently, there is no viable propulsion
system for satellites and interplanetary spacecraft that only use the spacecraft
power bus to generate propulsion. Plus, no energy storage devices can directly
use Ampere Tension forces in solid non-elastic materials to store energy or
strengthen the material. Currently, feasible methods for launching spacecraft
into an orbit require large amounts of stored energy as combustible fuel to get
spacecraft into space. These limitations have restricted the access to space to
multi-billion-dollar corporations and nation-states. This technology that
results from this research could transform how we get into space and store
energy using compact, lightweight ceramic materials. This technology could open
space to individuals, small companies, and small research groups that are now
restricted from doing research in space due to the high cost of getting
spacecraft into space and storing the energy for space travel.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
proposes researching the conditions that allow the unresolved Ampere Tension
forces to be observed and exploited to create propellant-less propulsion and
energy devices with almost infinite energy storage capacity. The research
proposed in this project is to determine under what condition Ampere Tension
forces are present and how these forces can be used to create a spacecraft
propellant-less propulsion and energy storage devices that are not limited by a
chemical reaction in materials electrolytic. The project aims to determine the
conditions that allow the unresolved forces to be observed and used to create an
external force on a conductor directly from the electric current and the
conditions that these same forces can store electrical energy directly into a
ceramic material directly from an electric current. The innovation proposed here
is to create a brand-new energy technology as a spacecraft propulsion device and
energy storage device that operates only on electricity and does not need any
fuel or chemical energy. In so doing, this innovation could transform current
methods of launching into space and energy storage methods. Satellites using
this technology would not need to include volume for fuel or chemical batteries
and could use that extra space to increase the functionality of the spacecraft.
Similarly, interplanetary spacecraft could maneuver using just the power bus and
operate for decades without limiting the mission due to limited propellant
supplies or energy storage limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.