* 2213764
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: A Software Refactoring Community Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2025
* USD 167,998.00

Software Refactoring plays a crucial role in maintaining high-quality software
by re-structuring existing code and reducing technical debt. Despite more than
5,000 authors publishing refactoring papers in the last two decades, refactoring
researchers, students, and new community members lack publicly available
refactoring benchmarks, tools, and datasets. They must frequently replicate
existing refactoring research from scratch – this wastes time, effort, and
introduces threats to validity. The project's novelties are to create and
disseminate a repository of software refactoring-related artifacts and online
tools, to enable refactoring as a service, sufficient to support rigorous
empirical studies and experiments with the detection, prioritization, repair,
testing, and documentation of software quality issues across a broad community
of researchers, educators, software engineers, and STEM researchers. The
project's impacts relate to issues of great economic impact: large software
companies spend millions of dollars yearly to reduce the technical debt through
refactoring. The publicly-released infrastructure will support the transition of
refactoring research into practice and will enable STEM researchers to better
maintain their software prototypes as these inevitably decay. The proposed
infrastructure REFCRI will be a catalyst for revamping software engineering
courses at many universities to emphasize real-world examples of refactoring and
will offer tremendous education resources for practitioners. The investigators
will organize workshops on the platform to foster a thriving
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will curate a repository of
refactoring data sets via data pre-processing techniques to (i) clean the data,
and (ii) check its coverage and diversity. The team of this project will release
an API to allow the refactoring community to easily upload datasets, refactoring
teaching examples/tutorials, tools, and publications. The data sets will serve
as benchmarks that enable researchers to validate new tools and will enable new
empirical studies in the field of software engineering. The data sets will
provide realistic training examples and tools to enhance the integration of
refactoring into software engineering curricula and will serve as a tremendous
educational resource for practitioners. The investigators will integrate and
orchestrate (based on Kubernetes) multiple tools covering the whole lifecycle of
refactoring by automatically transforming the inputs/outputs of existing tools
into generic data processing formats and packaging tools as Docker images. They
will make existing refactoring tools easy to configure, execute, and integrate.
REFCRI will re-implement several refactoring tools, from papers and
repositories, as services in the cloud. The investigators will first
automatically mine millions of examples of refactorings that open-source
developers applied manually and then they will use them to recommend and
synthesize new refactorings-by-example to support Python and other data science
languages widely used by the STEM community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.