* 2213223
* CIF: Small: Foundations of Decentralized Data Science: Optimizing Utility, Privacy and Communication Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ayfer Ozgur, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The deluge of data generated daily across mobile devices, sensors, and servers
holds the promise of unprecedented inferential power to revolutionize numerous
industries and scientific domains, from medicine, to engineering, to
infrastructure. Traditional data science that pools this data to a single
location is becoming increasingly unrealistic due to bandwidth limitations in
communication networks. Legal, administrative, and ethical constraints in
sharing proprietary, personal, or sensitive data pose further challenges on the
path to realizing this promise. The project pursues the following query: Can one
extract value from data generated across an entire network without having to
collect and process it in a single location?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal
of this project is to harness the inferential power of distributed data without
the systemic privacy risks and costs resulting from traditional data collection.
The project pursues decentralized schemes for a wide range of canonical data
science tasks that exchange narrowly scoped messages to complete the desired
task. These messages are designed to preserve the privacy of the user data and
its sensitive characteristics while minimizing the total communication cost. As
a result, they provide optimal trade-offs between accuracy for the desired task,
privacy for the user data, and communication efficiency. The schemes adapt to
the structure of the underlying data and network and, when available, can
leverage low intrinsic dimensionality of the data and multi-round interactions
over the network. This project also develops information-theoretic performance
benchmarks that delineate what is impossible under privacy and communication
constraints and establish optimality of the proposed schemes under various
criteria. As such, the project delivers a rigorous and comprehensive theoretical
foundation for decentralized data science that allows many canonical tasks to be
efficiently and privately implemented on distributed
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.