* 2213371
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigation of the Mechanism of Emergence of Collective Behavior in Motile Cilia Using Model Artificial Cilia
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Suzanne Ahmed, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Emergent collective behaviors resulting from the
coordination of autonomous individual entities is a universal and important
theme in the natural world. Collective behaviors occur from the level of
organisms to the level of cells and organelles. They are observed in the
synchronous firing of pacemaker heart cells, the swarming of insects and the
schooling of fish. A critical example of the emergence of collective behaviors
is the appearance of rhythmic coordinated waves in motile cilia. Cilia are hair-
like appendages that enable fluid pumping and locomotion in organisms as varied
as microscopic prokaryotes to mammals. They carry out diverse functions such as
the removal of contaminants from airways, in hearing or in the transport of an
egg from the ovaries for fertilization. This award will support Dr. Ahmed at the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro to synthesize the first chemically
powered, individually autonomous, self-propelled artificial cilia, producing a
model for biological cilia and open the door for further investigations related
to the operation of biological cilia. In addition, the project will present an
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences to partake in novel interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Theoretical work has supported the
prevailing hypothesis that coordinated collective waves in cilia emerge as a
result of hydrodynamic coupling between autonomous individual cilia.
Experimental support of this hypothesis has not yet been demonstrated either
within biological systems or artificial cilia. Biological cilia do not offer the
flexibility to vary structural parameters to decouple cilia and tease out the
mechanistic details of emergence. Artificial cilia offer the flexibility to
customize organization and speed to observe the emergence of collective
behaviors. This award will support the synthesis of the first chemically
powered, autonomous artificial cilia producing a model for biological cilia,
which will represent a significant step forward in the understanding of the
emergence of collective behaviors in motile cilia, the efficiency of their
motion and the structure-function relationship of various parameters on ciliated
swimmers. Dr. Ahmed will also take part in K-12 scientific outreach activities
in local schools that serve students from underrepresented groups in the
sciences, with the aim of kindling their interest in the sciences at a young
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.