* 2213706
* Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Analyzing Fundamentalism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Mansoor Moaddel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2024
* USD 198,693.00

This project studies religious fundamentalism, focusing on contrasting groups in
a single political entity. The adherents of fundamentalist movements consider
their religion to be a system of absolute truth, promote strict conformity to
the religious laws and moral precepts specified in the scriptures, and have
mustered considerable influence in some regions in recent decades. It is,
however, unclear to what extent the groups studied here hold fundamentalist
beliefs and attitudes. To make this assessment, this project will launch a full-
scale survey of religious fundamentalism and other cultural and sociopolitical
values. Building on a earlier study of the subject in the region, this project
evaluates the similarities and differences in fundamentalism between people in
different groups throughout the region. This project also gauges how
fundamentalist beliefs and attitudes among individuals are linked to their (a)
religiosity, (b) identity, (c) liberal values, (d) the feelings of insecurity
and xenophobia, (e) sources of information, and (f) demographics. Increased
understanding of what affects societal values and weakens fundamentalism
contributes to a better knowledge of how to engineer peace and avoid
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of considerable variability in the
fundamentalist movements among the followers of the Abrahamic faiths complicates
comparative analysis of the subject, hampers empirical generalization across
these faiths, and poses difficulties in theoretical abstraction. To overcome
these challenges, this project theorizes that fundamentalists, despite their
variabilities across religions and sects, share core orientations toward their
own and other religions. These core orientations rest on a disciplinarian
conception of the deity, literalism or inerrancy, religious exclusivity, and
religious intolerance. To measure these orientations, a fundamentalism scale
based on a battery of sixteen survey questions was constructed and validated.
This study employs this scale to gauge fundamentalism among a representative
sample of 3,300 adult respondents from contrasting groups, using both face-to-
face and online interviews. By developing a fundamentalism scale that measures
the subject in all the Abrahamic faiths, this project makes a significant
contribution to the social-scientific study of fundamentalism and comparative
religious studies. The collected dataset will also serve as an infrastructure
for comparative analysis and make it possible to engage in scientific dialogue
among different researchers studying the subject in the region and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.