* 2213245
* Collaborative Research: Lightning-caused disturbance and patterns of recovery in tropical forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Evan Gora, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 653,285.00

Tropical forests garner attention because they are home to exceptionally high
levels of biodiveristy, and are dominant contributors to the global carbon
budget. Ongoing changes in patterns of tree death in the tropics are endangering
this biodiversity, and decreasing the ability of forests to accumulate carbon.
This, in turn, will have an impact on global climate change. Recent work by this
team has revealed that lightning could be one of the major factors disrupting
tropical forests. This new phase of research will ask: how consistent are the
effects of lightning strikes among forests, and how do they recover from the
effects of damage by lightning? This project will quantify the short- and long-
term effects of lightning among tropical forests through advances in ecology,
atmospheric physics, and ecosystem science. Results of this study will examine
the importance of lightning to tropical forests and, more broadly, its effects
on carbon cycling, and the impact that has on global climate trends. The broader
impacts of this research will train a postdoctoral researcher and offer
international research experiences to undergraduate and graduate students. The
project will also produce exhibits at the Smithsonian's National Museum of
Natural History, and at the airport and central bus terminal in Panama, to
engage the public in the scientific process. Online, virtual tours of lightning
strikes will be developed, and virtual resources will make professional
development training available for underrepresented students to pursue graduate
education. Tropical rainforests are the world's best classroom for studying
biodiversity and ecosystem processes, and this project provides outstanding
opportunities for students to gain valuable educational experiences in-person,
via exhibits, and through online activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
goal of this study is to quantify the contributions of lightning strikes to
tropical forest turnover and successional dynamics. The central hypothesis is
that lightning strikes reduce forest carbon storage via their direct
contributions to tree mortality and indirect effects on post-disturbance forest
recovery. We will combine expertise in forest ecology, lightning physics, and
remote sensing to address three core questions: (1) Does lightning trigger an
alternative pathway of forest regeneration relative to windthrow?; (2) How do
lightning disturbance characteristics vary with forest age and tree species
composition?; and (3) How do lightning strikes regulate regional differences in
forest structure and carbon dynamics? This project builds on recent results by
this team of researchers, showing that the effects of lightning on tropical
forest turnover have been grossly underestimated. Those findings were made by
studying a single lowland forest. Broadly understanding the role of lightning in
tropical forests requires applying this approach to a range of forest types. An
advanced lightning location system will be developed to systematically quantify
the effects of ca. 40,000 annual lightning strikes across ca. 8,000 km2 of
tropical forest that encompass variation in composition, size structure, and
age. A chronosequence approach will be used to determine how lightning
influences tree community assembly and biomass accumulation during post-
disturbance regeneration. Quantifying these cross-scale effects will help in the
management tropical forests and the future of our planet. The outcomes of this
work are expected to substantially improve scientific understanding of tropical
forest ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.