* 2213032
* SBIR Phase I:  Superconducting Neural Units with Adjustable Weights
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Yuchao Zhou, WOLFZYC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 255,646.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to develop a new neuromorphic computing platform, the effects of
which may be seen in many different fields, ranging from the automobile industry
to robotics and biomedical applications. The reduction in energy use afforded by
the technology could save up to 2% of the total electricity consumption
nationwide, making it one of the most environmentally friendly computing
platforms. Furthermore, the superconductor-based hardware has the potential to
provide one of the fastest commercialized high-performance computing platforms
for both industry and research, offering the potential to solve current
computational problems in many fields. The development of high-frequency
neuromorphic computing, with specific application to artificial intelligence
applications, promises to strengthen the US economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to bring to the
technological forefront a high-speed superconductor electronics-based
neuromorphic computer centered around neural units with adjustable weights
serving as a disordered array. Currently, high-speed computing necessary for
large artificial intelligence models is bottlenecked at semiconductor device
architecture as Moore’s Law reaches its limits. Much of the necessary computing
power is only accessible via paid run time on vast server banks owned by a
select few companies that can afford to build them. By unlocking computing power
based on SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) arrays and rapid
single flux quantum (RSFQ), the project aims to develop an affordable, reliable,
and carbon friendly high-speed computing platform, thereby helping to solve the
power/cost crisis facing currently accessible computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.