* 2213289
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) for surface deformation monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Claudia Hulbert, GEOLABE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 254,707.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable the global autonomous detection of surface deformation.
Measuring Earth surface deformation is fundamental to detect and analyze surface
and subsurface changes due to anthropogenic activity, with a myriad of
industrial applications that includes the monitoring of oil and gas extraction
fields and storage reservoirs, mining operations, carbon dioxide sequestration,
and/or infrastructure integrity. Illustrating the economic and social impact of
its uses, the market for analyzing Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
(InSAR) data is expected to double within 5 years. Beyond the dramatic economic
growth of InSAR, its far-ranging applications have broad social and scientific
impacts, in particular related to natural hazards and climate change. Advances
in InSAR processing and improved signal-to-noise ratios will translate into
improved monitoring of earthquake activity, landslides, water supplies,
deforestation, floods, ice sheets, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at tackling the lack of
automation in InSAR processing and improving detection thresholds in InSAR time
series analysis. While the technique can potentially measure millimeter-scale
changes in deformation over periods of days to years, atmospheric effects can
wreak havoc on repeat-pass InSAR interpretation by introducing errors that may
mask small surface deformations. These effects, which are fundamentally due to
pressure, temperature and relative humidity variations in the troposphere, can
lead to errors that are larger than most of the deformation signals of interest.
Current algorithms are not suited for automated, large-scale monitoring without
a priori data because they require time-consuming manual intervention, and the
final product requires exhaustive expert interpretation. Through the development
of machine learning and artificial intelligence methods this project aims at:
(i) further automating and accelerating the processing of InSAR time series, via
the automation of some key sections of the processing pipeline that still rely
on extensive and costly human intervention; and (ii) developing a new
methodology to generate InSAR time series, that is robust to noise and allows
for a finer temporal and spatial resolution compared to the state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.