* 2213207
* LEAPS-MPS: Determining All the Contributions of Adrenodoxin to Cytochrome P450 Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michael Reddish, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,840.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Michael Reddish and his students at Appalachian State University will
investigate how a group of proteins, called ferredoxin proteins, enable
cytochrome P450 enzymes to catalyze a wide range of chemical reactions in
animals, plants, fungi, bacteria, and archaea. Cytochrome P450 enzymes naturally
play a role in the metabolism of drugs, steroids, and other chemicals.
Understanding how cytochrome P450 enzymes work enables the design of new
medicines and more environmentally friendly industrial processes. Professor
Reddish will also utilize resources from this project to: (1) Pay undergraduate
students so they can meet their financial needs through research instead of
external jobs; (2) Develop a new way to teach introductory chemistry that
focuses on cohort-building so that all students feel welcome in science; and (3)
Co-lead a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) in the upper-
level biochemistry lab at Appalachian State University. These activities will
enable more students to learn about research and encourage students with diverse
histories to become researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Reddish proposes
to focus on the interactions of human cytochrome P450 27A1 and the human
ferredoxin protein adrenodoxin. It is known that ferredoxin proteins supply
electrons to cytochrome P450 enzymes. Evidence from various researchers suggests
adrenodoxin may further promote catalysis in other ways. The project will
include a structural approach to determine if adrenodoxin promotes catalysis by
forcing the enzyme to a more “active” shape. The project will also test to see
if adrenodoxin changes the functionality of the enzyme by altering ligand
binding to the enzyme or altering reactivity of molecular oxygen utilized by the
enzyme. It is proposed that a clear understanding of all roles of adrenodoxin in
cytochrome P450 27A1 catalysis will allow for a better understanding of how
other ferredoxins enable cytochrome P450 catalysis from a wide variety of
sources and how their reactivity can be modified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.