* 2213732
* Microstructure Research Data Workshop at the South Big Data Innovation Hub
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Eva Campo, Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will bring together experts to advance public accessibility and
interoperation standards for microstructural material science datasets, a
category of data that has broad utility for many areas of materials science
research. The workshop builds on previous workshops, which succeeded in
identifying targeted gaps in microstructure descriptors commonly used in
manufacturing to correlate synthesis and macroscopic properties that determine
structural performance. This workshop aims at identifying metadata needed to
enable interoperability of distributed and federated microstructure data
worldwide. The identification and adoption of these metadata standards will have
widespread practical impacts in manufacturing, and be pursued through community
engagement and consensus building. The results of this workshop will have the
potential to dramatically advance manufacturing industries; efficiently
developing synthesis strategies towards targeted structural performance, that
could include resilience to extreme environments such as nuclear reactors and
wind farms, to extreme weather conditions (coastal erosion), to fatigue in
bridges, and to earthquake damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus
on FAIR principles-oriented specifications for data management issues that were
deemed crucial to the data science enterprise in previous gatherings, including:
1) metadata curation, 2) data ownership, provenance and sharing, 3) ontologies
and schema, etc. The workshop will include a number of tracks: Data Science
Education and Workforce, Manufacturing, Team Science, Smart Cities, Data
Sharing, and Health Disparities. In addition, the materials track will reach out
to the other tracks and will: 1) connect with experts in resilient cities and
ask what properties in cement, steel, etc. they are concerned with and
incorporate those in the case studies, 2) connect with experts in Team Science
for advice on how to efficiently execute the actionable items identified in the
workshop, and 3) connect with experts in Workforce development for help in
crafting a training program for data technicians in this realm (e.g. how much
data science and how much materials science would a technician, researcher, etc.
need to know to work in this space).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.