* 2213198
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Research in Northern New England
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,019,689.00

This project is jointly funded by Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an advanced scanning
transmission electron microscope (STEM), which is housed in a purpose-built
laboratory within the Electron Microscope Facility at Dartmouth College. While
located at Dartmouth, the STEM serves regional research and teaching
opportunities over Northern New England including at the University of New
Hampshire, the University of Vermont, and the University of Maine-Orono, where
it is the only microscope of its kind. The remote monitoring and operation
capabilities facilitate access for off-site users, including for courses and
projects in statewide networks of primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI).
The STEM supports teaching and research training of undergraduates, graduate
students, and post-doctoral fellows, and broadens the participation of women and
under-represented groups in biology, chemistry, engineering, and materials
science through programs at Dartmouth and the University of New Hampshire, and
through remote training and outreach via statewide PUI IDeA Networks of
Biomedical Research Excellence. Many of the research projects are designed to
yield direct benefits to society, addressing critical needs including energy
production and storage, gas-sensing, advanced materials, and
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The acquired
STEM has a high-brightness field emission gun capable of operating from 20 kV to
200 kV, and is equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). The
microscope makes possible many projects requiring high-resolution imaging and
elemental analysis, as well as tomography and low-dose imaging for biological
and beam-sensitive specimens. It enables research to answer fundamental
questions regarding the structure, formation, properties, and interactions of a
wide range of advanced materials such as high-entropy alloys, intermetallic
compounds, porous organic materials, incrementally-formed sheet metal, tau-MnAl
and NiFe permanent magnets, proton-exchange membrane cells, silicon devices for
radiation damage detection, SiGeSn alloys, Na-S battery materials, nanoparticles
alone and embedded in porous thin films, novel Li battery materials,
nanocrystalline alloys and nanolaminates, two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenides, non-oxide ceramics, and biomolecular specimens and
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.