* 2213169
* SBIR Phase II:  A Beat-to-Beat Blood Pressure Monitor Using Micro-Nanoscale Wrinkled Functional Materials
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Joshua Kim, VENA VITALS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on providing real-time and
continuous monitoring of blood pressure for patients in surgery and critical
care. Currently, only 10-15% of patients undergoing surgery receive continuous
blood pressure monitoring because such monitoring requires specialized skill to
administer the invasive procedure and can also introduce potential
complications. The remaining patients are monitored intermittently with a non-
invasive blood pressure cuff, resulting in gaps in information between readings
and potentially delayed response times. Rapid blood pressure drops are
associated with poor patient outcomes such as organ damage/failure, post-
surgical complications, and death. The success of this project has the potential
to not only increase the number of surgical and critical care patients who
receive continuous monitoring, improving quality of care and patient outcomes,
but also to enable continuous blood pressure monitoring in other applications,
such as in pre-eclampsia patients in obstetrics. This project also has
commercial potential. With over 50 million surgeries performed in the US each
year, the serviceable, addressable market is $2.5 billion per year. Expanded to
the global market where over 230 million surgeries are performed annually, the
total addressable market is over $11 billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops a wireless,
continuous, and non-invasive blood pressure monitoring device that can capture
rapid fluctuations in blood pressure with high temporal resolution. Current
technologies developed to address the unmet need for non-invasive, continuous
blood pressure monitoring have been limited in their accuracy, cost, and ease-
of-use. The research objectives to advance this project to commercial and
clinical readiness are: device optimization through sensor improvement and
algorithm development, form factor development for mechanical and electrical
stability, and development of a smart calibration system for improved usability.
Through iterative device design and testing in clinical environments, this
project aims to tackle the long-standing challenges of continuous blood pressure
monitoring, namely motion, calibration, and signal drift. The Phase II project
outcome is a wearable, non-invasive, and continuous blood pressure monitoring
device to be used in the operating room and intensive care unit. This device has
the potential to not only empower clinicians with greater insight into patient
condition, enabling rapid response and improved care in the clinical setting,
but it can also be used to improve understanding of disease progression,
treatment effectiveness, and patient stratification across
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.