* 2213824
* BII: IISAGE - Discovering the mechanisms and evolution of aging differences between females and males
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Nicole Riddle, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,098,650.00

In many animals, either females or males age faster or have a longer lifespan.
This aging difference has significant implications for biodiversity,
conservation, agriculture, and human health. In humans, for example, females
live longer than males, and females and males differ in how aging manifests
itself in terms of physical decline and disease. What causes the diverse
patterns of aging differences seen in nature is unknown. The IISAGE Biology
Integration Institute will determine how multiple biological processes
contribute to differences in aging between females and males and uncover their
evolutionary history. IISAGE will bring together expertise from across biology
to identify the molecular mechanisms and generalizable rules that govern
differences in aging between females and males. Tightly integrated projects will
test hypotheses focused on differences between females and males in genome
architecture, organismal biology, and phenotypic plasticity to understand
differences in aging. IISAGE will define how processes at the molecular,
organismal, and population level interact to generate aging differences between
females and males. Integrated with its scientific mission, IISAGE’s training,
education, and outreach program will increase diversity in STEM and prepare
trainees to work in diverse careers and in multidisciplinary teams. The IISAGE
summer program will engage &gt; 50 undergraduates from groups underrepresented
in STEM. A citizen science project will engage pet owners and K-12 students to
collect data for IISAGE scientific goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying rules
that explain differences in aging is challenging because there are many
differences between females and males. IISAGE will determine how genome
architecture, organismal biology, and phenotypic plasticity generate differences
in aging and define evolutionarily conserved and taxon-specific mechanisms
controlling those differences in aging between females and males. To do so,
IISAGE will produce novel analysis tools and hundreds of matched datasets
profiling gene expression and chromatin in dozens of species. By integrating
across disciplines, approaches, and levels of biological organization, IISAGE
will develop predictive models for how genome architecture, organismal biology,
and phenotypic plasticity can interact and lead to differences in aging.
IISAGE’s approach will include data from wild species, laboratory manipulations,
and citizen scientists to provide unprecedented insights into the mechanisms
controlling differences in aging between females and males. The datasets, tools,
and insights derived from IISAGE’s work will be of interest to scientists
ranging from basic biologists to translational researchers in the medical and
conservation fields, while IISAGE outreach and training activities will engage
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.