* 2213459
* Encoding Dynamic Traffic Flow Analysis into AI for Network-Wide Early Alarming of Traffic-Demand-Influencing Events and Their Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lili Du, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project will integrate dynamic traffic flow analysis into artificial
intelligence to provide early alarming of significant traffic-demand-influencing
events (DIEs) and the associated traffic impacts. Urban traffic can deviate from
normal states due to various scheduled and unscheduled DIEs, such as sports,
commercial promotions, and festivals. These events often induce a surge in
traffic demand, cause hours of congestion, and affect multiple traffic
infrastructures. Early awareness of DIEs and their traffic impact will benefit
many stakeholders, including travelers, government, and transportation-related
service providers, in taking proactive actions to manage traffic congestion.
This project aims to develop a network-wide online DIE monitoring system, which
can automatically provide early alarming of the DIEs and forecast the resulting
congestions. The research outcomes can be directly employed to mitigate traffic
network congestions and become an essential component of future smart city
technologies. The interdisciplinary studies will open a new line of research on
seamlessly integrating transportation engineering, data science, and artificial
intelligence-based technologies to develop new scientific knowledge and
methodologies for traffic operations and control. The PIs will integrate
research into pedagogical developments at their home departments, actively
disseminate research results, and engage in K-12 outreach activities via the
Gator Outreach program at the University of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop hybrid approaches that integrate traffic flow theories,
optimization algorithms, high-dimensional machine learning, and artificial
intelligence for monitoring the events that cause significant traffic demand
surges in a (sub)urban area based on real-time temporal-spatial traffic data.
The research will produce the following transformative scientific technologies:
(1) Data science-empowered online shockwave generating algorithms to accommodate
data imputation, which quantitatively captures the impact of a DIE on traffic
conditions on a network over time; (2) innovative encoding approaches to compile
shockwave diagrams for feeding machine learning model better; (3) sparse
principal component analysis-based feature engineering for selecting and fusing
the most promising subset of features for DIE monitoring; (4) a novel feature
acquisition location recommendation scheme to determine where new features
should be additionally acquired from the traffic network to boost the DIE-
monitoring AI maximally; and (5) a radical extension to the recurrent neural
network (RNN) model and theory by incorporating explicit regularization and
distributed computing-compatible architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.