* 2213273
* LEAPS-MPS: Peroxisome Targeting Chemical Technologies and Tools to Study Subcellular Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Michael Beck, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, Professor Beck and his students at
Eastern Illinois University (EIU) intend to develop chemical groups that can
direct attached molecules to the peroxisomes, an understudied region of cells
that has an important role in a variety of cellular processes. The new chemical
approaches and tools developed in this project have the potential to enable
detailed study of the biochemical reactions that take place in the peroxisomes
of living cells. Successful implementation of this project will also broaden
participation of students underrepresented in STEM fields by providing paid
research opportunities for students and strengthening the Inclusiveness in STEM
(iSTEM) program at EIU. The iSTEM program is designed to provide these students
more opportunities to interact with potential role models and
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Beck and his team intend to adapt peroxisome
targeting peptide sequences to develop modular moieties that can target pendant
small molecule cargoes to the peroxisomes. Successful implementation of this
research will result in the characterization peroxisome interaction moieties
(PIMs). Properties include cell permeability, interaction of key components of
the peroxisome import mechanism, and the ability to direct previously untargeted
compounds to the peroxisomes. PIMs will then be used to generate fluorogenic
probes to monitor hydrogen peroxide production in the peroxisomes. An expected
outcome of the project is to assist students in developing the connections and
skills they need to be successful in their future studies and/or careers in STEM
while making significant scientific contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.