* 2213516
* LEAPS-MPS: Limits in Mating and in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Joanna Furno, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 248,978.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics often uses simpler
functions (such as polynomials) to approximate the behavior of more complicated
functions. The area of dynamical systems studies the behavior of iterated
functions, in which a function such as a polynomial is applied repeatedly. One
basic dichotomy is the distinction between the set where these iterates get
larger and larger and the set where they stay relatively small. For a
polynomial, the latter is called the filled Julia set. In some cases, a
technique called mating can be used to glue together the filled Julia sets for
two polynomials. One aspect of this project will look at limits of matings to
see if it is possible to construct a similar gluing for exponentials. A second
aspect of this project will look at approximations in higher-dimensional spaces
to extend one-dimensional approximation results to that context. In this
project, the PI will recruit undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented minorities for research opportunities and travel to
demographically relevant conferences, which will provide community support and
information on opportunities for future education or employment. Additionally,
the project will provide remedial and enrichment activities for middle- and
high-school students through a branch of the Math Corps program, which has a
long history of creating a community around mathematical excellence among
underserved students. The program will recruit students from local middle
schools that contain large populations of students from underrepresented groups,
with high levels of economic need and low levels of performance in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project provides two new directions to
extend work on polynomial approximations of transcendental functions. The first
direction is to extend into the area of matings. Mating provides a method to
combine the dynamics of two polynomial functions together to obtain a rational
function with characteristics of both polynomials. Most examples of matings come
from quadratic or cubic polynomials, due to computational difficulties. The
project will use a new criterion and the special structure of the polynomials in
the family to give significant new examples of matings of arbitrarily large
degree. The examination of the limits of these matings will use recently
developed tools for transcendental functions to identify the limit, if it
exists. The eventual goal is to develop a theory of mating for transcendental
functions. The second direction is to generalize examples and results for limits
of functions of one complex variable to limits of functions of several complex
variables. In this new context, there are three different types of degree
(algebraic, topological, and dynamical). The examples will illustrate how the
limits interact with the different types of degree for maps of several complex
variables. Eventually, an improved understanding of different examples could
help answer open questions, such as which values can be attained as a first
dynamical degree. Additionally, our examples will lead us to prove more general
theorems, for example, showing when the convergence of the functions implies the
convergence of the Julia sets. By looking for families with constrained critical
behavior, it may be possible to classify the periodic and preperiodic Fatou
components that appear in the families or in the limits, as a first step toward
completing such a classification for transcendental functions of several complex
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.