* 2213567
* MSA: Understanding biological invasions across spatial scales using Phylogenetic Generalized Linear Mixed Models (PGLMM)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Daijiang Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 315,983.00

Non-native species invasions are causing worldwide ecosystem degradation and
economic loss, with average global economic costs exceeding 27 billion dollars
per year over the past five decades. More urgently, both the number of non-
native species and their impacts are projected to increase over the coming
decades. For example, approximately an additional 1,500 non-native species are
likely to establish in North America by 2050. Furthermore, the economic costs of
biological invasions are predicted to increase threefold per decade. Government
agencies, conservation organizations, and private citizens have spent
significant resources to mitigate the impacts of species invasions, but the
outcomes are far from satisfactory. One main reason is that we still do not have
a holistic and predictive understanding of species invasion across scales. This
project will compile an open-access, cross-scale database of species invasion
centered around the datasets collected by the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON). This database will be analyzed using advanced statistical
methods to test theory on the relative roles propagule pressure, abiotic
variables, and biotic variables on invasions for multiple taxonomic groups
(plants, birds, and beetles) across spatial scales. Model results will be
disseminated by building an online interactive application that can dynamically
present and forecast risks of invaders at all NEON sites. This application will
be updated automatically with new data to provide real-time management
recommendations. One postdoctoral researcher and two undergraduate students will
be trained in macrosystem biology, statistical, and data science skills during
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test the
relative importance of propagule pressure, abiotic variables (e.g., climate,
land-use history), and biotic variables (e.g., species interactions) in driving
species invasions across spatial scales in the context of community assembly. To
achieve this goal, this project will improve the ability of phylogenetic
generalized linear mixed model (PGLMM) to work with large datasets and then
apply it to the integrated database of species invasions based on NEON to
investigate patterns and mechanisms of biological invasions of different
taxonomic groups across spatial scales. This project will address the following
questions: 1) Do functional traits of non-native species interact with abiotic
variables to determine their distributions? 2) Do biotic interactions between
non-native and native species in the recipient communities affect the
distribution of non-native species? 3) What is the relative importance of
propagule pressure, abiotic variables, and biotic variables in determining the
distribution of non-native species from local to continental
scales?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Environmental Biology/Macrosystem Biology and NEON Enabled Science program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.