* 2213819
* The Use of Exceptional Clearance in Law Enforcement
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Scott Walfield, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 32,759.00

In this study, the relationship between serious violent and property crime case
outcomes and the variation in how exceptional clearances are used by agencies is
investigated. Law enforcement agencies control how cases flow through the
criminal justice system through the use of arrest and exceptional clearance.
Exceptional clearance occurs when law enforcement has sufficient evidence to
arrest but circumstances prevented them from taking the offender into custody
(e.g., suspect whereabouts unknown). If the crime is recorded as solved but no
arrest was made, this can degrade the accuracy of the reported crime clearance
data and can lead to the dissemination of misinformation to decision makers and
others. The analysis in this study uses characteristics of the crime incident as
well as information from the law enforcement organization and the community.
Results will further the precision and transparency of the measurement and
reporting of criminal case outcomes, which in turn will help improve public
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by the constructs of victim devaluation
perspective, social disorganization theory, and organizational theory, this
study examines the extent of variation among the three common criminal case
outcomes (i.e., open, clearance by arrest, and exceptional clearance) for Index
crimes using a multi-level approach. At the micro-level, 2015-2016 National
Incident-Based Reporting System data is used which includes victim, offender,
and case characteristics and the outcome of the case. This is merged with macro-
level data which includes police organizational data derived from the 2016 Law
Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics survey and community data
via the 2011-2015 American Community Survey 5-year estimates. The study has
practical applications in how crime clearance statistics are presented to
decision makers and the public in addition to addressing the wide variation in
use of exceptional clearances by law enforcement
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.