* 2213965
* PFI-TT:  Separation of azeotropic refrigerant mixtures using pilot-scale extractive distillation with ionic liquid entrainer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Aaron Scurto, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,551.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project seeks to provide certified refrigerant
reclaimers with a new technology for separating azeotropic refrigerant mixtures.
The Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and Refrigeration (HVAC) industry
tries to recover as much refrigerant as economically practical for reuse, but
reclaimers are now challenged by an array of complex, multi-component mixtures
that, in many cases, are not possible to separate and ultimately must be
stockpiled or destroyed. The American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2021
requires the phase down in production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbon
refrigerants in the U.S. by 85 percent over the next 15 years with a focus on
reducing high global warming potential gases. Currently, there are several
billion kilograms of refrigerants in existing cooling systems that must be
separated and recycled. Voice-of-customer data gathered in over 100 interviews
indicates that a new technology for separation of azeotropic refrigerant
mixtures is now needed and only about 5% of refrigerant is recovered. Outreach
activities, especially toward the inclusion of underrepresented minorities and
women will be supported through this project. Students will develop
entrepreneurial and technology commercialization skills and work with a start-up
company to take the innovation to the marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to demonstrate the first pilot-scale process using
extractive distillation and an ionic liquid entrainer for separating refrigerant
R-410A. The refrigerant is composed of 50 wt% difluoromethane and 50 wt%
pentafluoroethanee. The incumbent technology, fractional distillation, cannot
separate this azeotropic mixture into pure components. Ionic liquids are salts
that are liquid at room temperature, which can be designed to achieve high
separation selectivity for refrigerant gases. R-410A is the largest volume
refrigerant mixture sold in the U.S. Currently, there is approximately 100
million kilograms of R-410A used in residential and commercial air-conditioners
and heat pumps. The difluoromethane has a relatively low global warming
potential and can be repurposed into future refrigerant products. The
pentafluoroethane has a high global warming potential and can be used as a
fluorinated feedstock for producing new environmentally-friendly products. The
key research objectives include: separation of R-410A into products with a
purity of 99.5 wt% or higher, creation of a process simulation model that
represents the experimental results, and testing the actual reclaimed R-410A
from the industry to understand the effects of impurities. The results will be
used to develop a financial model for estimating the costs for separating
azeotropic refrigerants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.