* 2213156
* SBIR Phase I:  Pre-Hospital Detection of Large Vessel Occlusion Strokes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ezekiel Fink, ASTERION AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to arm emergency personnel with an objective
tool for identifying large vessel occlusion (LVO) strokes while in route to the
hospital. This rapid and accurate triage of stroke will enable routing of
patients to the most appropriate care setting and reduce the time to
intervention. LVOs require endovascular therapy which only comprehensive stroke
centers have the capability to conduct. If a patient with an LVO is routed to a
hospital without endovascular capabilities simply because it was closer, the
time to intervention is extended drastically. When it comes to improving
outcomes, time to optimal intervention is the most important factor with the
best outcomes achieved under three hours and statistically significant
improvements for each 15-minute window under that threshold. Stroke is the
second leading cause of death and the primary cause of long-term disability
worldwide costing the US $65B every year. Nearly 800,000 people suffer a stroke
in the US annually and 40% are left with a permanent disability. The project
will streamline stroke triage in the pre-hospital setting to reduce time to
intervention and improve outcomes in stroke patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project an EEG-based product
for EMS workers to use in the pre-hospital setting for the fast and objective
diagnosis of LVO in suspected stroke patients. In under five minutes, EMS
workers will be able to deploy, collect data, and have the analyzed results
presented in an intuitive dashboard identifying the probability of an LVO,
enabling EMS workers to route patients to stroke centers with EVT capabilities.
When a patient arrives at the hospital, the determination made within the
ambulance will be conveyed to physicians who can then immediately start
intervention, reducing the time from onset to intervention and improving short
and long-term patient outcomes. Comprehensive historical datasets of EEG-data
from stroke patients using a broad array of hardware will be used to develop a
machine learning model that can classify patients into LVO vs non-LVO stroke and
stroke vs non-stroke. Automation of data cleaning and feature extraction will
enable a highly user-friendly experience and the required workflow integration
for our end-users, emergency medical technicians. Lastly, this model will be
validated with novel EEG data collected at two clinical sites, laying the
foundation for regulatory interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.