* 2213274
* LEAPS-MPS:  Fast and Efficient Novel Algorithms for MHD Flow Ensembles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Muhammad Mohebujjaman, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 248,180.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The relative movement of an electrically conducting
fluid (e.g., liquid metal coolant, saltwater, ionized gases, or plasmas) in a
magnetic field is important as it has many applications in, e.g., nuclear
reactors, artificial suns to produce carbon-free electricity, artificial hearts,
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) pumps, and geomagnetic dynamos. The accurate numerical
simulation of the interaction between the velocity field of the fluid and the
magnetic field is often computationally challenging, arduous, and prohibitively
expensive even with the use of an advanced computing facility. This is because
the two fields are non-linearly coupled. Moreover, many practical flows occur in
a convection-dominated regime and their numerical simulations using standard
algorithms produce numerical instability. The scenario is exacerbated by the
presence of noise in the input data. The involvement of input uncertainties
reduces the accuracy of the final solutions. Therefore, it is important to
develop long-range high fidelity numerical algorithms for simulating such a
complex problem. First, this project will investigate efficient ensemble schemes
for simulating incompressible flow problems (without the presence of a magnetic
field). Second, this project will focus on understanding the numerical
instability and develop robust, efficient, and accurate algorithms for
simulating complex flow problems where velocity and magnetic fields interact.
This project will facilitate the teaching and training of students from
underrepresented groups to pursue their careers in STEM fields. This will be
carried out by supporting and supervising undergraduate and graduate students'
research in numerical analysis and scientific
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to understand the
numerical instability in the uncertainty quantification (UQ) of Navier-Stokes
(N-S) and MHD flow simulations. The objective of this project is to develop,
analyze, and test robust, and efficient novel algorithms of N-S and MHD flow
ensembles simulations. The first research goal is to develop and investigate an
efficient Stabilized Penalty-projection Finite Element Method (SPP-FEM) for the
UQ of fluid flow simulations. The SPP-FEM is presented in an elegant way that at
each time-step, it permits a shared system matrix for each realization in
conjunction with a stabilized penalty-projection step. It is conjectured that
the scheme will be unconditionally stable with respect to the time-step size and
would be much faster and more computationally efficient than standard numerical
methods. The second research goal is to develop a Proper Orthogonal
Decomposition (POD) based Reduced Order Modeling (ROM) stabilized Evolve-Filter-
Relax Stochastic Collocation ROM (EFR-SCM-ROM) algorithm to deal with the
numerical oscillations, which commonly arise in ROM of the UQ of MHD flow
ensembles. The EFR-SCM-ROM algorithm approximates the randomness of the
parameters using stochastic collocation methods (SCMs) and uses a high-order ROM
spatial differential filter in conjunction with an evolve-then-filter-then-relax
scheme to attenuate the numerical oscillations of standard ROMs. The new EFR-
SCM-ROM framework yields accurate approximations, minimizes the sensitivity of
noise in input data, and uses rigorous error estimates to determine practical
parameter scaling. The SPP-FEM and EFR-SCM-ROM algorithms are innovative and
considered novel approaches, which will enrich and revolutionize the
computational methodology and platform for the numerical approximation of MHD
flow ensembles. These studies will advance the knowledge base in the field of
MHD flow ensembles and other fields of multi-physics problems, including
Boussinesq systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.