* 2213804
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: Building a Broad Infrastructure for Uniform Meaning Representations
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,689.00

When humans attempt to talk with a computer, our language needs to be translated
into a meaning representation that can be processed and understood by the
computer. Currently, such translation is done on a task-by-task and language-by-
language basis. Such a fragmented approach introduces redundancy and repetition,
and is thus inefficient. Uniform Meaning Representation (UMR) is designed as a
machine-readable language that all languages, from high-resource languages such
as English and Chinese, to low-resource languages like Arapaho, can be
translated into. UMR can also be extended to multi-modal settings to represent
the content of videos and images, allowing computers to better process and
understand the content of these media forms. This project aims to build the
necessary infrastructure for translating languages and other media into UMRs.
This infrastructure includes tools used to facilitate the translation of human
language to UMRs, metrics that can be used to evaluate the quality of UMRs, and
an initial collection of UMRs for five languages that have very different
linguistic properties: English, Chinese, Arabic, Arapaho, and Quechua, as well
as video content that includes both language and gestures for two of those
languages.. The project also includes outreach efforts to engage fellow
researchers to produce UMRs for additional languages and genres with tutorials,
workshops, summer schools, as well as online training materials. Once a
sufficient amount of UMRs are created for a language, computer models and
algorithms can be trained on these UMRs to automatically produce more UMRs for
new data in that language. They can then be used to advance the state of the art
for a wide range of downstream human language technologies, ranging from human
robot interaction to dialogue systems, from information extraction to question
answering, from machine translation to text summarization. The project will also
produce UMRs for under-resourced languages and help bring modern language
technologies to speakers of those languages, as well as people working on the
documentation and/or revitalization of the languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together an interdisciplinary team of linguists and computer
scientists to jointly build&lt;br/&gt;an infrastructure for Uniform Meaning
Representation (UMR), a practical, formal, computationally tractable, and cross-
linguistically valid document-level meaning representation of natural language
that can impact a wide range of downstream applications that require “deep”
natural language understanding (NLU). The UMR infrastructure will consist of
UMR-annotated data sets for five languages, including multimodal data sets for
two of those languages, English and Arapaho, a UMR annotation interface and
relevant training materials, baseline UMR parsing models that fellow NLP
researchers can use as a point of comparison when developing more advanced UMR
parsing models, metrics for evaluating document-level meaning representations,
and a platform for disseminating the UMR data sets, tools and resources to users
of the infrastructure. This project also includes a broad range of outreach
efforts consisting of workshops, tutorials, summer schools, and a shared task at
the end of the project to involve fellow researchers in the NLP community to
produce UMRs for additional languages and promote the use of the UMR
infrastructure in meaning representation parsing research and downstream
applications. The UMR infrastructure promotes the development of general purpose
multilingual and multimodal applications in an effort to move away from both
language-specific and task-specific models that require repetitive and often
conflicting semantic annotation efforts. The ultimate goal of the project is to
build a community of NLP researchers that will contribute to the development of
UMR-based data and tools, and adopt UMR in downstream applications to advance
the state of the art in Natural Language Processing (NLP) in particular and
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in general. In particular, the proposed
infrastructure promotes access to information technology in languages for
traditionally underrepresented groups by providing the necessary tools and
resources to develop AI technologies for these
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.