* 2213264
* LEAPS-MPS: CAS: Rotational Dynamics of Perfluorinated Carboxylic Acid in the Presence of Helical Chirality
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sylvestre Twagirayezu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,682.00

This LEAPS-MPS project is funded by the Division of Chemistry to support
Professor Twagirayezu and his group at Lamar University to study the effects of
spatial molecular arrangement of long-chain fluorinated compounds on their
chemical nature. Fluorinated compounds are functional human-made chemicals that,
after release into the environment, exhibit helical coiling due to molecular
deformation. Accurate analysis of helical coiling is extremely challenging and
demands highly sensitive and precise measurement tools. The research addresses
this challenge through experimental investigation and computational chemistry to
determine the exact nature of helical coiling in fluorinated compounds. The
results will provide insights that could be used for studying the dynamics of
chiral molecules. The research program will promote research participation of
college and high-school students from the underrepresented populations in the
Southeast Texas Community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LEAPS-MPS award supports
research on conformational studies of perfluorinated compounds and their chiral-
targeted complexes. The selected compounds, i.e., perfluorooctanoic acids, are
human-made pollutants exhibiting transient helical chirality due to molecular
deformation. However, the accurate analysis of chiral systems requires fast,
highly-sensitive, and precise measurement tools. This research project takes
advantage of recent advances in quantum chemical calculations and molecular
rotational spectroscopy to (i) determine the rotational signatures of
perfluorinated compounds, (ii) decode dynamical information hidden in the
observed rotational features, (iii) provide insights that facilitate the
development of new analytical tools for fast measurements of chiral
perfluorinated compounds. This award also supports the initiation of the SEED
program to engage and encourage research participation of college and high-
school students from the underrepresented populations in the Southeast Texas
Community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.