* 2213731
* CCRI: Planning-C: Planning to Build Digital Infrastructure for Real-Time, Continual, and Intelligent Transportation Analysis and Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Yuche Chen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 93,702.00

Readily available and easy-to-use simulators have been driving the recent
advances in artificial intelligence (AI) research. This project leads planning
and outreach activities that envision a large-scale research infrastructure that
operates in parallel with real-world transportation systems in real time,
continually, and integrating features to support AI-based discovery of new and
more effective traffic management strategies. The infrastructure provides access
to three types of users: data providers (e.g., local communities) who offer
traffic data and/or controllers, researchers who utilize the infrastructure to
discover traffic management strategies, and traffic managers who aim to gain
insights on effectively managing the traffic through the infrastructureâ€™s
visualizations and analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Planning project
includes activities to 1) develop proof-of-concept that establishes a prototype
traffic simulator that supports AI-based automatic calibration and intelligent
traffic control, 2) organize workshops that outreach to researchers in relevant
CISE sub-disciplines to formulate, refine, and prioritize new research
opportunities enabled by the envisioned infrastructure, and 3) outreach local
communities and agencies to identify key community needs. These planning
activities are designed to build a cross-disciplinary and community-integrated
team for a Medium-New CCRI proposal, which ultimately builds and maintains the
envisioned infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of the envisioned
infrastructure entails fundamental advances and seamless integration of multiple
disciplines, including mobile computing, modeling and simulation, transportation
science, and artificial intelligence. Moreover, the envisioned infrastructure
significantly reduces barriers to innovations in using AI for improving
transportation management that can bring transformative benefits to
transportation planning for increased mobility, safety, energy efficiency, etc.
Finally, the planning activities are expected to engage a broad-based community,
from undergraduate students that can benefit from improved curricula from the
infrastructure to diverse participants that can access the workshops from
anywhere in the world through virtual attendance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
URL: https://ccri-planning-intelligent-transportation.github.io/ The project
repository will hold data, code, simulators, etc., for at least two
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.