* 2213353
* LEAPS-MPS: Determining the Mechanisms by Which Alarmone Signaling in Clostridioides Difficile Differs From Tthat in other Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Erin Purcell, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With the support of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Erin B. Purcell and her group at Old Dominion
University will study nucleotide signal molecules known as ‘alarmones.’ Bacteria
across diverse types respond to environmental stress by synthesizing different
chemical species, such as tetraphosphate and pentaphosphate alarmones, to
regulate survival mechanisms. Until recently, smaller triphosphate alarmones
were thought to be degradation products of the larger signal molecules. However,
it has recently been discovered that some bacteria synthesize triphosphate
alarmones directly in addition to the tetra- and pentaphosphate signals. To
date, the anaerobic spore-forming bacterium Clostridioides difficile is the only
bacterium reported to synthesize triphosphate alarmones exclusively. Graduate
and undergraduate trainees in the Purcell lab intend to determine how this
organism’s alarmone synthesis and utilization differ from those in other
bacteria. This project is expected to expand understanding of alarmone signaling
and establish a paradigm for signaling by the triphosphate alarmone alone. This
project will provide opportunities to train graduate and undergraduate
researchers in foundational biochemistry techniques. Graduate researchers,
mostly from underrepresented groups, will also gain experience as co-mentors of
undergraduate trainees to nurture their leadership skills as future scientific
leaders and role models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project
will be to determine the structural basis of this organism’s unique alarmone
synthesis and the regulatory role played by the incompletely characterized
triphosphate alarmone, pGpp. The Purcell group is especially interested in
discovering which active site residues in the clostridial alarmone synthetase
enzymes are involved in hydrolyzing phosphate bonds on its nucleotide substrates
to generate pGpp. Successful implementation of this project will also determine
whether clostridial alarmone hydrolases and alarmone-binding effectors can
recognize the larger alarmones produced by nearby bacteria, potentially
utilizing alarmones for intercellular and interspecies communication as well as
intracellular signaling. This project has the potential to identify the genes
and processes regulated by alarmone signaling in C. difficile to determine
whether it uses its non-canonical alarmone in a conserved manner or whether the
outputs of alarmone signaling pathways in this organism are also
unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.