* 2213838
* STTR Phase I:  Highly Responsive Implantable Ultrasonic Sensor for Long-Term Hemodynamic Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Liwei Lin, CORAVIE MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 295,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an early remote monitoring
solution that notifies healthcare providers of risky blood pressure trends,
enabling cost-effective interventions and preempting costly heart events or
organ damage later. The clinical paradigm shift from infrequent point-in-time
and manual blood pressure measurements to continuous and automatic monitoring
and reporting may increase the understanding of circadian blood pressure trends
and variability that could lead to more than $500 million in healthcare savings
and promote the health of the American public. In the United States, there are
116 million people estimated to have high blood pressure, costing the economy
$131 billion each year, and leading to stroke, heart disease, kidney disease,
and death. A continuous and automatic long-term monitor that requires no patient
action offers peace of mind for the nearly 3 million who struggle with
monitoring blood pressure from home and who are taking multiple medications for
high blood pressure; yet have not managed their blood pressure to a healthy
range. The successful development and integration of technologies may offer
significant opportunities for future implantable, closed-loop solutions for
major chronic health conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Phase I project will evaluate the ability of an implanted
blood pressure monitor to address current, well-known challenges such as sensor
drift and sensor failure due to tissue maturation and the encapsulation effect,
sensor movement and migration, body movement and activity. This project will
model, design, and develop ultrasonic sensors that have the technical capability
to deliver accurate, long-term, continuous blood pressure measurement when
hermetically packaged in biocompatible material for chronic subcutaneous
implant. Three ultrasonic sensors will be modelled, designed, fabricated, and
tested through a physiologic bench simulation for correlation to blood pressure
meausrement over a range of clinical scenarios. The ultrasonic sensorâ€™s
miniaturized form factor will then be hermetically enclosed and further tested
for power consumption, biocompatibility, and sensor performance during an
accelerated test that simulates the biological process of encapsulation. The
goal is to design and develop an ultrasonic sensor that possesses the
functionality to continuously monitor blood pressure in a dynamic implant
environment over a duration of at least one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.