* 2213324
* MPS-Ascend: Elucidating the Design Rules of Green Fluorescent Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Pablo Unzueta, Unzueta, Pablo Andres
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Pablo Unzueta is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Uzueta supports the
research project entitled " MPS-Ascend: Elucidating the Design Rules of Green
Fluorescent Protein", under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is Stanford University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Todd Martinez. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends
to use Quantum Mechanical/Molecular Modeling ab initio molecular dynamics to
study the green fluorescent protein (GFP) chromophore in the protein pocket. A
collaborative approach between experiment, theory and machine learning (ML) has
the potential to provide novel insights into GFP. Finally, ML will be used to
construct a generative model which uses refined theoretical and experimental
data with a focus on human interpretability and physical/chemical intuition upon
model interrogation. Successful implementation of the proposed work will result
in the creation of a smartphone app that provides voice-controlled quantum
chemistry, 2-D structure recognition and interactive 3-D models. A postdoc
mentoring network for historically excluded persons will also be constructed
that recognizes promising early undergraduates from local colleges to aid them
along academic and professional tracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.