* 2213923
* PFI-TT:  Filled carbon nanotubes for the development of high-performance lithium-ion batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Wenzhi Li, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to advance the development of new
components for the next generation high-capacity batteries. The rapid acceptance
of electric vehicles has caused a high demand for new battery technologies
capable of overcoming the existing hurdles. Battery applications such as power
grid energy storage, electric aviation, etc. are also rising at fast pace. This
project will develop and commercialize new anode materials using nanotechnology
to meet the prevailing challenges in the battery industry. The new materials
will offer the opportunity of developing high-energy-density, fast-charging, and
durable batteries. The proposed technology can be implemented by manufacturers
for electric vehicles, electric aviation, grid energy storage, etc. which may,
in turn, improve the major global problems of increasing carbon dioxide
emissions and decreasing petroleum reserves. The project will also enable
several educational and leadership opportunities for students in product design,
implementation, data acquisition, entrepreneurship and technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the use-inspired
application of metal sulfide-filled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as anode additive
materials and anodes in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Preliminary research
suggests that nickel sulfide-filled CNTs can significantly increase the energy
density of LIBs. This project will meet the following goals: scaling up the
synthesis of nickel sulfide-filled CNTs from research-scale to bench-scale and
pilot-scale, understanding the performance of nickel sulfide-filled CNTs as
additive materials for commercial anodes such as graphite and silicon,
optimizing the loading (weight ratio) of nickel sulfide-filled CNTs as an anode
additive, and understanding the performance of nickel sulfide-filled CNTs
synthesized on carbon-based substrates as full working anodes for LIBs in
different form factors such as coin cells, pouch cells, cylindrical cells, etc.
The expected results will fill knowledge gaps in the commercialization of metal
sulfide-filled CNTs as anode additives and full anodes. The project will enhance
the performance of future LIBs in terms of energy density, charging speed,
safety, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.