* 2213688
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: SpecScape: Enabling a Global Spectrum Observatory through Mobile, Wide-band Spectrum Sensing Kits and a Software Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,400,000.00

With continued growth in the demands on wireless spectrum for wireless
communication, spectrum policies are evolving at a pace far more rapid than ever
before. Central to efforts of spectrum modernization is a critical need to
accurately measure spectrum activities across diverse, wide bands and across
wide areas in a cost-effective and accurate manner, so that impacts of such
changes can be carefully evaluated and acted upon in a data-driven manner. The
focus of this project, SpecScape, is to design, implement, deploy, and make
available low-cost kits that allow spectrum sensing and measurement. In
particular, the team is building an end-to-end infrastructure that includes
mobile sensors to measure spectrum activity, a supporting software ecosystem, a
cloud-hosted infrastructure to manage collected measurements, and mechanisms by
which users can access such information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
significant broader impact of this project is that it provides a community-
driven way to understand spectrum use across different spectrum bands -- across
communications, astronomy, weather prediction, localization systems, etc. This
information will aid researchers, industry practitioners, and governmental
agencies, including policymakers. On the educational side, the team is involved
in creating a hands-on wireless curriculum for undergraduates across multiple
institutions (UW and UCSD), engaging undergraduates in research-related
activities, and creating online courseware based on the spectrum sensing
platform. The project also engages a broad audience through multiple
dissemination channels of research outcomes and aims to encourage women and
minority students to pursue STEM careers through opportunities in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.