* 2213975
* PFI-RP:  Portable integrated photonic micro-gas chromatography system for rapid gas analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Weidong Zhou, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2025
* USD 566,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for
Innovation – Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project lies in the development of
the next-generation portable and wearable gas analysis device that will play an
important role in healthcare, industrial and workplace safety, and defense and
national security. Real-world gas samples typically contain tens to hundreds of
volatile organic compounds. Majority of gas sensors either lack the detection
specificity or only respond to specific gases, which makes it challenging to
detect specific gases from a complex background. Although advancement in
portable gas chromatography in the past 20 years demonstrates great potential in
the development of powerful portable and wearable gas analysis devices, it
remains a grand challenge to achieve efficient separation and rapid detection
for effective gas analysis in a compact, highly integrated, and cost-effective
platform. The proposed technology provides unprecedented gas analysis speed,
separation capability, sensitivity, ultra-compact size, and system scalability.
Upon successful commercialization, the technology is envisioned to transform a
powerful instrument in research labs to miniaturized sensors easily accepted and
accessible by the general public with broad applications in healthcare,
environment, industry, and national defense and security. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to develop a compact and portable on-chip GC
system with photonic integrated circuit (PIC) for rapid and comprehensive
volatile organic compounds gas analysis. The GC-PIC system combines on-chip
nanophotonic sensor arrays and efficient vapor separation occurring in high-
aspect ratio microfabricated Si GC columns. A reconstructive metasurface
spectrometer is integrated for on-chip optical detection. The project addresses
critical challenges in synergistic integration of different material/device
technologies to minimize the system footprint, increase performance reliability
and repeatability, and transition the technology from the lab to
commercialization. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
overcoming various technical challenges at the interface of optics, materials,
microfabrication, sensing, manufacturing, signal processing, and scaling and to
demonstrate a GC-PIC prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.