* 2213639
* Collaborative Research: Applying 3D Deep Learning to Site Detection in Tropical Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* David Newton, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,559.00

Researchers at several universities will develop Artificial Intelligence (AI)
methods to investigate long-term human impacts on tropical ecosystems.
Archaeologists can provide new insights to AI because they study both spatial
and temporal components critical for understanding cultural processes that shape
past and present ecosystems. The remote sensing technique of airborne light
detection and ranging (lidar) captures 3D data that permits researchers to
identify previously unknown archaeological features beneath forest canopy and in
inaccessible places, generating new data and fundamentally changing the capacity
for understanding the spatial aspects of anthropogenic landscapes. However, in
tropical regions, researchers face a challenge because they must manually
examine the 2D images of lidar data to identify archaeological features, which
is time-consuming, expensive, and produces results that commonly exclude small
archaeological features, such as households. This project overcomes these issues
by developing new methods that directly analyze 3D lidar data that can be used
in addition to the 2D images. The research team will develop transformative
methods applicable to industry, academia, and beyond providing insights into
current issues of the interconnections of landuse, land transformation, and the
importance of the tropics in human-environment dynamics for resilience and
sustainability. The study has broad implications for the local, national, and
global challenges we face on multiple fronts related to climate change,
urbanization, and population growth that coincides with increasing social
inequality and environmental consequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team will use AI to develop machine learning methods that
allow researchers to automatically detect archaeological features of varying
sizes as well as anthropogenic landscape modifications in lidar data in relation
to topography and vegetation. These methods will enhance understanding of human
impacts on tropical ecosystems because they (a) produce more comprehensive
documentation of the built environment, allowing for more accurate demographic
reconstructions and total household counts, (b) fill in gaps in measurements of
the smallest structures that constituted the majority of ancient Maya households
allowing for more accurate reconstructions of household and neighborhood
inequality and social networks, and (c) create more accurate maps of human-
environment relationships. Beyond archaeology, these methods will benefit
biology, geology, geography, civil engineering, architecture, and urban studies,
which rely on accurate reconstructions of small spatial features. The
collaborative focus of the project will also create and enhance educational and
training opportunities for students in geospatial techniques and computer
science, and strengthen connections between the US-based institutions,
international agencies, and indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.