* 2213432
* LEAPS-MPS: Computational Modeling to Characterize and Attribute Uncertainty in Future Coastal Risk
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Anthony Wong, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 179,999.00

The project aims to examine how coastal areas can mitigate damages from sea-
level change and coastal flooding. Rising global sea levels and intensifying
storms cause risks for people and property in coastal areas. Strategies to
manage these risks include protective measures like building seawalls, elevating
existing structures, and relocation away from the coast. However, uncertainty is
inherent in the geophysical processes, the mathematical models, and the
observational data used to calibrate those models. These modeling uncertainties
lead to uncertainty in the optimal strategy to defend against coastal hazards.
This research will assess how different geophysical and socioeconomic factors
lead to uncertainty in the decisions and costs to effectively protect coastal
areas, and uncertainty in the estimated damages from potentially under-
protecting coastal assets. The project will provide training opportunities for
students to develop software and conduct computer model experiments. These
activities will support the representation and persistence of students from
underrepresented minority groups by enhancing studentsâ€™ sense of science
identity through engaging in projects. Further, the research will be conducted
at a Carnegie R2 university, where the resources made available through this
project will have positive impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
investigate models for sea-level change and coastal impacts by exploiting
mathematical structures for coastal adaptation decision-making and gridded
global climate data. Machine learning and statistical tools will be integrated
with existing geophysical and socioeconomic models, bridging coastal adaptation
decisions to uncertainties in geophysical processes, in climate and
socioeconomic models, and in observational data. This coupled modeling framework
will serve as a laboratory to characterize uncertainty in future coastal
adaptation costs and decisions. The uncertainty will be decomposed and
attributed to geophysical drivers of risk and socioeconomic uncertainties using
supervised machine learning and global sensitivity analysis methods. The
research will assess the extent to which different uncertainties affect the
optimal strategies for adapting coastal areas to the risks posed by sea-level
change. As optimality is typically defined by minimizing expected loss,
additional decision-making criteria will be implemented in the models employed,
thereby enabling an exploration of the role of risk aversion and imperfect
information. A standard modeling framework for integrated assessment will be
used, which will facilitate future efforts to expand this work to examine the
larger role of sea-level hazards in integrated assessments of climate
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.