* 2213854
* BII: Predicting the global host-virus network from molecular foundations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Colin Carlson, Georgetown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,711,338.00

The Viral Emergence Research Initiative Biology Integration Institute (VERENA
BII) will integrate data and biological theory across the fields of
microbiology, immunology, ecology, evolution, and global change biology, working
towards a unified understanding that improves our ability to predict viral
emergence. The COVID-19 pandemic highlights a pressing need to understand the
ecology and evolution of emerging viruses. These global dynamics are determined
first and foremost by the genetic code of both viruses and their hosts, and by
microscopic interactions between the two at the level of proteins and cells.
However, biologists frequently struggle to connect theory across these scales.
At the heart of this research effort is an open clearinghouse of big data,
creating new opportunities to apply artificial intelligence to real-world
problems. To foster a core set of data fluency and interdisciplinary research
skills, the Lighthouse Learning Community will train participants at every
career stage in the boundary-spanning science of the host-virus network,
including more than 100 early career scientists. Undergraduates will be
introduced to both biology and data science through a Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experience in “The Fundamentals of Disease Surveillance,” while
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will explore these methods deeper
through a biology integration workshop series, including a new Summer in the
Capitol program in Washington, D.C. This cohort of emerging scholars will use
open source materials, K-12 outreach, and digital media to harness public
interest in emerging diseases like COVID-19, raising awareness about key issues
while sharing the importance of basic biological research to save lives and
protect ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the mechanistic and
molecular Rules of Life that govern host-virus dynamics at planetary scales, the
VERENA BII will leverage a unique mix of data synthesis, computational
innovation, field sampling, and laboratory experiments to identify the molecular
underpinnings of host-virus interactions. An unprecedented comparative study of
the chiropteran within-host environment will generate and test hypotheses about
the immunological adaptations that allow bats to tolerate deadly viruses. In
parallel, model-guided experiments will measure the features of the invertebrate
immune system that play the greatest role in mosquitoes’ competence as arboviral
vectors. Together, these model systems will illuminate the hard-coded basis of
host-virus compatibility, supporting new machine learning methods to predict
ecological and evolutionary networks and anticipate global risks of viral
emergence in a changing climate. More broadly, the VERENA BII will expand an
existing role as a hub of open data, software, and cyberinfrastructure for host-
virus interactions, experimental virology, and wildlife disease
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.