* 2213159
* MPS-Ascend: First-Principles Modeling of Etching and Intercalation in 2D Nanomaterials and Heterostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Diamond Jones, Jones, Diamond T
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Diamond Jones is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Jones supports the
research project entitled " MPS-Ascend: First-Principles Modeling of Etching and
Intercalation in 2D Nanomaterials and Heterostructures ", under the mentorship
of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Pennsylvania, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Andrew Rappe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work develops and applies computational
chemistry to non-equilibrium processes of fundamental interest and practical
importance to the formation of two dimensional nanomaterials. A key goal of the
proposed study is to develop ab initio methods to bridge fundamental
understanding of metal carbide formation processes. A special focus will be on
the wet chemical etching method to form two-dimensional metal carbide
nanomaterials. The methodology will incorporate electronic structure
calculations, statistical mechanics, stochastics, and machine learning modeling.
The broadening participation plan will involve a collaboration with Women+
Chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania where the PI intends to volunteer
with an established program for middle school girls in Philadelphia public
schools. The PI intends to use social media platforms to identify and spotlight
historically excluded minorities working in the physical sciences; these names
will be forwarded to editors of chemical journals in an effort to diversify the
pool of reviewers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.