* 2213507
* LEAPS-MPS: Development of Carbodiphosphorane Catalysts for Organic and Polymer Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Allegra Liberman-Martin, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 235,421.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Allegra Liberman-Martin and undergraduate students at Chapman University will
develop metal-free catalysts for the sustainable preparation of small organic
molecules and polymers. Many current catalysts use expensive, rare, or toxic
metals, creating an ongoing need to develop efficient and robust catalysts based
on earth-abundant elements. The Prof. Liberman-Martin and her students will
study catalysts that feature neutral, electron-rich carbon centers. This
investigation will improve understanding of reaction pathways for electron-rich
carbon catalysts while also providing new catalytic methods involving ester
substrates, which are found in biomass and plant-based oils. Prof. Liberman-
Martinâ€™s broadening participation plan creates an orientation program, one-
semester research opportunity, and monthly workshop series for STEM transfer
students at Chapman University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Liberman-Martin and
Chapman University undergraduates will study the organocatalytic reactivity of
carbodiphosphoranes and phosphorus ylides. Both catalyst categories feature an
electron-rich carbon center flanked by one or two phosphorus substituents.
Although carbodiphosphoranes have been investigated as ligands to support
inorganic complexes and phosphorus ylides are commonly used as reagents for
organic synthesis, their catalytic behavior remains relatively unexplored. This
project studies catalysis in the context of ester derivatization and targets
both ester reduction and ring-opening polymerization reactions. Discoveries from
this project have the potential to broaden the organocatalytic methods available
to chemists and improve the fundamental understanding of carbodiphosphorane
structure and reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.