* 2213292
* MPS-Ascend: Hadronic Physics at Arizona State University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Brandon Sumner, Sumner, Brandon C
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Brandon Sumner is awarded an NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a
program of research on exotic hadronic matter and activities related to
broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. Most of the visible
mass of the universe is made of bound systems of interacting quarks called
hadrons. Most of the hadrons contain either three quarks (baryons) or a quark
and anti-quark pair (mesons). A bound system of anything other than three bound
quarks or a quark and anti-quark pair is called an “exotic” hadron and Sumner’s
research is aimed at detecting and understanding those unusual forms of hadronic
matter. Sumner is already a member of his home institution’s division of the
American Physical Society Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity Alliance, and will
continue to empower and support physics departments, laboratories, and other
organizations to identify and enact strategies for improving equity, diversity,
and inclusion. The host institution for the fellowship is Arizona State
University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael
Dugger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brandon Sumner will conduct a study on new states
of quarks centered on experimental measurements of exotic hadronic states of
quarks and on the development of instruments to characterize the beams used to
create and detect the hadronic states of interest. Specifically, he will measure
properties of excited cascade states while searching for new states using data
from the GlueX detector at the Jefferson Lab. Sumner will engage in outreach to
increase the representation of physicists from underrepresented groups and will
collaborate in in-person outreach to K-12 students with the Chair of the Physics
Department at Arizona State University, Prof. Patricia Rankin, who is a
cosponsor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.