* 2213949
* Track 2 MRI: Acquisition of a Mini Carbon Dating System for Multi-Millennial, Multi-User Sequences of Annually Resolved 14C and Other High Precision Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bryan Black, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,032,379.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program award provides funds to
support the acquisition of an instrument with which to measure the amount of
Carbon-14 (14C or radiocarbon) in plants, animals and some inorganic samples.
Carbon-14 is the unstable isotope of carbon and can be used as a ‘radioactive
clock’ to date a range of samples from the last 40+ thousand years. While
radiocarbon dating is the most widely used tool with which to determine rates of
change and the timing of events which impacted human history, Carbon-14 locked
away in natural archives such as tree-rings also offers important insights into
a number of key scientific frontiers. These include: reconstructing past global
scale changes in atmospheric and oceanic circulation; predicting and mitigating
for technology threatening space weather events; understanding the role of solar
forcing on climate and; synchronizing global scale chronologies of human,
climate and ecological change through the use of globally detected Carbon-14
marker events. The instrument will be integrated into the teaching, public
outreach and research programs of the world’s founding Laboratory of Tree-Ring
Research (LTRR), which has interwoven with radiocarbon dating since inception of
the technique in the 1960s. This provides unique opportunities to enhance and
broaden STEM outreach and teaching by combing these two dating and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction methods in new ways to introduce core
scientific concepts, tell science stories, and inspire new experimentation and
applications at the cutting edge of Carbon-14 analysis. This will be accelerated
by the proximity of the instrument to an archive of millions of ready-to-
analyze, unique, annual-scale Carbon-14 samples housed in
LTRR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purchase of Ionplus AG’s Mini Carbon Dating
System (MICADAS) will maximize throughput of stable, high-precision, small-
sample (50–500 microgram) measurements of Carbon-14 for applications that
require rapid throughput of thousands of samples, such as consecutive
measurements from individual tree-rings. The MICADAS will integrate with an
Automated Graphitization Equipment (AGE3) system coupled with an Isotope Ratio
Mass Spectrometer (IRMS) to facilitate speedier sample preparation and efficient
throughput. Installation in LTRR will provide a service center for a local,
national, and international user community by offering tree-ring and
radiocarbon-dating solutions under one roof, and creating new onsite and remote
training opportunities with converging expertise in tree-ring,
schlerochronological, and radiocarbon methods. Starting research foci will;
continue in progress work towards an international community effort to rebuild
the existing tree-ring based portion of the International Radiocarbon
Calibration Curve (required by anyone dating samples using radiocarbon) using
single tree-ring samples; work to establish baselines for the periodicity and
magnitude of past space-weather extremes which could threaten modern
infrastructure; provide an annually resolved proxy record of solar forcing on
climate through the Holocene; reveal “cosmogenic anchor points” to synchronize
disparate proxies such as ice-core and tree-ring records; explore global and
regional variability in carbon cycling and; assess ocean circulation in critical
climatic zones through comparison of Carbon-14 time-series from tree-rings and
annually laminated marine bivalves. The facility will respond to an increasing
need for niche training in combined applications using tree-ring dating
techniques and radiocarbon analysis by offering targeted interdisciplinary
training opportunities (locally, nationally and internationally) through a range
of workshops, summer schools, scholarship programs and web-resources. The
instrument’s accessibility, high capacity and throughput, plus sample
preparation requirements will also provide outstanding teaching and training
opportunities to benefit undergraduate and graduate STEM students, early-career
researchers, and faculty at the University of Arizona (a land-grant, Hispanic
Serving Institution with a 52% female student population). Integration of the
instrument and associated core scientific concepts into a thriving outreach
program, which reaches regional Title 1 schools and serves c. 2,500 visitors a
year, will ensure that the new facility not only functions as a nexus to
generate new-cross-cutting research applications, but also as a place to inspire
the next generation of STEM scientists and to inform the public about the ways
science is used to measure time and explore Earth’s past, present and
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.