* 2213253
* SBIR Phase I:  High throughput and antigen specific T-cell receptor discovery through engineered macrophages
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Binbin Chen, VCREATE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I project is
to enable discovery of needed T-cell receptor (TCR) based therapeutics for late-
stage cancer patients who have limited treatment options. These immunotherapies
work by leveraging T-cells engineered with TCRs that will identify and destroy
cancer cells that naturally present a marker (antigen) specific to the cancer on
their surface (e.g., cancer mutations). This project will develop a high-
throughput platform capable of screening many thousands of TCRs against many
thousands of antigens to identify clinically relevant TCRs. This project could
impact societyâ€™s health by discovering TCRs that will serve as the basis for
treatments against currently incurable cancers. The commercial impacts are
potentially large. The total market size of T-cell therapeutics was $2.4 billion
in 2018 and is estimated to reach $8.5 billion by 2027. The platform described
by this proposal has the potential to discover many TCR based therapeutics,
creating value for patient and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is to develop a platform for identifying clinically valuable
TCRs. This platform could be critical for developing new immunotherapies against
solid tumors and for understanding the biology that underlies TCR-antigen
interaction. Screening thousands of TCRs for functional activation against
thousands of antigens is challenging due to the difficulty of tracking
interactions between hundreds of thousands of unique cells. The proposed
platform and method links T-cell activation with phagocytosis using engineered
T-macrophage and antigen presenting cell (APC) lines. T-macrophages engulf APCs
as directed by TCR activation, capturing evidence of an interaction within the
T-macrophage. The resulting interactions can be read from the T-macrophages via
single-cell sequencing. The objective of this project is to produce large cell-
based libraries for TCR and antigens and to identify interacting TCR-antigen
pairs. The antigen library will include hundreds of clinically relevant cancer
targets, such as KRAS and TP53. These results will demonstrate the feasibility
of our platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.