* 2213738
* CCRI:Planning-C:SCA-in-Cloud: Infrastructure to Perform Side-Channel Attacks on Cryptographic Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* David Andrews, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This project focuses on planning activities leading to the development of a
remotely accessible research infrastructure for performing and analyzing side-
channel attacks on cryptographic algorithms (SCA-in-Cloud). When commissioned,
this infrastructure is envisioned serve as an open access platform for
researchers to design and evaluate innovative SCA methods (e.g., timing, power-
based) implemented in both hardware and software. The availability of this open
infrastructure will also encourage more secure development practices and open
new community-based research avenues to develop SCA-resistant implementations of
next generation cryptographic algorithms. A key objective of this planning grant
is to coalesce different groups (cryptography theorists, software engineers,
embedded and real-time engineers, and cybersecurity practitioners) into a more
visible community and solicit collaborators and feedback that is necessary to
create this critical infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two major
tasks in this planning project. The first major task includes a series of
outreach activities for soliciting the interest, requirements, and the scope of
the SCA-in-Cloud infrastructure. Outreach strategies include surveys and
workshops at conferences for direct interactions and community building with all
other cryptography active and aspirational research groups, and the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Further, an advisory committee
will be formed for the initial determination of hardware/software platforms and
known side-channel attacks included in the infrastructure. The second major task
is to develop a prototype of the infrastructure, which will include FPGA and
embedded development kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consistently
integrate the project development with undergraduate and graduate research and
education, and expose students early on to recent advances in security, software
design, and hardware design. The proposed infrastructure will be used by the
Embedded System Security course at the University of Arkansas for performing
power-based side-channel attacks. Other institutions will be contacted to take
advantage of this SCA-in-Cloud infrastructure. Women and underrepresented
students will be encouraged to join the research team. Further, tutorials and
demos will be organized at related conferences, such as FPGA, HOST, and Crypto
for introducing the infrastructure to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website, https://sca-in-cloud.uark.edu, is
dedicated to the portal to the infrastructure and the project repository for all
data, code, results, and reports. All users will access the infrastructure
through this website to perform side-channel attacks on cryptographic algorithms
and obtain the results. The website and all project files will be stored on a
desktop computer maintained by the research team for 3 years. In addition, a
GitHub project will host all data, code results, and reports as a permanent
solution, and will be linked to from the above URL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.