* 2213166
* MPS-Ascend: Representation Theory of General Linear Groups over Finite Local Principal Ideal Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nariel Monteiro, Monteiro, Nariel
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Monteiro, Nariel is awarded a National Science
Foundation Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Monteiro supports the research project entitled
"Representation Theory of General Linear Groups over Finite Local Principal
Ideal Rings," under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of California, Santa Cruz, and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Robert Boltje.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans
to construct complex representations of general linear groups over a finite
local principal ideal ring and investigate similarities with representations of
such groups over arbitrary fields of positive characteristic, particularly the
modular representations. The primary technique for such study will be to use
block theory and the general study of G-algebras, which has previously been
applied successfully by the PI in the case r = 2. The PI plans to investigate
generalizations of such results to other algebraic groups. The PI will also
focus his time on playing a leadership role in PROMYS Math Circle (PMC), a
program focused on increasing the representation of underrepresented students in
STEM fields. This includes developing mathematical content, applying for grants
to support PMC, and helping run a 6-week summer program. Building on his prior
experience with programs to encourage and support the participation of students
from underrepresented and low-income groups in the STEM field, the PI will
engage in various outreach, recruitment, and retention
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.