* 2213118
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Mediated Orthopedic Implant Design and Selection
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* William Byron, MED DIMENSIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 254,580.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is customized dental implant solutions for
animals affected by traumatic jaw injury and disease. Current veterinary
implants utilize platforms designed for human use, despite a greater variability
in anatomy, bone strength, and procedural requirements. This approach has
subsequent shortcomings accounting for anatomical and physiologic variations
resulting in trauma, neovascular damage, incomplete healing, and failure to
improve or restore functionality. The project proposes a software program and
system for generating customized implant designs and criteria based on the
specific anatomy and procedure. A successful project would improve veterinary
care and the lives of pets and service dogs following injury.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to develop a Machine Learning (ML) software to incorporate bone
density screening with 2-dimensional to 3-dimensional reconstruction software to
create anatomically derived implants and software guided implant placement. The
proposed ML system will identify key anatomical considerations and animal
classifications for optimizing implant designs and procedural criteria. By
integrating a database of appropriate animal scans, the ML software will
identify the optimal regions for implant and refine as needed. The result of
this Phase 1 is a database-derived algorithm which generates implant shapes and
sizes that avoid anatomical features that interfere with proper
placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.