* 2213040
* SBIR Phase I:  Three Dimentional (3D) Printing With Embedded, Layer-Crossing, Continuous Carbon Filament Reinforcement
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Winston Tao, NUTHATCH ROBOTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to increase the all-around strength of three dimentional (3D)-printed
polymer objects, which will make such objects more useful for structurally-
stressed prototypes and manufactured products (including prototypes and products
that are physically large). The prposed strength gains are expected from
embedding continuous carbon-fiber filaments in multiple directions within the
body of a 3D-print. Designers and engineers seek to tailor internal carbon-fiber
arrangements to suit their specific needs. The resulting carbon-fiber-reinforced
objects (as with 3D-printed objects in general) may be produced without the
expensive and/or time-consuming use of molds, tooling, or specialized hand-
labor. By facilitating the cost-effective production of strong, plastics-based
custom and low-volume manufactured products, this project seeks accelerate
product development, foster entrepreneurship, and encourage manufacturing
endeavors within the United States by making it easier to turn imagined concepts
into strong, functional objects in the physical world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop a process for embedding continuous, layer-
crossing, carbon-fiber filaments within the body of a Fused Deposition Modeling
(FDM) 3D print in order to provide tensile and shear reinforcement along planes
orthogonal to the 3D printed layer. The goal of the research is to employ quasi-
parallel filaments oriented orthogonal to 3D print layers, reducing the
interlayer weakness and resultant structural anisotropy characteristic of FDM
prints. The project will further examine the use of more complex filament
arrangements to provide selective reinforcement in directions and along paths
specified by a product designer. The overall strength, stiffness, and toughness
will be assessed adn compared to conventionally-manufactured engineering
plastics. The embedding process, which will take place simultaneously with the
layer-by-layer creation of the print, will be achieved by combining the actions
of FDM printer nozzles with those of automated robotic filament manipulators.
The project will examine the geometric range of printed parts and components
that incorporate reinforcing filaments, with initial goal of printing reinforced
shell-like objects that continuously curve along multiple
axes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.