* 2213230
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigating Metallicity and Stellar Age Effects on X-ray Binary Populations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Breanna Binder, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 218,224.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). X-ray binaries (XRBs) consist of a neutron star or
black hole that is actively accreting gas from a close companion star; this
accretion is responsible for the emission of X-rays. Of particular interest are
high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXBs), in which the companion star is more than 8
times the Sun's mass, as these will become binary black holes or neutron stars,
capable of producing detectable gravitational waves when they merge. The high-
energy photons radiated by XRBs can also heat a galaxy's gas reservoir
sufficiently to "act as a brake" on star formation, particularly in the small,
metal poor galaxies that dominate at high redshift. Moreover, HMXBs from the
first generation of stars likely helped reionize the early universe. XRBs have
thus played a significant role in the formation and evolution of galaxies. A
better understanding of XRBs requires an appraisal of how they are affected by
the age and metallicity of their environment. This project will characterize XRB
populations in a sample of local galaxies having a range of chemical abundance,
star formation history (SFH), and age to assess any such dependence. The
proposal will support the mentoring of two undergraduate researchers each year,
as well as an astronomy summer school (Cal Poly PASS) that will train roughly
ten undergraduates per year, all drawn from under- represented or marginalized
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research carried out by the principal investigator
(PI) and students will determine the detailed shape of the XRB X-ray luminosity
function (XLF) while controlling for environmental metallicity, SMH, and stellar
age for individual XRBs within forth-eight nearby galaxies using multiwavelength
archival data. The shape of the XLF is expected to evolve with metallicity and
stellar age, along with substantial (and stochastic) variations in HMXB
formation efficiency in local low-mass, low- metallicity galaxies that serve as
analogs to the young galaxies found at high redshift. Understanding the XLF
shape and scatter inherent in XRB scaling relations will be important for
constraining XRB population synthesis models used in (e.g.) detailed galaxy
evolution simulations, a clearer understanding of star formation suppression
over cosmic time, and for a better sense of how these objects contribute to the
reionization of the universe. This LEAPS-MPS research program represents the
first systematic study of XRBs and their environments on sub-
kiloparsec&lt;br/&gt;scales. The rich, publicly available archival observations
of nearby galaxies provide additional opportunities for undergraduate students
at Cal Poly Pomona to participate in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.