* 2213672
* CCRI:New:An Instrumented Multi-Platform Overlay for Networked Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Patrick Crowley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,841,145.00

This project will create practical software infrastructure to enable researchers
to develop networked systems innovations by developing, evaluating, and
distributing networking software that operates over smartphones, laptops,
servers, and routers. Many networking and distributed systems research projects
are envisioned to improve how users, devices, and servers connect and
communicate. However, smartphones represent the predominant user platform, while
most academic systems researchers can only justify prototype development and
evaluation in Linux, due to the complexity and engineering effort associated
with other types of systems. The infrastructure developed in this project –
software able to operate over multiple device types while providing built-in
experimental data capture – will dramatically simplify the steps needed for
researchers to prototype &amp; evaluate their work in modern device contexts.
Just as it is easier to search for keys under a streetlight, it is easier to
design research projects within the comfortable limits of available research
platforms; the goal of this project is to dramatically broaden those
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of using a modern research platform
extend beyond more relevant academic research evaluations. First,
commercialization and real-word adoption are more likely. Research activities
that target modern platforms simplify the pathway between research innovation
and translation into real-world use through open-source projects and
commercialization. Second, by targeting platforms like smartphones, research
products can be more readily used by people for both research evaluation and,
when relevant, actual usage by non-researchers. It is difficult to generate
“killer apps” for a networked system innovation if the research products cannot
be used by people. Third, graduate research assistants, in the course of their
training in research projects, will benefit from the use of the tools and
techniques needed to develop and evaluate on modern platforms. Students
graduating into research positions will begin with a modern systems foundation,
while students graduating into industry will have desirable knowledge and
practical skills. Fourth, the intrinsic experimental data and telemetry gathered
through this infrastructure will enable energy-oriented experimentation, which
can aid researchers in pursuing research agendas in
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.