* 2213852
* PFI-RP:  Magnet Topology Optimization for Electric Machine Design
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jon Longtin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to improve electric machine designs.
The proposed software suite is expected to be a plug-in module that can be
installed as an add-on to a number of existing computer-aided engineering (CAE)
tools. The efficient design of magnets with Rare Earth (RE) or non-RE materials
may enable the development of high-quality and high-throughput generators and
electric motors for many applications, including electric vehicles, wind power,
and electric aircraft. This project will implement NSF I-Corps training for
participating students and conduct outreach activities for broadening
participation in science, technology, enegineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a level-
set-based, multi-physics and multi-material topology optimization software for
electric machine design. Conceptual design is considered the most important
stage in the product life cycle, and topology optimization is the most advanced
tool for conceptual design. The proposed topology optimization tool will be used
in the initial stages of the electric generator/motor development and may enable
the design engineers to achieve a better design with reduced lead time. The key
differentiator of the proposed magnet topology optimization tool lies in the
level-set-based parametric topology optimization framework. Compared with
element-based approaches such as the Homogenization method and SIMP methods, the
lev-el-set-based topology optimization approach which can handle multi-physics
and multi-material magnet topology optimization problems with design-dependent
boundary conditions. The topology optimization will be integrated with model-
based co-design tools for electric-machine design to simultaneously achieve
optimal designs at the component and system levels of an electric machine. The
proposed research includes: (1) multiphysics modeling of electric generators,
(2) a parametric level set topology optimization of multi-physics and multi-
material magnets, (3) integration of topology optimization with model-based co-
design, and (4) advanced manufacturing and performance validation of optimized
magnets for electric generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.