* 2213127
* Collaborative Research: Equitable Science Sensemaking: Helping Teacher Candidates Support Multiple Pathways for Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sophia Jeong, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 155,994.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
education for future elementary science teachers. Specifically, the project aims
to help teacher candidates learn about science in an immersive and approachable
way that can, in turn, support their development of equitable science teaching
practices. Learning activities for teacher candidates will be designed,
implemented in methods courses, and then revised and re-evaluated. The teacher
candidates will also design their own lessons and use them during their
concurrent teaching practicum. These activities and lessons will be based on a
view of science that values the many perspectives that science students could
have. By designing and evaluating these activities, this project has the
potential to enhance understanding about supporting equitable science teaching,
which is important for broadening participation in STEM fields. Additional
project activities include efforts to sustain the professional learning
communities established in the methods courses, disseminate results through
publications and presentations, and make curricular materials and updates
accessible to an online community of teacher educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to support undergraduate elementary teacher
candidates’ learning about science and equitable science teaching. The project
plans to achieve this goal by designing learning activities for elementary
science methods courses that leverage successful practices from the prior work
of the project team, including immersive learning, collaborative planning, and
reflection. Activities will include resources for equitable teaching, such as
anti-deficit noticing and multicultural curriculum design. The project intends
to trace how the designed activities support teacher candidates in
rearticulating ideologies about what counts as “science,” developing equitable
teaching practices, and designing curricula that invite and value multiple ways
of knowing. In the first year, the project aims to design, implement, and
evaluate learning activities with an initial cohort of teacher candidates across
two universities: Ohio State University and Vanderbilt University. In the second
year, the project will redesign learning activities based on feedback from
teacher candidates and an advisory board. Data will include video recordings of
learning activities, artifacts from methods courses, and interviews with
participants. Qualitative analysis methods will be used to evaluate teacher
candidates’ learning about science and about equitable science teaching
practices. The redesigned activities will be implemented and evaluated with a
new cohort. In addition, the project intends to follow the initial cohort of
participating teacher candidates beyond their methods courses by offering
professional learning experiences: video clubs in which participants share and
discuss videos of their teaching. Teacher candidates will also be invited to
share what they have learned at conferences, building networks of elementary
educators committed to equitable elementary science teaching. Further
dissemination efforts include faculty conference presentations, publications,
and a freely available "Facilitator's Guide" that could foster a community of
users. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE:EHR program. The NSF IUSE:EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.