* 2213128
* SBIR Phase II:  A Flexible and Efficient Manufacturing System for Radio Antenna Reflectors
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Roslyn Norman, PARAMIUM TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2024
* USD 999,968.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to provide faster internet speeds to remote locations. This goal will
be accomplished through the delivery of custom-shaped reflector panels for
satellite communication antennas. Currently, there is a significant unmet need
in the market for rapid turnaround, relatively low quantity, and affordable
curved metal panels with complex, high precision shapes. The manufacturing
technology developed in this project may enable economical antenna design and
allow for asymmetric panel shapes. The expected advancement in panel fabrication
techniques may increase the efficiency of satellite communication by enabling
more complex and tailored designs for individual applications. Expanded
satellite communication allows for more internet access in underserved
communities around the world. The new manufacturing technology may also benefit
radio astronomy, with some estimates showing a 70% reduction in dish reflector
costs for some large near-term projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop a new
technology to make satellite dish panels. This innovation may reduce cost and
allow radio antenna producers to optimize their designs for faster data
throughput. To meet modern communication needs, application-specific, precision
manufactured reflector panels are needed. Historic manufacturing techniques have
long lead times and high material costs. This project builds on past efforts and
demonstrations to integrate innovative inspection methods and new manufacturing
techniques into an automatic workstation capable of fabricating 1-meter squared
scale reflector panels. Test panels will be built to evaluate system performance
against key performance indicators, including panel shape accuracy and time to
shape and inspect panels. This new approach may produce panels up to 11 times
faster than some traditional methods without compromising shape
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.