* 2213636
* CCRI: New: A Community Testbed for Designing Carbon-Efficient Cloud Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,458,189.00

While the growth of cloud platforms has fueled the rise of a diverse set of
online services in recent decades, it has also led to increasing energy
consumption and, hence, carbon emissions. Cloud platforms are well-positioned to
reduce their carbon emissions by transitioning to cleaner energy sources because
cloud applications often have significant spatial, temporal, and performance
flexibility, enabling them to shift the location, time, and intensity of their
execution to better align with the availability of carbon-free renewable energy
or low-carbon grid energy. Unfortunately, researchers cannot leverage this
unique combination of advantages to experiment with and optimize cloud
applications' carbon-efficiency because current cloud platforms do not expose
energy's carbon characteristics to them. To address the problem, this project
will design and implement a shared community testbed for experimenting with the
design of carbon-efficient cloud applications. The testbed will be deployed in
an edge data center with a local energy system that includes a co-located solar
array, batteries, and cooling system. The testbed software will virtualize the
energy system by exposing software-defined visibility and control of it to cloud
applications, which will enable experimentation with a rich, but unexplored,
design space for developing novel carbon-efficient cloud applications capable of
responding to clean energy and carbon dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has the potential for significant technical impact in advancing the design of
carbon-efficient cloud applications, which is important for reducing
environmental damage associated with cloud platforms' increasing energy usage
and carbon footprint. The project will involve significant community outreach,
including annual workshops and tutorials, to both raise awareness of the
importance of optimizing for carbon-efficiency and demonstrate how the testbed
can enable and advance carbon-efficiency research. The project also plans to
conduct outreach by incorporating sustainable computing topics as part of summer
programs for local middle and high school students. The project will incorporate
use of the testbed into current courses on cloud computing and green computing
to both get feedback on the testbed and to enrich students' learning
environment. Finally, in addition to making the testbed available to the
community, the project will make the software artifacts and datasets developed
by the project available to the community via the UMass Trace Repository, which
hosts many open datasets collected by researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.