* 2213616
* PFI-TT:  Reactive biofilm surfaces for efficient nitrogen management in liquid waste streams
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Nicole Berge, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,689.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to test and commercialize an energy-
efficient, high-rate technology with a small carbon footprint to manage ammonium
nitrogen in liquid waste streams. The project supports environmental
sustainability through the protection of clean water. This project will use a
new reactor design to utilize dissolved methane gas as a carbon source,
achieving low nitrogen levels in the treated effluent and reducing the
greenhouse gas footprint of wastewater treatment plants. This project may be
suitable for small and large scale municipalities in the United States. Students
involved in the project will obtain experiential training with an
entrepreneurship mindset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to
demonstrate and test critical parameters associated with obtaining low nitrogen
in treated effluents while saving energy and carbon. More stringent limits are
proposed for the total nitrogen content in treated wastewater that is discharged
in estuaries, directly into the sea, or into other freshwater-sensitive water
bodies. Conventional denitrification cannot meet this stringent criterion due to
the low concentration biodegradable organic carbon in the influent needed for
heterotrophic denitrification. The proposed technology combines anaerobic
ammonia oxidation with methane supported denitrification in reactive biofilms to
achieve low nitrogen in the final effluent. The process also uses dissolved
methane gas to help denitrification, mitigating the challenges of greenhouse gas
emissions. The partnerships with a technology vendor and several wastewater
districts may ensure the commercialization of this research
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.