* 2213826
* HCC: Small: Human-Centered Computing to Support Citizen Data Science on Gender-based Violence
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Catherine D'Ignazio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 598,366.00

This study seeks to better understand citizen data practices, namely, which data
are related to serious social problems are more important to citizens and what
citizens actually do with open data. It focuses on citizen data about gender-
based violence, and specifically data about the killing of women and girls for
reasons based on their gender. While there has been a great deal of research on
open data, and speculation about its benefits to democracy, there has been
comparatively less empirical work. It is well-established that official data on
gender violence and feminicide are often incomplete, difficult to access,
infrequently updated, and underreported. Citizen groups have stepped into these
gendered data gaps. This research project aims to empirically study the
informatic practices of groups that undertake citizen data science about
feminicide as well as develop design implications for how human-centered
computing may better support this work. By systematizing ad-hoc citizen
practices into an empirical model and cultivating citizens' own human-centered
computing design ideas, this work will advance the practice of citizen data
science on the topic of feminicide as well as support public awareness, policy
and civil society-public sector collaboration on civic data about gender-based
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make four contributions to the
scholarly literature in the fields of human-computer interaction, critical data
studies, women's and gender studies, and sociology. (1) Empirical contribution:
The project aims first of all to advance empirical understanding of citizen data
science practices about feminicide and gender-based killing which have been the
subject of little research. This will provide the empirical groundwork for
digital tools and research that can better support citizen data science about
gender-based violence, and could potentially lead to increased government-civil
society cooperation around feminicide data in the future. (2) Methodological
contribution: While research on citizen data practices typically focuses on case
studies, this research will undertake a broader and transnational analysis of
these practices across a specific topical domain where there is significant
citizen energy and activity. (3) Design contribution: By working in an equitable
and participatory way with groups themselves, it will contribute high-level
design implications for human-centered computing to support citizen data science
about gender-based violence, and center the voices and experiences of such
groups in the design process. (4) Generalizability of findings: An assessment of
fundamental concepts and research methods explored in this research will provide
groundwork for equity-oriented citizen data science beyond the domain of gender-
based violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.