* 2213520
* LEAPS-MPS: Electric field sensing with nitrogen vacancy centers and chemical tuning of the diamond host
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Abraham Wolcott, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,696.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description.
Diamond has many properties that make it valuable well beyond its use as a
gemstone. Notably, diamond hosts a sensitive detector of magnetic and electric
fields: the nitrogen vacancy (NV) center. Such NV centers can be used to sense
magnetic objects and have potential for use as quantum bits (qubits) in the
quantum computers of the future. Diamond’s chemical inertness, its reluctance to
change or be modified, is both a challenge and an opportunity for materials
chemists, physicists and engineers. Changing chemical bonds on the surface of
diamond allows for the attachment of molecular groups and anchoring points for
measurement and detection. In this LEAPS-MPS project, the PI and his team will
explore the surface chemistry of diamond and investigate how the light given off
by the NV center changes with an applied voltage. The surface chemistry of
nanoscale diamonds and the behavior of the NV center will be simultaneously
examined with the long-term aim of making a more advanced quantum sensor.
Undergraduate students will learn advanced chemistry and spectroscopy
techniques, including use of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource.
Recruitment of talent is in collaboration with the Black Leadership and
Opportunity Center (BLOC) and other student-based organizations at San Jose
State University. This project will provide rigorous and wide-ranging research
experiences to prepare scientists and engineers for a successful career by
providing the skills to execute a research project, manage troubleshooting,
prepare an impactful research presentation and build their resume for future
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. In this LEAPS-MPS project,
the PI will explore new routes to chemically activate the surface of nanoscale
high-pressure high-temperature nanoscale diamonds 25 to 100 nm in size to
generate new covalent bonds and examine the photophysics of NV centers. By
tuning the surface dipole moment of the diamond host, researchers will
investigate a largely unexplored space of NV voltage sensing with
spectroelectrochemistry. Activation of the diamond surface will occur with wet
chemistry under inert conditions and a series of nucleophiles are reacted with
the “activated” diamond constructs. Confirmation of the atomic and molecular
structure of the diamond constructs will occur with overlapping surface
sensitive techniques including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and synchrotron-
based X-ray spectroscopies at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource.
The surface modified samples are deposited onto transparent conducting
electrodes and NV center fluorescence is tracked as a function of applied
voltage in a custom microscope. A series of voltage sweep parameters are
modified to understand how the NV center can toggle between its fluorescent
charge states. A working model is then generated to explain the NV center
fluorescent properties as a function of surface dipole moment, charge density
and charge identity. This diamond project is conducted by a highly diverse
cohort of researchers from many disciplines including the physical sciences,
life sciences and engineering disciplines. Researchers acquire an advanced skill
set during the project cycle and will be able to successfully apply to PhD
programs, work at national laboratories or enter into industrial positions upon
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.