* 2213195
* MPS-Ascend: Reading natural information stored in granular materials through oblique impacts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Esteban Wright, Wright, Esteban
* Fellowship Award
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Esteban Wright is awarded an NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broadening participation
by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Esteban Wright
supports his research project entitled " MPS-Ascend: Reading natural information
stored in granular materials through oblique impacts", under the mentorship of a
sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is the University
of Maryland, College Park, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Wolfgang Losert.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asteroid surfaces are incredibly complex and diverse
environments with large boulders several meters in size alongside fine-grained
regolith. The polydisperse nature of the surface extends to the subsurface where
little is known about the composition, porosity, or size distribution of the
granular material. These environments are subject to surface impacts from
micrometeorites or material ejected from the surface into suborbital
trajectories. Asteroids also experience thermal compression and relaxation due
to their fast rotation speeds. Both of these processes contribute to compressive
cycling forces that can be imprinted in the grain's memory. This project aims to
study the dynamics of oblique impacts as a means to probe this stored
information in the grains. Impact experiments into granular systems provide a
way to study subsurface granular systems from surface interactions alone. This
is a major advantage in the context of space missions, especially those equipped
with landers, or with specially designed impactors for testing the surface
response or for determining landing sites. This project involves
multidisciplinary fields (such as computational physics and engineering) and
includes students of diverse academic backgrounds. More broadly, an active role
by the PI, who is of minority background, in such outreach events at the
University of Maryland as Maryland Day and GRADMAP, an organization aimed at
expanding diversity and representation in the physics and astronomy communities,
enables visibility of active underrepresented individuals in leadership
positions within physics and astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.