* 2213550
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Advancing process understanding of lake water quality to macrosystem scales with knowledge-guided machine learning
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 10/31/2026
* USD 567,340.00

Despite the growing influence of human activities on lakes, there is remarkably
sparse information on lake water quality at continental scales. Moreover, we
have only a nascent understanding of how broadscale changes in key drivers, such
as climate and land use, control water quality at continental scales. Thus, it
is a challenge to understand how ecological knowledge, based on a few relatively
well-studied lakes, applies to the continental U.S., where data are limited for
1000s of lakes. Because of the large number of lakes and the complexity of the
water quality problem, machine learning may prove useful. However, recent
advances in machine learning that have shown great success in commercial
applications have yet to be fully applied to problems in natural systems, such
as lake water quality, in part because of lower data volumes. In addition, a
fundamental goal of basic ecological research is mechanistic understanding of
the way the world works, a goal missing in many machine learning approaches.
This project develops ecology-knowledge guided machine learning (Eco-KGML) as a
framework for leveraging the power of both ecological understanding and machine
learning in modeling lake water quality across the U.S. Eco-KGML improves the
accuracy of water quality predictions and advances the discovery of new
knowledge about water quality processes. To broaden the impacts of this work,
the project supports participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) through a training program
consisting of cohorts of undergraduate students, recruited from historically-
excluded groups, who work on Eco-KGML research projects each summer. This
program provides authentic research experiences that evolve into individual
research projects during the academic year and engage students in cross-
disciplinary, cross-institutional, collaborative science in a supportive
environment. This project also improves STEM education through production and
dissemination of an interactive software module that introduces students to Eco-
KGML concepts. The broader impact of this project extends beyond the
participating universities through collaborations with U.S. federal agency
partners and collaborators from the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON) that inform, and feed back to, agency and NEON priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops ecology-knowledge guided machine
learning (Eco-KGML) as a conceptual framework for modeling lake and reservoir
water quality (WQ) dynamics at macrosystem scales. Eco-KGML uses hybrid
combinations of dynamical process-based models and ML models to scale WQ
processes from well-studied lakes to macrosystem-scales across the U.S with the
help of geographically extensive WQ data. This project focuses on the specific
WQ metrics of water clarity, phytoplankton biomass, and hypolimnetic anoxia, in
addressing the questions: What are the dominant processes governing water
quality and how do they vary across space and time? How do climate, land use,
and ecosystem memory interact to affect water quality dynamics from local to
macrosystem-scales? What are the broad spatial and long-term patterns of change
in lake water quality? In addressing these questions, a new line of research is
enabled in Eco-KGML models for lake WQ, which are not only aimed at improving
predictive performance of WQ variables but can also lead to discovery of new
knowledge about WQ processes at a range of spatio-temporal scales. Novel
research in estimating process parameters of a lake, given its WQ observations,
in a computationally efficient and generalizable manner is explored using ML
methods. The ML-based models for lake WQ enable the discovery of new
relationships among WQ variables at every lake, along with extracting relevant
time lags. Through novel research in modular compositional learning (MCL), Eco-
KGML models are developed to identify which WQ processes are dominant at a given
lake and how they interact to influence overall WQ dynamics. Moreover, the Eco-
KGML models learn and distinguish processes specific to a single lake from those
that generalize across types of lakes according to its ecological
characteristics. This flexible and comprehensive use of both scientific
knowledge and data enable the study of scale-dependent relationships between
lakes and their drivers while providing more robust predictions for lakes across
multiple temporal and spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.