* 2213221
* SBIR Phase I:  IoT-Enabled Intelligent Data Replication for Secure Redundant Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Jairo Giraldo Trujillo, GRID MODERNIZATION SOLUTIONS, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 11/30/2023
* USD 248,975.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is to increase
the visibility and availability of data used for control and automation of
critical infrastructures. This research proposes the development of a novel
technology that takes advantage of flexible, low cost, and low power internet of
things (IoT) devices to replicate, transmit, and analyze relevant monitoring and
control data. Blackouts in the U.S. cause tens of billions of dollars in outage
cost annually. This technology will advance the nation's energy safety,
security, and economy by improving the capabilities of critical infrastructure
systems to respond to blackouts caused by anomalous events such as natural
disasters (e.g., hurricanes, winter storms) and localized faults or
cyberattacks. Therefore, the technology developed in this project will decrease
restoration time and provide real-time defense against cyberattacks, reducing
the loss of electricity to critical users such as hospitals and governmental
facilities, and saving billions of dollars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance the scientific knowledge required to enhance the
resilience of critical infrastructures through the integration of IoT networks,
monitoring and control technologies, and data analytics. Advances in the use of
IoT devices for critical infrastructures integrated with security mechanisms
will facilitate the technology transition of the current critical
infrastructure. This project will explore and design novel mechanisms for data
processing, light-weight encryption, and attack detection. The technology
developed in this project will have widespread applications in monitoring and
control, not only in the electricity sector, but also in many other critical
infrastructures such as water, oil, and gas. A proof of concept will be
developed to validate the feasibility of the proposed architecture and
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.