* 2213959
* PFI-TT: Virtual Torque measurements for heavy duty engine applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Richard Meyer, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 249,856.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to provide an accurate and reliable
virtual torque sensing (VTS) technology integrated with truck engines that can
help improve fuel efficiency and reduce emissions while facilitating a more
comfortable gear shift. Improved accuracy of real time engine torque may result
in a more appropriate gear selection in transmissions thereby delivering reduced
fuel consumption and better knowledge about powertrain operation. As exhaust
temperature and emission levels depend on both instantaneous and historical
engine speed/torque demands, improved accuracy in real time torque measurement
helps to address a significant source of harmful emissions. The proposed device
is being designed for heavy and medium truck engines fitted in transportation
trucks, off-highway vehicles, military trucks, and other vehicles in the
transportation sector. This project also seeks to extend the application of this
technique to compressed and liquified- natural gas-fueled and hybrid vehicles.
Improved accuracy in real time torque measurement will enable engineers to
develop more robust analytical models and methods that will help reduce
transmission calibration time, while providing opportunities for engine
prognostics by identifying unusual variations in engine
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop VTS
technology providing real-time analyses of engine torque to facilitate optimal
gear shifting and provide engine prognostics for vehicles. The three major
objectives of this project are: 1) build a minimum viable product with tested
and proven features for different engines, 2) perform real-world, on-road fuel
efficiency truck testing using VTS enabled improvements, and 3) develop a
commercialization path for marketing and obtaining sensor certifications.
Historically, the automotive industry has struggled to obtain and utilize
inexpensive, accurate, onboard sensors for engine control applications. Better
coordination between a vehicleâ€™s engine and transmission may enable smoother
gear shifts and improved fuel economy and vehicle performance. A simple,
accurate, and cost-effective torque sensor may improve the efficiency and
reliability of engine and transmission control. The VTS accuracy relies upon the
ability to extract accurate torque values from harmonic information contained
within the engine flywheel speed. In this project, artificial intelligence with
a machine learning capability will be utilized for accurate and reliable torque
analysis. However, the long-term goal of this project is to expand utilization
of instantaneous torque measurement methods to better assist engineers in
developing advanced control methods for the rapidly developing vehicle mobility
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.