* 2213946
* PFI-RP:  Commercialization of Automotive Lane Line Detection Software for Snow-Covered  Roads
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Zachary Asher, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2025
* USD 549,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is improved transportation safety and
usability for the general public during adverse weather conditions.
Additionally, this project seeks to develop and commercialize new computer
vision and machine learning techniques that can be applied to other
applications, facilitating engagement from the automotive industry in addressing
inclement weather driving problems and enabling entrepreneurial engagement from
underrepresented communities. Achievement of safe vehicle operation in adverse
weather has further implications associated with the widespread deployment of
automated vehicles and features including improved efficiency to combat climate
change, improvements in ground vehicles for military applications, and a
stronger transportation network design and management. Students from
underrepresented communities will be recruited and receive training in
translational research and entrepreneurship through engagement with existing
university-wide organizations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks
to develop automated vehicle computer vision for adverse weather which, despite
being commonly identified as a needed product, has received relatively little
attention in the marketplace. The proposed technology utilizes automotive
cameras, computer vision, systems engineering principles, and refined methods of
machine learning without an overreliance on deep learning. The translation and
commercialization of computer vision algorithms into a fully automated vehicle
systems with embedded hardware requires a multidisciplinary approach requiring
academic, industrial, and entrepreneurial competence. The four key technical
barriers include data scale-up, module improvements, vehicle integration, and
use of embedded hardware. Because the identified minimum viable product is
designed for safe automated driving in snow, the team is pursuing winter season
milestones that include large dataset collection, module improvements with an
associated vehicle integration demonstration, and a complete minimum viable
product demonstration with potential business partners and customers. The
project goal is successful commercialization of an automotive lane line
detection software for snow-covered roads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.