* 2213103
* MPS-Ascend: Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Heteropolymers: Sequence Details and Coupling to Statistical Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Phillips, Phillips, Michael Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Michael Phillips is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Phillips supports his
research entitled “MPS-Ascend: Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Heteropolymers:
Sequence Details and Coupling to Statistical Fluctuations”, under the mentorship
of sponsoring senior scientists. The host institution for the fellowship is
University of Denver, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Kingshuk
Ghosh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical techniques will be applied to predict
the behavior of large, long-chain like molecules in solution with an aim to
better understand how living cells work. This work extends previous models and
applies them to phenomena like liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) where
polymer solutions separate into high- and low-density regions. The hypothesis is
that this process is important to reducing noise in the chemical circuitry that
extracts information from DNA. The complex theoretical tools developed will help
streamline the design of new synthetic polymers, and advance understanding of
fundamental questions about physical and chemical processes in living cells and
evolution. Alongside research activities, this project promotes education and
diversity in STEM fields. Students from diverse backgrounds are engaged directly
at the college and university levels by informational events. Those materials
and methods are shared freely with K-12 educators. Students explore topics
across scientific fields by working on introductory projects led by experienced
researchers. Video games, music, programming, machine learning, and other tools
are incorporated into the projects. Select students are offered stipends to
support the time and effort spent on projects. This project advances scientific
progress across several different fields. Further, a new approach to public
engagement is pioneered to improve scientific understanding in the local
community. In these ways, the health, prosperity, and welfare of the United
States is strongly promoted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.