* 2213220
* STTR Phase I:  Solution processed flexible semitransparent organic photovoltaic (OPV) modules for greenhouses
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Harald Ade, POLYPV, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a disruptive technology that reduces the
environmental impact of greenhouse-based agriculture while simultaneously
improving its economic potential through the application of semitransparent
organic solar cells onto the greenhouse glazing (i.e., windows). Greenhouses can
be a form of high productivity farming that conserves land and water making them
an attractive form of sustainable and climate resilient agriculture. However,
greenhouses consume significantly more energy than conventional farming. For
greenhouses to be a part of a sustainable agriculture future, there is a need to
reduce their energy demand. Prior research has demonstrated that organic solar
modules integrated into greenhouse structures may reduce or even eliminate
external energy demand while not negatively impacting crop production. The
global commercial market of conventional greenhouses will reach $50.6 billion by
2025. The growing greenhouse market translates to gigawatt solar power market
size. The added economic benefit of organic solar module adoption in greenhouses
provides a path for widespread adoption of organic solar modules and the growing
greenhouse market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
develop flexible, semitransparent, organic solar cells that are tailored
specifically for greenhouse glazing integration. The organic solar cells will
contribute to the energy production of such greenhouses and may completely
eliminate greenhouse energy needs, providing a more environmentally sound form
of agriculture. To make this vision of low energy demand greenhouses, there is a
need to make high-performance flexible organic solar cells. This solution will
be achieved through the optimization of the active layer, the electrodes, and
the encapsulation processes. The three primary research tasks are to: (1)
produce photoactive inks that are compatible with large-scale coating and have
tuned transmittance; (2) achieve high transparency and physically robust,
transparent, conducting electrodes based on silver nanowires produced using
scalable coating methods; and (3) develop large area, low-cost, transparent, and
flexible encapsulation layers. If successful, these solar cells will have
advantageous operating characteristics not achievable with other solar cell
technologies, providing a unique commercial
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.