* 2213323
* MPS-Ascend: Triangulations of the Product of Two Simplices and Matroids from Fine Mixed Subdivisions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Felix Gotti, Gotti, Felix
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). PI Felix Gotti is awarded a National Science Foundation
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities related to
broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to
Dr. Gotti supports the research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Triangulations of
the Product of Two Simplices and Matroids from Fine Mixed Subdivisions", under
the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the
fellowship is the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Alex Postnikov.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on his prior
research, Dr. Gotti plans to investigate problems in algebraic combinatorics
related to triangulations of products of two simplices and fine mixed
subdivisions of regular tetrahedra. In this work, the PI aims to address some
questions posed in Postnikov's work entitled "Permutohedra, associahedra, and
beyond" and to settle down some problems related to lozenge tilings (i.e., two-
dimensional fine mixed subdivisions) that are stated at the end of Ardila and
Billey’s work titled “Flag arrangements and triangulations of product of
simplices”. The PI's broadening participation plans include the design of
satellite research projects aimed to bring research in mathematics to young
highly-motivated students and to mentor students from under-served communities
in STEM. Along with appropriate mentoring efforts, this will contribute towards
a significant positive impact on these students' careers. Additionally, the PI
will engage in outreach to high school students through involvement and
leadership in MIT-PRIMES, an NSF-funded research program in Mathematics and
Computer Sciences offered by MIT for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.