* 2213912
* PFI-TT:  Developing a Device to Improve Lymphatic Flow
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Linda Koehler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be in developing a wearable medical
device as a new solution for patients with lymphedema, a condition in which
fluid build up causes swelling, especially in the arms or legs. The device will
improve the body fluid circulation while significantly reducing the risk of
severe complications associated with this disease. The goal is to address health
disparities and to improve the overall health outcomes of patients suffering
from lymphedema. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on
developing an emerging medical technology to address lymphedema, which is a
major public health issue in the United States. Lymphedema is characterized by
chronic swelling of a body part which has debilitating effects and negatively
impacts the quality of life of the patient. A compact, wearable, and simple to
operate medical device will be built that will apply therapeutic pressure
gradients with the goal of improving lymphatic flow. This technology may
significantly enhance current therapeutic modalities when compared to
compressive methods that use pneumatic pressure to squeeze out lymph fluid. The
proposed technology will have two key mechanical elements: the patch and the
controller, designed in a way to mimic the manual lymph drainage techniques. The
technology may enhance current therapeutic clinical modalities and be extended
to home-based therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.