* 2213574
* MSA: A Macrosystems Perspective on River Eutrophication from Chlorophyll Abundance Patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* MELINDA DANIELS, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2025
* USD 312,431.00

Rivers and streams provide society with water to drink and irrigate,
recreational opportunities, and habitat for plants and animals. These valuable
services can be threatened by pollution in the form of nitrogen and phosphorus,
nutrients that encourage algae to grow in rivers in the same way that weeds grow
in a garden. Nutrient-enriched runoff from farms, suburbs, and cities has caused
most rivers and streams in North America to have too much algae and aquatic
plants. While reducing nutrient inputs to rivers would solve this algal problem,
it is difficult to know how much those inputs need to be reduced and in what
locations. This is because nutrients and algae from different locations are
continually mixed together as rivers converge and flow downstream. River floods
can scour patches of algae from the river bed and carry them downstream, making
it even more complicated to identify an appropriate level of nutrient reduction
for a particular river that can control algae. A recent discovery of how algal
concentration changes during river floods may be a key to more accurately
predicting how much nutrients need to be reduced to control harmful algal
blooms. This research is testing and applying this new method to help guide
policies that lead to healthier rivers using effective
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests a transformative approach
using hysteresis patterns, which are system lags between inputs and outputs, of
chlorophyll concentrations during storm events to evaluate river eutrophication
in a way that efficiently integrates the heterogeneous distribution of algal
biomass and its temporal pattern of growth and transport throughout entire
watersheds. The approach helps resolve a long-standing challenge in limnology of
separately accounting for growth and transport of benthic and planktonic algae
in measurements of river chlorophyll abundance. The project combines two spatial
scales, namely regional and continental. The first goal is to monitor high-
frequency chlorophyll concentrations in six rivers of the Delaware River Basin
with contrasting human influence. These data are enabling linkages between
reach-scale controls on benthic and planktonic growth, such as habitat features
and hydrologic conditions, to chlorophyll hysteresis responses measured
downstream. The output is quantitative relationships between nutrient
enrichment, channel morphology, and chlorophyll hysteresis indices. The second
goal is to test these relationships with chlorophyll sensor data, algal
community characterization, and watershed characteristics from the 28 NEON
aquatic field sites. By exploring new metrics of river eutrophication, this
project develops analyses of algal growth dynamics over more appropriate spatial
and temporal scales and better captures the combined contribution of benthic and
water-column habitats to river eutrophication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.