* 2213988
* New perspectives on Arctic Sea Ice Variability in the 20th Century
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gregory Hakim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,854.00

This project will further our understanding of Arctic sea ice in the 20th
century and how it interacted with the atmosphere and ocean. Scientific
understanding Arctic sea-ice variability is limited by the relatively short
period of continuous monitoring by satellites (which covers 1979 to present) and
incomplete sea ice and atmospheric observations for the first half of the 20th
century. This project will produce a new, physically realistic reconstruction of
Arctic sea ice and sea surface temperatures during the 20th century and use it
to study Arctic sea ice during the Early 20th century Warming (ETCW), a
particularly interesting period between 1915-1940 when the Arctic warmed
significantly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ETCW is a particularly interesting
period, as it is well established that during 1915-1940 the Arctic warmed
significantly, but reconstructions of sea-ice extent during that time do not
show a realistic corresponding sea ice loss due to poor sea ice data
availability. In addition, widely used 20th century reanalysis also fail to
capture the ETCW in the Arctic, most likely due to the use of these sea ice
reconstructions as boundary conditions. Thus, to study the ETCW and pre-
satellite 20th century Arctic climate variability, one must look to other tools.
This project will first create a physically consistent reconstruction of the
20th century Arctic sea ice-ocean system using a combination of nudged-
circulation fully coupled earth system modeling simulations and ensemble data
assimilation. Second, as the ETCW is identified as one of the largest episodes
of multi-decadal Arctic climate variability in the last millennium and its
mechanisms are still poorly understood, the project will investigate the
mechanisms that drove the ETCW through the following research questions: what
are the roles of the Atlantic and Pacific in forcing the ETCW?, and what is the
role of sea ice loss in driving the ETCW? The new Arctic sea ice-ocean system
reconstruction will be made available to the research community through the
Arctic Data Center. The project will support an early career researcher and a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.