* 2213768
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Properties of the Ahr Valley and Their Role in Structural Damage During Recent Flooding
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Michael Gardner, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 77,558.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will focus on collecting
and processing high resolution, perishable data on the spatial distribution of
erosive and depositional patterns in the vicinity of infrastructure and river
sections that were affected during the 2021 Western European Floods. These data
will be interrogated to provide insight into how channel geometry, flow
conditions, the presence of debris, and geotechnical properties affect
performance of engineered structures interacting with extreme floods. This is
relevant in the context of global climate change where extreme flooding is
expected to occur more frequently and at larger magnitudes. Many of the modern
structures that were damaged during the flooding in Germany are similar to
structures found across the United States and knowledge gained from studying
this flooding event will be transferable to the built environment in the United
States. Data generated during the project can provide support to update
infrastructure design and flood mitigation strategies to meet future demands
intensified by climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this
research is to provide new data and knowledge on the impact of extreme flooding
events on infrastructure and the effects of urban land usage and environmental
conditions. Through this data collection, a detailed set of case studies that
document sediment dynamics in the vicinity of infrastructure and in urban river
sections will facilitate identification of features and processes that
potentially influence performance of engineered structures during extreme
flooding. Geophysical field measurements in the riverbed will include rotary
side scan sonar, high resolution chirp sonar, and single beam sonar. This will
enable collection of channel bathymetry and sediment stratigraphy, which may
reveal novel information on if or how changes in substrata in the upper meter of
the river bed play a significant role in sediment mobilization and instability
during extreme hydraulic events. Both ground-based and airborne LiDAR surveys
will provide high-resolution, 3D models of the riverbanks and surrounding
structures, enabling assessment of potential interaction between erosive
patterns and structural damage. Multispectral images will be collected using
drone-based technology to identify broader erosive and depositional patterns.
Geotechnical field measurements will include pocket free fall penetrometer,
pocket erodometer, field vane shear, and field fall cone measurements in
addition to sample collection for laboratory measurements. The geotechnical
observations, coupled with the geophysical and remote sensing data, will enable
a comprehensive assessment of how sediments were eroded and transported near
engineered structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.