* 2213598
* Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere Bridging Ecology, Chemistry and Climate; Ventura, California; June 12-17, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Mark Potosnak, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 30,130.00

This project supports the Gordon Research Conference, “2022 Biogenic
Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere Bridging Ecology, Chemistry and Climate.” The
conference will bring together scientists interested in biogenic hydrocarbons in
the atmosphere that play an important role in plant ecosystems and atmospheric
chemistry across a variety of scales. The meeting will focus on integrating the
biological, ecological, and atmospheric roles of these compounds in a unique,
cross-disciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the 10th
Gordon Research Conference to address the topic of “Biogenic Hydrocarbons and
the Atmosphere,” the first of which was in 2000. Gordon Research Conferences are
dedicated to presentations and discussions of cutting-edge research and provide
an outstanding opportunity for early career researchers to interact with senior
and world-class scientists in diverse fields. The intellectual merit of this
conference includes the growth of a greater understanding of the synthesis,
emissions and chemical processing of biogenic hydrocarbons in the atmosphere
that will lead to the development of novel reliable methods of detection and
quantification of volatiles in the atmosphere, their physiological and
ecological roles, their influences in the Earth System and their fate in the
atmosphere under current and future environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Seminar, to be held two
days prior to the Conference, will bring together a cohort of the most promising
early career researchers from a range of disciplines for a program of talks and
discussions designed to facilitate networking and career development. The
Conference will take place in Ventura, CA from June 12th to 17th, 2022 preceded
by the Seminar on June 11-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.