* 2213368
* LEAPS-MPS: Stochastic Particle-Continuum Hybrid Simulation Method for Model Heterogeneous Catalysts under Reaction Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Changho Kim, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,865.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Changho Kim and his students at the University of California, Merced (UCM) will
develop an improved method for simulating complex chemical reactions on
computers. Many important chemical processes, from synthesizing fuel to cleaning
exhaust, involve so-called catalysts, added chemicals which make the reaction
proceed faster, with fewer unwanted byproducts. Developing improved catalysts is
very challenging, especially “heterogeneous catalysts” which are used in
reactions combining gas, liquid, and/or solid chemicals. The outcome of the
research will be computer models of heterogeneous catalysts that can help
explain how they work and guide the design of improved versions. As they are
developed, these computer simulations will be tested against experimental
results on reactions involving heterogeneous catalysts. This project will
provide research opportunities as well as extracurricular activities for
undergraduate students at UCM, which is a Minority-Serving Institution.
Additionally, Prof. Kim will create and lead educational activities for local
K-12 teachers and students, demonstrating how math is used to understand
chemistry. These efforts will contribute to improving science education in
California’s ethnically and economically diverse Central Valley and help
increase the regional STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Kim will
develop a stochastic hybrid method that efficiently simulates gas-solid
interfacial systems. To this end, this project will couple the kinetic Monte
Carlo method (for an atomistic-resolution description of chemical reactions on
the catalytic surface) with the fluctuating hydrodynamics method (for
hydrodynamic transport at the mesoscopic scale). In this way, intrinsic thermal
fluctuations present in the particle description of surface chemistry can be
seamlessly coupled with the continuum description of the gas phase. Prof. Kim
will develop a scalable implementation strategy that can be used efficiently on
high-performance computing platforms, and he will perform theoretical and
experimental validations using the example of carbon monoxide oxidation on metal
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.