* 2213436
* LEAPS-MPS: Robust and High Order Numerical Simulation for Phase Field Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Yuan Liu, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

The phase-field method is an established theoretical approach used to study the
interfacial dynamics of the mixture of different fluids, solids, and gas. This
project will investigate an efficient numerical framework for its numerical
simulation. The algorithms developed will be applicable to a large class of
physical problems, and thus will contribute to the understanding of fundamental
mechanisms in materials science, biology, and other related fields. The project
will also provide training and outreach opportunities to K-12 students,
undergraduates, and graduate students, with a focus in mathematical modeling,
numerical analysis, and engineering applications, and special attention to
promoting the participation of members of groups underrepresented in STEM. This
project is devoted to designing, analyzing, and implementing a fully discrete
numerical framework for phase-field models in high dimensional spaces and
arbitrary computational geometries. Under the scalar auxiliary variable
framework, high order symplectic Runge-Kutta methods will be carefully
constructed and studied to ensure energy stability. To efficiently capture the
sharp gradient and easily handle the complex boundary conditions, the
discontinuous Galerkin (DG) method will be employed as the spatial
discretization technique. Investigation and comparison of high dimensional
computational efficiency between classical modal DG and multiresolution DG
methods will be carried out.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.