* 2213808
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning-C: Accelerated Infrastructure for Simulating Future Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Nam Sung Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,999.00

Software-based simulation is the backbone of computer architecture research and
development. The project novelty is the identification of the following problems
with these methodologies: (1) The use of on-premise servers for running
simulations suffers from the high operation and embodied energy costs. Although
simulation performance has always been a primary engineering focus of software-
based simulators, energy consumption and environmental impacts of detailed
hardware simulation have mainly been ignored. (2) Detailed software-based
simulations have different run-time characteristics than baremetal applications.
Such differences make the general-purpose servers with default server
configurations extremely inefficient for running detailed simulations. (3)
Lastly, full-system simulation environments have steep learning curves that
further steepen as the hardware and software stacks to be simulated become more
complex. The project’s impacts are to bring the CISE community's attention to
the energy waste at the onpremise simulation clusters and provide a foundation
for minimizing the energy and carbon footprint of future hardware
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators’ goal is to create a cloud-
based community infrastructure for running simulations. This community
infrastructure eliminates the need for funding agencies such as NSF to invest in
on-premise servers and significantly reduce the end-to-end carbon footprint of
simulations. More specifically, investigators extensively analyze the source
code and run-time of the popular architectural simulators to understand their
characteristics as a software program that needs to be efficiently executed on
real hardware. The investigators use the profiling results to tune system
parameters and provide a highly optimized environment for running architectural
simulations. They enhance the proposed cloud infrastructure with hardware
accelerators that further improve popular architectural simulators' energy
efficiency and performance. The infrastructure follows a marketplace model for
sharing and using simulation models and setups developed by other researchers to
reduce the learning curve of detailed simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.