* 2213114
* SBIR Phase I:  Proof -Of-Concept for Large-Scale and Low-Cost Biomass Production Using an Innovative Open Aquatic Algae Cultivation System (OAACS)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Stuart Bussell, VERPOND, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to establish the proof-of-concept of using an innovative open aquatic
algae cultivation system (OAACS) to overcome scale and cost constraints of
current large-scale algal biomass production systems like raceway ponds. Drop-in
biofuels derived from OAACS’ biomass have a projected minimum fuel selling price
of $2.53/gasoline gallon equivalent, which is competitive with fossil fuels, and
have potential production scales that exceed current global fossil fuel usage.
Successful commercialization of OAACS can lead to new sustainable energy
sources, significant displacement of fossil fuel use, and concomitant reductions
in the future environmental and societal impacts of global climate change. If
successful, OAACS can also pave the way for sustainable, competitive, and
meaningfully large-scale production of other bioproducts like fertilizers and
high protein feeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to fabricate
robust liners for OAACS using an innovative forced assembly co-extrusion and
two-dimensional multiplication technique and then demonstrate their performance
in OAACS scale-down laboratory photobioreactors. The minimum success criterion
is production of liners that support sustained algal aerial yields &gt;15 g ash
free dry weight/m2/day for weeks or months without the need for liner cleaning
or CO2 supplementation. This will establish feasibility that OAACS can meet
production scale- and cost-targets. Tasks include: 1. Fabrication and physical
characterization of base case liners using previously demonstrated techniques
and then extending results to liners with pore size gradients and surface
modified nanofibers; 2. Demonstrating high dissolved inorganic carbon transfer
rates through the liners; and 3. Demonstrating robust performance of the liners
during continuous culturing in laboratory
photobioreactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.