* 2213541
* RCN: The Macrosystems Ecology For All (MEFA) Research Coordination Network
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Laurel Anderson, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,750.00

Environmental challenges facing the world today can be global in scale, like
climate change, or regional in scale, like drought. Large-scale environmental
conditions interact with local ecosystems: climate change may lead to a drought
that dries local vegetation, increasing the risk of wildfire. Human land use
patterns may enable fire in one site to spread quickly to other sites, leading
to regional fire hazards. This example illustrates how understanding connections
among ecological phenomena across scales allows scientists to make predictions
about environmental disturbances. Macrosystems ecology is an emerging scientific
field that explores links among geophysical, biological, and social-cultural
processes at different scales. This work is informed by analysis of increasingly
large environmental datasets, like those made available by the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). However, not all ecology faculty,
particularly those from teaching-oriented institutions, have been trained in
macrosystems ecology concepts and techniques, or in working with large sets of
environmental data. Indeed, there is a large pool of ecology faculty who could
engage with macrosystems ecology but are not doing so. The Macrosystems Ecology
For All (MEFA) Research Coordination Network (RCN) will provide a gateway for
such faculty to learn more about macrosystems concepts, update their data
science skills, design inclusive research projects that resonate with their
scientific interests, and foster hands-on research with undergraduates.
Collaboration across institutions will be emphasized to build camaraderie for
team science, share expertise, and address large-scale ecological questions with
efficiency. Having more researchers from diverse personal and institutional
backgrounds engaging with macrosystems ecology will bring fresh perspectives and
innovation to this important scientific field. Through the faculty training
provided by MEFA, more undergraduate students from different communities will be
exposed to emerging data science and macrosystems concepts. By providing faculty
development in a supportive framework, MEFA will enhance the skills of its
faculty participants and enable them to build a diverse and inclusive scientific
workforce prepared to engage with the extraordinary environmental challenges of
the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MEFA RCN will sponsor five in-person
meetings and a series of online workshops that provide training in data science
techniques, highlight examples of macrosystems research, and support the
development of collaborative teams and multi-site projects that engage
undergraduates in macrosystems ecology research. MEFA will partner with other
networks including NEON, the BEDE (Biological and Environmental Data Education)
Network, and Project EDDIE (Environmental Data-Driven Inquiry and Exploration)
in developing these training activities. MEFA will have a strong emphasis on
promoting diversity, equity, inclusion, and justice (DEIJ), providing training
on diversity issues in a collaborative science context, and requiring that all
research projects have a DEIJ plan. MEFA will recruit faculty from minority-
serving institutions and provide support for faculty from underrepresented
groups serving in project leadership roles within the network. MEFA will be
governed by a Network Management Team who will facilitate the daily workings of
MEFA and a Network Advisory Team who will provide macrosystems ecology
expertise, DEIJ advice, and guidance on vision and organizational priorities.
Assessment of MEFAâ€™s progress toward its goals will be provided by Measurement
Resources Company (MRC), a national measurement and evaluation
firm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.