* 2213001
* MPS Ascend: Characterizing Contributions of Volatile Chemical Products to Aerosol Chemistry and Composition in the Modern Megacity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Emily Franklin, Franklin, Emily Barnes
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Emily Franklin is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Franklin supports the
research project entitled “MPS Ascend: Characterizing Contributions of Volatile
Chemical Products to Aerosol Chemistry and Composition in the Modern Megacity",
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the
fellowship is Colorado State University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Delphine Farmer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends to establish
molecular and compositional markers of Volatile Chemical Products (VCP)-related
secondary aerosol formation through laboratory oxidation experiments, and (2)
Characterize and quantify VCP-related perturbations in aerosol quantity and
composition under ambient conditions in a coastal megacity. Oxidation
experiments of consumer products under realistic use conditions and an
observational campaign in the New York City region will inform the inform the
stated objectives. The work has the potential to inform models that predict the
future of urban air quality in a changing environment. The Broadening
Participation plan will improve the retention and experiences of researchers
from historically excluded groups in STEM and allow an opportunity to partner
with the Denver area Spanish Speaking environmental justice community which may
lead to community led aerosol mitigation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.