* 2213295
* LEAPS-MPS: Deep Learning the Knot Landscape
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mark Hughes, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,783.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of knot theory began in the mid
1800s, motivated heavily by ideas from physics. Today, knots play an important
role in physics through gauge theory and quantum field theories, molecular
biology via protein and DNA knotting, and low-dimensional topology in the form
of handlebody diagrams of 4-manifolds and Dehn surgery descriptions of
3-manifolds. In 2016 the PI initiated a novel approach to studying problems in
knot theory by applying techniques of machine learning and artificial
intelligence. While there is now a small but growing body of research in this
direction, with contributions from mathematicians, physicists, and computer
scientists, most of the existing work focuses on techniques of supervised
learning and applications of reinforcement learning to unknotting braids. The PI
will adapt new techniques from generative machine learning and reinforcement
learning to study topological properties of knots and learn latent distributions
of knots and their invariants. The PI will also extend earlier work with
collaborators, by establishing theoretical underpinnings of new observations and
experimental results. As part of this project the PI will develop a mentored
data science research training program for undergraduate students, in which
students will be mentored by both the PI and a data scientist from industry or
academia. Students will participate in a semester-long mentored learning group
with the PI, before completing an intensive workshop where they work together to
solve data science problems from industry with their external mentor. At each
step of this program, special attention will be given to increasing
participation of historically underrepresented groups through partnerships with
campus organizations that specialize in outreach to these communities. By
participating in mentored research these students will gain experience that will
help them prepare for graduate degrees and careers in academia and industry,
thereby preparing to be future role models for students from these
underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will adapt text-to-
image generative adversarial networks to construct invariant-to-knot GANs,
allowing for the construction of knots with prescribed topological properties.
The PI will also use variational autoencoders to learn new latent distributions
of knots which are natural with respect to various topological properties and
invariants. These latent representations of knots will provide a clearer
understanding of knot distributions and produce random models that allow for
targeted generation of knots with specified properties. Any new latent
representations of knot theoretic data will be made available to other
researchers for use in training new machine learning models, improving the
performance of the models being developed. These techniques will be used to
guide searches for counterexamples to important open conjectures. In addition,
the PI will use deep reinforcement learning algorithms to study the slice genus
and braid band rank problems, generalizing existing results on the use of
reinforcement learning to the unknotting of braids. Given that the problem of
computing the slice genus of knots is central to key open questions in low-
dimensional topology and constructions in physics, new techniques developed here
will have direct applications outside of knot theory. Successful use of these
techniques will serve as a template for future applications of generative
machine learning and reinforcement learning to other areas of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.