* 2213527
* LEAPS-MPS: Spin-lattice interaction in paramagnetic cubic iron at high pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jorge Munoz, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,068.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
LEAPS-MPS award supports computational and theoretical research on the effect of
magnetism on the way iron atoms arrange themselves at high temperatures and
pressures. As one of the principal constituents of the Earth, and being of
paramount importance to our technological civilization, iron is one of the most
intensely studied materials, but quantum mechanical simulations that
simultaneously include magnetism and the displacement patterns of iron atoms
from their equilibrium positions due to temperature are computationally
prohibitive. These simulations are nevertheless important because many physical
and chemical properties of materials depend on the particular arrangement of
atoms and their vibrations around equilibrium positions, and the ability to
accurately predict such patterns can enable the design of materials using only
computer simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will approach this
computational challenge by using a particular computer algorithm to efficiently
search for general parameters that result in predictions that are consistent
with experiments, and by using these parameters to guide quantum mechanical and
other simulations. The team will also spearhead the use of a machine learning
algorithm capable of learning two or more features of the material and
transparently showing their interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the creation of educational resources that will be used to expose
community college students to concepts of computational materials science and
will facilitate formal and informal mentorship for community college students by
faculty and undergraduate researchers at the University of Texas El Paso, and
establishing research collaborations with researchers at the University of
California Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LEAPS-MPS award supports computational and
theoretical research on how magnetic spin excitations (magnons) in the
paramagnetic states of face-centered cubic and body-centered cubic iron affect
the relative thermodynamic stability of the two phases at temperatures up to the
melting point and pressures up to 15 GPa through their interaction with phonons.
Simulations of the lattice dynamics from first principles are computationally
expensive, and the inclusion of spin degrees of freedom can make the direct
computation of the interaction prohibitive. Nevertheless, with an estimated
contribution to the free energy of up to 35 meV/atom, the spin-lattice coupling
cannot be ignored in calculations of the thermodynamics and phase stability of
this system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will approach the challenge
by (i) empirically constraining the interatomic force constants, from which
phonon dispersion relations can be computed via evolutionary computation, and
(ii) developing machine learning models based on mathematical graphs capable of
learning both atomic and spin configurations to be used in dynamics
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the creation of
educational resources that will be used to expose community college students to
concepts of computational materials science and will facilitate formal and
informal mentorship for community college students by faculty and undergraduate
researchers at the University of Texas El Paso, and establishing research
collaborations with researcher at the University of California
Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.