* 2213263
* CAREER: A Prosthetic Elbow with Network of Soft and Modular Thermo-Active Actuators for Mobility Impaired Patients
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Amir Jafari, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2026
* USD 386,315.00

There are about 15 million mobility impaired people in the United States who
need assistance to move their limbs. Assistive robots have been proposed to help
people with mobility impairments. Existing actuators for assistive robots are
limited to rigid actuators and soft actuators. Rigid actuators are powerful but
may cause injury. Soft actuators can be safer, but not as powerful, portable, or
responsive as their rigid counterparts. Soft actuators that use heat to
stimulate actuation are portable and can be powerful. However, their response
can be too slow for many rehabilitation applications. This NSF Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project attempts to overcome these challenges by
developing novel networks of flexible Peltier-based soft actuators designed for
rehabilitation. The project will provide research opportunities to
underrepresented pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate students and to
students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s long-term goal is to
create a wearable rehabilitation technology that is lightweight, portable, and
soft but also quick to respond and powerful. Toward this goal, this project aims
to optimally develop and control networks of modular thermo-active soft
actuators with unprecedented properties for rehabilitation applications. Each
actuator is composed of two modules, in which dramatic volume change due to the
liquid-gas phase transitions leads to the axial expansion and contraction of a
flexible tube inside each module. Flexible Peltiers are placed between modules
to absorb heat from one module and to deliver heat to the other module. One
module expands when heated, and the other one expands when cooled. The research
objectives of the proposal are to: (1) understand the underlying multi-physics
(electro-thermo-mechanical) governing the operation of the actuator and the
network, (2) create a framework for optimizing the network performance and
establishing the effect of the actuator’s design parameters on the performance,
(3) develop a versatile and robust control scheme, and (4) demonstrate the
capabilities of the proposed networked actuators to be used as a drivetrain for
a prosthetic elbow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.