* 2213438
* Sedimentary Minerals, Organic Chemical Transformations, and the Origin of Life
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,176.00

Our understanding of geological environments on Earth 4.35 billion years ago has
advanced to the point where geology can be combined with organic chemistry that
does not need careful human control to build models for how the first genetic
molecules might have emerged on Earth, and possibly on other rocky planets like
Mars. This "hands off" chemistry can be further simplified in the context of
rocks present in those environments. This combination now allows us to advance
scientific knowledge relevant to one of the oldest questions posed by humankind:
Where did we come from? Further, the simplicity of the prebiotic chemistry that
this project will develop makes it accessible to students, even those in high
school. In addition to advancing the science, this project will deliver kits to
those students that will let them participate in the current excitement in
geochemistry relevant to this "big question".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This geology-
chemistry combination supports the "RNA first hypothesis" for the origin of
life, which holds that Darwinian evolution emerged based on the abiological
formation of ribonucleic acid that served as its first informational molecule.
Here, the geological environment comprises intermittently dry, constrained
aquifers that receive by rain small carbohydrates stabilized by volcanic sulfur
dioxide, reduced nitrogen-containing organic molecules, and other species that
were created by UV and electrical discharge in atmospheres that had been reduced
by iron fragmented from the cores of impacting bodies. The geological
environment includes surrounding rocks from a redox neutral crust, including
borate evaporite minerals, as well as basaltic glass generated by the impacts
and volcanism on the young Earth. The basaltic glass contains dehydrated
phosphates which can serve as a catalyst to assemble RNA. In this single
environment, small organics can yield oligomeric RNA 100-200 nucleotides long by
a process that initiates with borate-controlled maturation of stabilized
carbohydrates, phosphorylation by glass-delivered polyphosphates, reaction of
ribose cyclic phosphates with nucleobases to give nucleotides, with borate-
moderated phosphorylation yielding nucleoside triphosphates. This project will
complete structure analysis of RNA products formed from triphosphates by impact
glass, integrate carbohydrate processing with downstream nucleoside synthesis,
explore the possibility of this environment producing homochiral products, and
develop the sedimentary and igneous geology of relevant minerals for students to
work with.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.