* 2213915
* SCC-PG: Just in Time Intervention for Patients with Chronic Heart Diseases in Arizona tribes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Fatemeh Afghah, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death in the United States.
Cardiovascular diseases are often chronic conditions that involve several costly
emergency visits or long hospitalizations for the patients. Limited access to
medical facilities in rural communities can result in worse health outcomes for
these patients, in particular, the American Indian (AI) patients living in
remote and rural areas. A considerable number of Arizonan AIs with
cardiovascular conditions may be at risk of missing the window of opportunity
for effective treatment and experiencing a lower chance of survival because of
living far away from medical service providers. Arizona has the third largest
population of Indian Americans who live in rural, tribal and often extremely
isolated areas. The cardiac patients living in these areas do not have the
required timely access to care, in particular to specialty services like
cardiologists. Therefore, an important challenge related to these conditions for
rural patients is the ‘early detection of deterioration in symptoms’, which is
critical for ‘just in time’ interventions. This planning project is a
collaborative effort among the Northern Arizona University (NAU) and University
of Michigan (UM) as well as community leaders in rural and tribal health to
discuss the best strategies to utilize an integrated remote heart monitoring
system to benefit the patients with chronic heart conditions who live in rural,
remote and isolated tribal areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project
offers several innovative approaches by working with the tribal AI community to
begin(i) Developing a new remote heart monitoring technology to predict the
deterioration of the symptoms and occurrence of critical heart conditions in
patients with some common chronic cardiac conditions such as atrial fibrillation
and congested heart failure. Several remote heart monitoring systems have
focused on reliable detection of such events, however by the time that the
device alerts the patients or their family, it is already too late to seek
medical help for the patients who live in rural and remote areas. Hence, our
early prediction framework can give the patients enough time to seek medical
assistance. This system can also help caregivers control severe symptoms, reduce
readmissions, and reduce the cost associated with care; (ii) Developing deep
learning-based and Markov-based prediction methods; and (iii) Developing on-
device prediction methods that can work independently of the cloud in order to
service the patients with no access to broadband internet. This study can be
replicated for a wide range of other diseases and medical conditions and in
different geographic regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.