* 2213429
* LEAPS-MPS Quantum vortex states and non-collinear magnetic interactions in light-driven quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Mahmoud Asmar, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2024
* USD 159,653.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research with a general aim to understand, predict, and control novel regimes of
matter in light-driven quantum materials. Our understanding of light-matter
interaction has been instrumental in technological applications such as solar
cells, phototransistors, and light-emitting diodes. However, recent advances in
probes accessing and manipulating quantum states in time and length scales that
were unattainable just a decade ago have now enabled the exploration of new
quantum phases of matter, leading to many questions and challenges. Questions on
light-driven engineering of materials, such as "How fast and drastically can we
change the properties of materials using light?" or "Can light induce states in
matter that can revolutionize quantum computation?" demand a concerted
theoretical effort to understand the dynamics of photon-dressed electrons and
the phases of light-driven matter. This project aims to establish the
theoretical foundations of physical phenomena in periodically driven systems
where light irradiation offers precise control of material properties and can
induce novel non-equilibrium states of technological
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also support the training of
undergraduate students through direct involvement in the PI’s research, aid the
creation of educational materials and resources that will train high-school
teachers, and expose high-school students to the concepts of materials physics
and light-matter interactions. This project will, in addition, help the
establishment of collaborations with national and international researchers and
increase the retention and enrollment of students from historically underserved
communities in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research to develop
techniques, methodologies, and model systems for understanding periodically-
driven systems and predicting and controlling novel regimes of matter in
existing and future experimental setups. Systems that intertwine light-matter,
magnetic, and spin-orbit interactions will be the primary focus of the research
that will be carried out in two major thrusts. In the first thrust, the PI will
investigate light-driven effects on spin-susceptibility and the indirect
magnetic exchange interaction mediated by irradiated materials with spin-orbit-
coupling (SOC). The PI will calculate the induced magnetic exchange interaction
between magnetic adatoms in light-driven two-dimensional SOC materials and
irradiated magnetic heterostructures enclosing three-dimensional Rashba coupled
semiconductors. The theory developed will quantify the magnetic exchange
coupling mediated by photon-dressed fermions in irradiated SOC systems. The
second thrust is focused on light-matter interactions in Dirac-like materials
subjected to light-vortex beams. The PI will develop a theory to describe these
time and space-dependent systems, explore new phenomena arising from light’s
orbital angular momentum, and analyze the potential photoinduction of vortices
and concomitant vortex states to establish ways to observe these predictions in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also support the creation of
educational materials and resources to be used by high-school teachers and
undergraduates, and expose high-school students to the concepts of condensed
matter physics and light-matter interactions through the PI’s research. This
project will help increase the retention and enrollment of students from
historically underserved communities in physics and will aid the establishment
of collaborations with national and international
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.