* 2213445
* LEAPS-MPS: CAS:Stimuli-Responsive Biodegradable Polymeric Nanomaterials for Biomedical Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Binglin Sui, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,118.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Binglin Sui and his students will work to develop a series of stimuli-
responsive, biocompatible and biodegradable polymers and polymer-based
nanomaterials that can be extensively utilized in the biological and medical
worlds. Biosafety and sustainability have become two critical issues of bio-
oriented nanomaterials with the rapid development of nanotechnology, resulting
from the fact that those materials with nanoscale sizes could not be eliminated
from the body and their accumulation in the body is likely to induce chronic
systemic toxicities. The new polymers that Prof. Sui will develop consist of
biodegradable polymer chains containing bio-cleavable chemical bonds. Therefore,
in biological and physiological environments, the polymers and polymer-based
nanomaterials will gradually break down and eventually turn into nontoxic small
molecules in the body, devoid of biosafety and sustainability concerns. Prof.
Sui will use cancer-related biomedical applications of the new materials to
promote students’ awareness of human health issues and to get graduate and
undergraduate students as well as the underrepresented Native American students
from tribal colleges in North Dakota engaged in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Sui proposes to address the challenges of
nanomaterials that are currently preventing the majority of materials with
nanoscale sizes from biomedical applications, especially for bioimaging and
nanomedicine. To that end, the new polymers are composed of biodegradable
backbones containing bio-cleavable chemical bonds and stimuli-responsive and
self-immolative side chains, bestowing the polymeric nanosystems capabilities of
covalent conjugation of diagnostic, therapeutic, and genetic agents;
controllable traceless-release of the conjugated agents on demand with maximal
agent-releasing efficiency; and decomposition into nontoxic small molecules in
the body after liberating loaded cargos, inducing no long-term concerns of
biosafety and sustainability. The development of such materials expects to
advance the evolution of bioimaging and nanomedicine into a biosafe, more
reliable, and more efficient technique compared to traditional medicinal methods
for the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases. Furthermore, the
proposed strategy for solving the critical issues will pave the way for the
development of more and more biosafe and sustainable polymers and nanomaterials.
Prof. Sui plans to involve graduate and undergraduate students, especially
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields, as well as high school
students in the project to broaden the integration of research and
participation-oriented outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.