* 2213791
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: An Infrastructure for Sustainable Innovation and Research in Computer Science Education
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 416,000.00

Researchers from the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, North
Carolina State University, and Virginia Tech collaborate to support the Computer
Science Education Hub, social and technical infrastructure to accelerate
research on teaching and learning of computing disciplines. The Hub will host
community events and provide a web repository for computing education datasets,
tools, and common analysis methods. The Hub facilitates creation and adoption of
new tools to support computing educators and students, and new standards to
support data collection and data-enabled research. Hub community events help
researchers and educators from many learning contexts to develop and improve
computing education resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hub provides a
pioneering example of infrastructure to support data-enabled research on
education in Computing and beyond. It advances Computing Education Research
through: (1) building a community and website that helps instructors adopt
evidence-based practices and innovative learning technologies, (2) creating data
standards and large, high-quality datasets, (3) developing advanced algorithms
using artificial intelligence, statistics, and analytics methods that leverage
data to optimize student learning effectiveness, efficiency, and engagement, (4)
developing rigorous evaluation methods to demonstrate large, lasting, and
replicable impacts on student achievement. Cross-disciplinary scientific
advances are disseminated through the Hub infrastructure community and through
scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hub will have a direct and
immediate impact on hundreds of researchers and educators, and tens of thousands
of students, during the project phase and beyond. It will reduce barriers to
educational innovation and support discoveries in the many scientific
communities that contribute to computing education research, where many
researchers and educators are currently isolated into separate silos. Through
community development and outreach efforts, this team directly engages with
instructors and students from underserved communities in the design and use of
the infrastructure. Discoveries and innovations enabled by the Hub will help
tens of thousands of students in the strategically important field of computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To distribute project-related information, the
website at http://cssplice.org/ is maintained, where all project information
including standards, best practices, and resources will be shared. It informs
the community about events and opportunities to contribute. The site provides
links to project publications, code, data, and learning content hosted in
archival repositories such as GitHub and DataShop. The website will be
maintained at least through 2027. The resources contributed to archival
repositories will be maintained indefinitely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.