* 2213401
* LEAPS-MPS: Taming the Radicals-Manipulating Lattice-Confined Metalloradicals for C-H Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Wenyang Gao, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Wenyang Gao and his students at New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
will take advantage of the high reactivities of chemicals known as radicals
(i.e. molecules that have odd numbers of electrons) and apply them to promote
reactions of light hydrocarbons. Advances in hydraulic fracturing technologies
provide vast available reserves of domestic light hydrocarbons, e.g., natural
gas. Insufficient processing infrastructure coupled with the challenge of long-
range transportation of gaseous hydrocarbons has prevented efficient utilization
of these resources. A significant amount of natural gas has to be burned in on-
site flares to avoid its direct atmospheric release. Chemical upgrading of light
hydrocarbons, for instance, transforming gaseous methane into liquid methanol,
is expected to turn these resources into chemical fuels or industrial feedstocks
that have increased ease of handling, transport, and storage. Prof. Gao’s work
will address the lack of chemical approaches for transforming methane
efficiently and selectively by trapping highly reactive metal-containing
radicals in rigid porous materials known as metal-organic frameworks, which will
facilitate the desired reactions of light hydrocarbons. Meanwhile, the project
will engage underrepresented minority students working on addressing
sustainability and energy-related issues and prepare them as role models for the
future scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take
advantage of the high reactivities of radicals and apply them for the activation
of light hydrocarbons. Prof. Gao and his students will utilize metal-organic
frameworks, and their lattice confinement effect, to tame the highly reactive
metalloradicals and utilize these species for hydrocarbon conversion. This
project expects to provide synthetic access to solid-state radicals, examine
their structures and reactivities, and obtain understanding on how tamed
radicals to impact the chemical valorization of light hydrocarbons. This project
will not only develop novel synthetic chemistry to access lattice-confined
metalloradicals in the solid state, but also examine these highly reactive
metalloradicals towards activating strong C(sp3)–H bonds in simple
hydrocarbons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.