* 2213187
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Density Logical Qubit Parity Coding
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Dennis Lucarelli, ERROR CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,414.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to accelerate the adoption of error correction technologies in
the quantum computing industry. It is widely held that quantum error correction
will be critical to realize the potential of universal quantum computing. An
error-corrected quantum computer holds promise for making transformational
discoveries in science and engineering that will have broad impact across
traditional technology sectors. By developing resource-efficient quantum error
correction design and decoding software tools, this Phase I project aims to
hasten the era of error-corrected quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance a new
method for error syndrome extraction from a register of data qubits during the
execution of an error-corrected quantum algorithm. In contrast to the standard
approach to syndrome extraction, where each quantum codeword is treated
independently, this new approach extracts error information from the entire
quantum computer collectively. The algorithmic and cost advantage of the
proposed approach is a reduction in the number of extra qubits required for
error syndrome extraction. This project will focus on reducing the density of
the quantum circuits used for syndrome extraction according to the new approach.
Low-density quantum circuits are critical for robust quantum error correction
since syndrome extraction is mediated by two-qubit entangling gates, which often
have error rates higher than idling or memory errors occurring in the data
qubits. Another objective of this Phase I project is to design low-density error
correcting codes that promote locality in syndrome extraction. Local syndrome
extraction is important for error correction in quantum processors that support
limited connectivity between qubits. A final objective is to benchmark the
proposed constructions and algorithms on simulated data and perform proof-of-
concept experimental validation on cloud-based quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.