* 2213202
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Dialog Systems As Second Language Learning Partners
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Zhou YU, Articulate.AI Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project centers on offering a lower-cost, more accessible alternative to help
people everywhere learn to speak a new language. By using state-of-the-art
conversational artificial intelligence (AI), the project offers students
individualized, curriculum-based learning that is affordable and accessible 24
hours a day, with no limits on the amount of time they can practice.
Additionally, the AI system will be able to analyze learners’ speech to offer
suggestions on ways to improve their grammar and conversational fluency, in much
the same way a trained tutor would assist a student. The project brings
conversational AI to the language learning market, enabling a more effective,
entertaining, and low-cost product to transform the current language learning
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is an innovative integration effort to combine state-of-the-art
AI technologies for education applications. The project will contribute new
user-adaptive algorithms and datasets for dialog policy training on language
learning tasks. The project will contribute to the company’s open-source,
multimodal, dialog system framework to enable the dialog community to reduce the
entry barrier for multimodal dialog system research. The project will also
provide the community with an annotated conversational dataset for grammatical
error correction along with a trained grammar correction model and grammar error
type detector. The developed educational dialog systems for second language
communication learning can also serve as a general framework for education
experts to test different learning theories. This project will also explore
hypotheses of whether adaptive conversation experience and different feedback
structures will impact learner confidence and learning
gain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.