* 2213266
* MPS-Ascend: Probing Fundamental Physics with Next Generation Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rhondale Tso, Tso, Rhondale
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Rhondale Tso is awarded an NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a
program of research and activities related to broadening participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Tso supports his research
project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Probing Fundamental Physics with Next Generation
Gravitational Wave Detectors", under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist.
The host institution for the fellowship is the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Nicolas
Yunes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tso aims to facilitate the era of precision tests of
general relativity by (i) advancing models probing fundamental physics beyond GR
to accurately constrain deviations from classical general relatively and (ii)
developing theoretical models characterizing fundamental features of the
dynamical formation of black holes that will also display key features of
general relativity. Tso will prepare a translation document of LIGO outreach
material to the Navajo language, similar to what has been accomplished with the
Siksika (Blackfoot) language. Both languages are documented as endangered
languages, thus the project will aid in preserving, sustaining, and revitalizing
the language. Tso will be involved in outreach to underrepresented groups as
well, in particular to Native American groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.