* 2213210
* MPS-Ascend: Nickel/Photoredox-Catalyzed C(sp3)–C(sp3) Cross-Coupling Between Alkyl Halides and Activated Alcohols
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Melecio Perea, Perea, Melecio
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Melecio Perea is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Perea supports the
research project entitled "MPS-Ascend: Nickel/Photoredox-Catalyzed C(sp3)–C(sp3)
Cross-Coupling Between Alkyl Halides and Activated Alcohols", under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
the University of California Los Angeles, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Abigail Doyle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends to explore the
merger of nickel and photoredox catalysis which is an effective strategy for
functionalizing C(sp3) centers. The proposed work intends to develop alkyl-alkyl
coupling in racemic form; pursue mechanistic investigations which will provide
insight into the nature of the cross coupling; and provide an evaluation of the
scope of the reaction and its potential applicability to medicinally relevant
transformations. The work will be complemented by computational modeling in the
form of multivariant linear regression analysis. The PI intends to mentor other
graduate and undergraduate students from historically excluded backgrounds
through participation in the NSF Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate Research University Alliance at UCLA. This alliance aims to
enhance diversity in academia by supporting predoctoral and postdoctoral
researchers from minority backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.