* 2213365
* LEAPS-MPS: Nanopatterning Nitride Based Nanostructures Using Sequential Infiltration Synthesis for Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Mahua Biswas, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 179,285.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Optoelectronic devices, including photodetectors, solar
cells, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs), are essentially energy conversion
devices which converts light to electricity or vice versa. These devices are
used in many aspects of modern life such as telecommunication, energy, consumer
electronics, and solid-state lighting. Most commonly the active material in
optoelectronic devices are Gallium Nitride (GaN) or Aluminum Nitride (AlN).
These materials have attracted significant attention and are of great interest
because of their emission in ultraviolet (UV) and visible wavelengths.
Nanostructures of nitride materials are not as common as planar structures which
are currently used in commercial devices, but they could enable future devices
with novel functionalities. With this award from the LEAPS-MPS program
researchers at Illinois State University develop nanopatterns of AlN and GaN by
using a synthesis approach called Sequential Infiltration Synthesis (SIS). SIS
allows them to investigate the growth mechanism of the nitride materials as well
as optical properties of nanostructures with different shapes morphologies. In
addition to this research being of great interest to the semiconductor industry,
the project also enhances the undergraduate education at a primarily
undergraduate institution because students can participate in cutting-edge
experimental research, which provides hands-on synthesis and characterization
opportunities. This effort also broadens the semiconductor workforce by
integrating research results into the physics curriculum as part of an upper-
level experimental physics courses. The recipient of this award, an early career
female faculty member is a role model for female and minority students,
encouraging them to choose STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;In the field of optoelectronic research, group III nitrides
such as AlN and GaN have gained significant attention over last few decades due
to their stabilities and as a wide band gap semiconductor with emission in the
ultraviolet and visible ranges. The planar structured nitride materials
currently used in commercial devices come with limitations such as defects and
dislocations due to lattice mismatch with available substrates which
consequently limit the performance of the resulting devices, high temperature
requirements limiting choice of substrates and the dimensions are not suitable
for futuristic nanoscale devices. For emerging devices, the concerns related to
planar structures can be alleviated by employing nanostructures of these
materials. However, fabrication methods of nanostructured nitride materials are
still in infancy and current approaches are complex and multi-step processes.
Significant improvements and a fundamental understanding are needed regarding
the growth of nitride nanostructures and subsequent long-range patterning of
these nanostructures. With this award from the LEAPS-MPS program the researchers
synthesize AlN and GaN nanorod patterns using nanostructured block copolymer
(BCP) templates and an inorganic deposition method called Sequential
Infiltration Synthesis (SIS). The SIS process involves infiltration of gas phase
molecules into soft polymeric materials. This project investigates the SIS
growth mechanism for nitride materials using Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy (FTIR) as well as other physical, structural and optical
characterization techniques. These and other methods, including scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray
diffraction (XRD), photoluminescence (PL) and photoluminescence excitation (PLE)
spectroscopy, and cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging, are used to study the
resulting nanostructures. The proposed work opens up new avenues of research to
realize nitride nanomaterial growth and patterning using SIS as a facile and
cost-effective method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.