* 2213582
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of Nuclear Size
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fred Chang, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 857,671.00

This project elucidates how the size of the nucleus in the cell is determined.
It has been appreciated for over a hundred years that nuclear size scales with
cell size, so that larger cells have larger nuclei. As cells grow, the nucleus
grows at the same rate. This size scaling relationship is one of the fundamental
rules of life, but the mechanisms responsible for nuclear size regulation are
still poorly understood. Deciphering such mechanisms will give insights into why
it is important for cells to regulate nuclear size and will provide general
principles of how size regulation of cells and organelles is accomplished. In
general, this work will add to our knowledge of fundamental cellular processes
that are used to build living cells. As a broader outcome, this project will
introduce to the larger public the importance of physical forces and
quantitative measurements in cell biology research through development of
educational modules and a scientific exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, a quantitative model for nuclear size scaling will be developed. This
model proposes that nuclear size is specified by physical factors such as
osmotic pressure and membrane tension. Specifically, nuclear size may be
determined largely by a balance of colloid osmotic pressures within the
nucleoplasm and cytoplasm, which are determined by the numbers of osmotically
active macromolecules present in each compartment. The general approach is to
use theoretical modeling coupled with quantitative experiments on the fission
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe as a model organism. In S. pombe, the nucleus
behaves as an “ideal osmometer” whose size corresponds quantitatively to its
osmotic environment. This model will be tested in experiments in which physical
parameters such as osmotic pressure are varied. The mechanism of nuclear size
homeostasis in which abnormal nuclear sizes are gradually corrected will be
elucidated. Mechanisms that couple nuclear volume growth and nuclear envelope
surface area will be examined. This osmotic model of nuclear size promises to
greatly impact the general understanding of organelle size
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.