* 2213064
* MPS-Ascend: Improved polymer upcycling strategies via stochastic thermodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jorge Rosa Raices, Rosa Raices, Jorge Luis
* Fellowship Award
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Jorge Rosa Raices is awarded an NSF Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-
Ascend) to conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Rosa
Raices supports his research entitled “MPS-Ascend: Improved polymer upcycling
strategies via stochastic thermodynamics”, under the mentorship of sponsoring
senior scientists. The host institution for the fellowship is University of
California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. David Limmer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the world, sustainable technological advance is
threatened by unmitigated plastic waste accumulation. To reduce our future
output of plastic waste, leading researchers are synthesizing new polymer
materials that can be upcycled, or cheaply broken down into valuable molecular
feedstock for products of equal or greater value. From these efforts surge a
promising class of upcyclable plastics that can chemically self-disassemble on
demand through programmable activation of embedded enzymatic catalysts capable
of breaking down the host material. This work employs a theory of thermodynamics
for complicated materials far from the steady state of equilibrium, combined
with efficient molecular computer simulation algorithms. These will be used to
study self-disassembling plastics at the molecular level and to infer principles
governing their cost-effective synthesis and upcycling through self-disassembly.
In this way, the work seeks to advance progress toward a circular plastic
economy by providing materials design guidelines that could expedite the
development and worldwide integration of sustainable plastic
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.