* 2213926
* PFI-TT: Soft robotic educational kits for recruiting a more diverse group of students into science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be to spark interest and induct a
more diverse group of students from underrepresented backgrounds into robotics
and Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields generally.
These objectives will be enabled through the development of engineering toolkits
for students, educators, researchers, and hobbyist-makers. This project may
reduce the underrepresentation of various backgrounds in STEM fields (i.e.
women, people of color, low SES students) in two primary ways. First, by
introducing robotics curriculum to students in middle and high school, it will
increase the likelihood that students from underrepresented groups will have
access to this field at an impactful age, when many students develop identities
that reflect their future societal roles as adults. Additionally, the
multidisciplinary approach of the soft robotic kits may appeal to students with
interests in areas like art, craft making, fashion design, medicine, and
environmental protection. Inviting students with diverse subject interests may
encourage innovative ideas and solutions in many fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop new soft robotic STEM kits,
evaluate their utility with educational partners, and deepen partnerships with
organizations that have experience supporting hardware-focused startups. Most of
the robotics STEM kits on the market consist of pre-built components that can be
assembled in different configurations to realize various physical designs.
Students are limited by the constraints of the hardware, limiting the potential
for cross-curricular collaboration and innovation and ultimately discouraging
the development of new perspectives or novel ideas. This project seeks to refine
and develop entry-level soft robotic kits complete with materials, build
instructions, and an educational curriculum. The focus of the kits will be on
subjects typically neglected in introductory robotic design experiences such as
manufacturing, material science, mechanical design, biology, medicine, and
human-robot cooperation. These kits will consist of curriculum-backed hardware
and their design will be based on feedback from students and educators, and
ultimately be evaluated in pilots with high school students in partnership with
educational organizations. In addition, a first open-ended soft robotic kit will
be developed to broaden the possibilities for design and creativity and lower
the barrier of entry for students, makers, and artists for creating more
sophisticated soft robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.