* 2213894
* PFI-TT: Development and Commercialization of a Novel Tubular Proton Exchange Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jasna Jankovic, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in the development and
commercialization of a Tubular Proton Exchange Fuel Cell â€“ a novel design of a
fuel cell technology. Fuel cells operate on hydrogen, a zero-carbon and
renewable fuel that offers an opportunity to remove carbon pollution in the
power generation and manufacturing sectors. Fuel cells may mitigate pollution
and climate change challenges. The proposed tubular design features a number of
components that nay reduce the fuel cell weight by 50% and reduce performance
losses, while offering a modular design. Due to modular design, the potential
commercial applications range from portable power, micro-mobility, industrial
equipment, transportation, and distributed backup power. The development of the
proposed novel tubular fuel cell may contribute to the scientific and
technological understanding of alternative fuel cell designs and aid in the
broadening of hydrogen-based technologies and the transition to the hydrogen
economy. This project may also have an impact on the training of future leaders
and entrepreneurs and broaden participation in the field of clean energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on prototyping and
commercializing tubular proton exchange fuel cells (TPEFCs). State-of-the-art
proton exchange fuel cells (PEFCs) currently built in a planar design, use
expensive agglomerate-type catalyst layers with poor reactant mass transport and
by-product water removal. PEFCs are bulky, complex, and contain expensive flow
field/bipolar plates with high pressure drops. They face challenges due to their
cost, degradation and insufficient efficiency. The research objective of this
project is to prototype and demonstrate a tubular fuel cell design with improved
reactant mass transport and product water removal. The TPEFCs may eliminate
several components of PEFCs (e.g., one flow field plate and a gas diffusion
layer), significantly reducing the weigh and cost while also improving the
reactant, current, and temperature distribution. TPEFCs may also increase
specific power and energy density. This research seeks to develop and
demonstrate a tubular fuel cell prototype, including the electrodes, membrane,
inner gas supply/current collector, and outer flow field plate, using advanced
fabrication approaches such as additive manufacturing. The project will, in
parallel, focus on commercialization of the product through market research,
customer discovery, entrepreneurial training of the students, and preparation
for a potential start-up company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.