* 2213630
* MSA: Self-organizing principles for upscaling ecosystem water and heterotrophic carbon fluxes
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Salvatore Calabrese, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Climate change and land management are affecting soils globally, with
detrimental consequences for soil health and biodiversity, plant productivity,
and climate regulation. However, the loss of soil organic carbon and its
emission as carbon dioxide, which is a major input of carbon to the atmosphere
regulated by soil microorganisms (known as heterotrophic respiration), remains
one of the most uncertain terrestrial carbon fluxes. This research aims to
understand how heterotrophic respiration varies across biomes and climates
depending on macroscopic environmental variables (for example, rainfall and
vegetation productivity) and from the ecosystem to continental scale, by
combining experimental data from multiple observational networks and
mathematical models of microbial growth and metabolism. This analysis is helping
to map heterotrophic respiration at regional to continental scales and assess
the potential impact of climate change on soils and ecosystems by enabling more
accurate estimates of soil organic carbon losses. The effort allows
environmental policymakers working on ecosystem management and sustainability to
plan effective conservation strategies, especially for those regions that are
most sensitive to climate change. The project will train diverse students and
will support the development of new interdisciplinary curricular material at the
intersection of microbiology, hydrology, and environmental science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is guided by the hypothesis that
at the ecosystem scale the ratio of annual heterotrophic respiration to plant
productivity (a dimensionless measure related to the soil carbon budget) is
primarily correlated with the aridity index (a dimensionless measure of
wetness/dryness). The project combines process-based microbial growth modeling
with flux tower datasets and field-based measurements of soil and ecosystem
carbon fluxes from NEON and other regional and global networks to explore,
guided by the Ï€ theorem of dimensional analysis, the existence of fundamental
laws explaining the variability in water and carbon fluxes across biomes. A
parsimonious process-based microbial model is being used to analyze observations
and statistically link microbial parameters to macroscopic environmental drivers
and identify key dimensionless groups governing the large-scale dynamics. The
macroscopic relations between heterotrophic respiration and environmental
drivers are then used to reconstruct large-scale carbon fluxes based on the
spatial structure of primary environmental drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.