* 2213856
* Collaborative Research: Saturated, suffocated, and salty: Hotspots of ammonium-N &amp; dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium-denitrification dichotomy in anoxic riparian soil
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Marc Peipoch, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 06/30/2025
* USD 249,848.00

Wetlands and streamside (riparian) zones are important natural filters for
nitrogen (N) pollution and are often referred to as the kidneys of the
landscape. They remove N from soils and groundwaters through a microbial process
(denitrification) that converts polluting nitrate-N to harmless nitrogen gas.
Denitrification typically happens under wet and low-oxygen soil conditions.
However, extreme wetness can be too much of a good thing and could alter the
microbial balance in favor of retaining N in soils (as ammonium-N) through a
process called dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA).
Denitrification provides an ecosystem service by removing excess N while DNRA
counters it. How and which soil conditions tip the balance from denitrification
to DNRA is not well understood and is the focus of this study. A clear
understanding of these processes and conditions will allow watershed managers
and environmental agencies to better manage riparian zones and wetlands for N
removal. This study will also allow better decision making with regard to
environmental impacts of existing milldams that can create detrimental wet and
stagnant water conditions in streams and riparian zones. Lessons learnt here
will also enhance our understanding of N pollution in landscapes subject to
salinization from road salts and sea level rise. This work will support the
education of two PhD students and the professional development of three junior
and two senior scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will identify the
key conditions that regulate the DNRA-denitrification dichotomy and the
production of ammonium-N in anoxic soils. The key hypotheses are: (a) hydrologic
stagnation (low groundwater mixing) favors DNRA; (b) DNRA will increase (vis-à-
vis denitrification) when specific concentration ratio for electron donors
(organic C, ferrous iron, and sulfide) versus the electron acceptor (nitrate-N)
is exceeded; and (c) salinization increases the concentrations of ammonium-N in
riparian groundwater through - abiotic displacement of soil-sorbed ammonium-N,
and salinity-driven release of ferrous and sulfide ions that stimulate DNRA.
These controls will be evaluated through an innovative combination and
integration of four independent, but complementary, approaches: (a) designed
mesocosm factorial experiments that use 15N labeled nitrate-N to compare DNRA
and denitrification process rates and factors involved; (b) in-situ measurements
of riparian soil and water N at existing milldam study sites; (c) microbial
quantification of DNRA genes (nrfA) in mesocosm and riparian soils; and (d)
reactive transport modeling and calibration for laboratory mesocosm experiments
followed with scaling up and testing for riparian
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.