* 2213407
* LEAPS-MPS: Diffusive Partial Differential Equations in the Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Stanley Snelson, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 107,124.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion, the process whereby
particles, individuals, or energy spread from areas of higher concentration to
areas of lower concentration, is a central feature of many important physical
systems. Understanding the dynamics of these systems leads to a wide variety of
mathematical challenges. This project applies the theory of partial differential
equations (PDE) to study two classes of diffusive models. The first, kinetic
models of gases and plasmas, feature diffusion generated by collisions between
particles. These models are of both theoretical and practical importance, as
plasmas are used in many modern technological devices. The second class,
elliptic free boundary problems, arise in the study of phase transitions,
insulation, and many other physical and industrial processes. These models are
based on the coupling between an undetermined geometric region and a diffusive
equation defined in that region. The mathematical goals of this project are
combined with an educational component that includes support for graduate
student researchers, as well as a one-day workshop organized around research
questions in PDE introduced at the advanced-undergraduate level. The goal of
these measures is to increase opportunities for the next generation of
researchers in this subject area, including those from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance
the well-posedness and regularity theory of two classical kinetic equations, the
Boltzmann and Landau equations, which feature the interaction of nonlinear,
nonlocal diffusion in the velocity variable, with transport in the time and
space variables. Specific goals include constructing short-time solutions for
general initial data by leveraging the smoothing properties of the diffusion
term, as well as weakening the conditions required for solutions to regularize
and be continued past a given time. In free boundary theory, this project
includes the qualitative study of minimizers for functionals of Alt-Caffarelli
type with possibly irregular diffusion coefficients and unbounded coupling
terms. The goal is to extend well-known free boundary regularity results to
minimizers of these more general functionals. This project will also use free
boundary techniques to study shape optimization problems related to Dirichlet
eigenvalues of general elliptic operators, including problems for which
existence of optimal domains is currently unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.