* 2213136
* SBIR Phase II:  Arctic Environmental Modeling with Augmentation and Curation from an Artificial Intelligence Engine
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Leslie Canavera, POLARCTIC LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will address the growing need for accurate models and forecasts of the
Arctic. As Arctic maritime operations such as fishing, shipping, and mariculture
of kelp are increasingly impacted by unprecedented climate change, traditional
modeling techniques are unable to support these new demands. Ecosystems are not
static, and their unpredictability hinders safe and sustainable economic
development for communities. This modeling approach supports the economic
competitiveness for Alaskan fisheries by increasing transparency of resources on
short timescales (precision fishing) and long timescales (ecosystem modeling).
The results could be used to identify new and emerging locations for fisheries,
under- or over-fished locations, and differences between locations that can be
restored or those that the ecosystem has shifted away from supporting. By
applying dynamic ecology information, this project can provide tools to improve
management of ocean resources, which could increase industry profits while
simultaneously raising the total harvestable biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II innovation is to create and
refine an Artificial Intelligence (AI) engine capable of generating custom
environmental models, making new and emerging science quickly accessible to the
people and communities that need the solutions. The AI-produced software will
integrate multiple types of scientific techniques from the fields of nearshore
bathymetry models, habitat mapping, precision fishing, and Ecosystem Based
Fisheries Management (EBFM) tools. Scaling the generation of tailored models
provides cost effective, adaptable, and accurate solutions to ocean
environmental challenges. Successfully executing this plan will require a
combination of technical and computing skills; numerical modeling expertise;
significant scientific literacy in remote sensing, bathymetry, sea ice, physical
oceanography, and fisheries science; and the development and training of novel
neural network architectures. In Phase I work, remote sensing from satellites
was used to map the nearshore in the prototype AI engine. Remote sensing from
new satellite resources has enabled this effort of a deeper understanding of the
world’s remote locations, like the Arctic Ocean. These data deserts can leverage
satellites and pockets of Indigenous Traditional Knowledge to build productive,
new economies that are resilient and adaptable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.