* 2213565
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Estimating and forecasting nonstationary, multi-scale climate and land-use effects on avian communities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Andrew Finley, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2027
* USD 728,443.00

Birds are declining worldwide, with an estimated loss of three billion
individuals in North America alone over the last 50 years. The goal of this
project is to examine how two major global change drivers, climate and land-use
change, have affected – and will continue to affect – breeding birds across the
United States. The research combines bird observations from four nationwide data
sources (National Ecological Observatory Network [NEON], eBird, Breeding Bird
Survey, and National Park Service Inventory and Monitoring Program) to estimate
the historical impacts of climate and land-use change on individual species’
occurrences and biodiversity metrics over the last two decades for hundreds of
species within six avian communities: eastern forests, western forests,
aridlands, habitat generalists, grasslands, and urban/suburban. Using estimates
from the recent past, the project will then forecast bird occurrences and
distributions under a range of projected climate and land-use scenarios during
the mid-century and end-of-century. Forecasts will be used to identify
vulnerable species and bird communities at multiple spatial scales across the
United States. Species forecasts will account for multiple sources of
uncertainty, which is critical for understanding where conservation efforts
could have the greatest impact in the face of ongoing global change. Findings
from this work will be available via a web-based tool, which will provide the
public and resource managers with detailed information on both vulnerable and
resilient bird communities to enhance avian stewardship nationwide. A post-doc
and graduate student will be trained in data science and statistical methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on evaluating and forecasting the
occurrence dynamics of both individual species and entire ecological communities
by quantifying the multi-scale effects of environmental drivers, while
simultaneously merging independent data sources, via development of a
‘macrosystems integrated community occupancy model.’ The model will be applied
to North American avifauna to examine the effects of several climate and land-
use variables on the dynamics of species across biogeographical communities in
the continental United States throughout the 21st century. The results will lead
to (1) a macroscale understanding of bird species’ distributions and
biodiversity metrics during the last two decades; and (2) forecasts of
distribution dynamics from local to regional scales across the continental
United States under plausible climate and land-use scenarios, allowing for
assessments of species and community vulnerabilities to potential global
changes. The methodological approaches developed during this project will expand
the scope of community-level analyses to encompass macroscale drivers of
spatiotemporal biodiversity changes during an era of accelerated species
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.