* 2213845
* PFI-TT: A novel human developmental toxicity assay platform using microfluidics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kathryn Remus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project provides an alternative to animal models
for assessing the toxic effects of chemical compounds on human development using
induced pluripotent stem cells. Despite being expensive, time consuming, and
offering limited insights into human biology, animal models are the current gold
standard for toxicity testing. However, human cells can be used to generate
models of early human development and, by using these models to assess toxic
effects, human-relevant toxicity data may be more more controllable, repeatable,
and inexpensive. Such an alternative to animal models could reduce the costs of
drug and chemical development, and as regulatory groups worldwide set goals for
the reduction and eventual elimination of animal testing, drug and chemical
development companies will need to adopt effective and efficient alternatives.
The few platforms for assessing toxicity that exist in the market rely on
metrics that are inadequate for predicting human toxicity. As such, platforms
that more faithfully model human development may have impact on the toxicity
testing market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop
a novel human stem cell-based microfluidic developmental toxicology platform, in
which three-dimensional multicellular models are generated for toxicity testing.
This project aims to conduct critical technological developments for this
microfluidic toxicology platform to make it repeatable, controllable, and high-
throughput while thoroughly characterizing its predictive power. Specifically,
this project aims to integrate microfluidic organoid-generation technology with
automated and commercially-available liquid handling systems to minimize
operator influence and enable future scale-up of the experimental platform via
multiple integrated platforms running in parallel. Additionally, this project
aims to validate the predictive power of the platform by using it to test the
effects of a comprehensive suite of compounds with known toxicities. The testing
may be used to determine the range of compounds for which the platform is
predictive, as well as to examine the effects of each compound on tissue
morphology, cell marker expression, and metabolism. This data will be used to
determine the predictive power of each metric in order to develop efficient
tools and endpoints to expedite toxicological assessment of
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.