* 2213842
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Programmable Visual Capabilities of Environments through 3D printed Light-transfer
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeeeun Kim, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,750.00

Although 3D printing is now inexpensive enough for end-users to create custom
interactive devices with sensing and actuation capabilities that leverage visual
feedback, most resulting objects are either passive or require complicated,
expensive, and high-maintenance electronics. Furthermore, the design and
fabrication of custom functions, and the reprogramming of those functions in
physical objects once fabricated, are nearly impossible for end-users with
little experience or without domain expertise. This project aims to change that
situation by increasing users’ perception of everyday objects and their
functions to support decision making and improve performance in associated
tasks. Project outcomes will have broad impact by advancing the state of the art
in 3D printing of everyday objects and interactive devices with enhanced visual
capabilities for applications in smart environments. Additional impact will
derive from leveraging the interplay between the 3D printing process and
material characteristics to equip visual capabilities with passive light-
transfer properties and thereby foster end-user consideration of visual literacy
when designing battery-less smart objects that convey digital information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals the project will center around four
main research activities. First, the team will conduct holistic material
experiments to characterize the design space of light-transfer materials and
micro-structures, in order to understand their capabilities in charging,
releasing, and reflecting light energy to sense, communicate, and display
information. This will be followed by a series of hypothesis testing experiments
to ascertain the effect of improved human perception on recognizing embedded
information. Second, the team will work with domain experts (i.e., in
architecture and visualization) as well as engineering/design students using
iterative participatory design techniques to distil the knowledge obtained in
the previous activity to identify opportunities, challenges, and needs in design
support tools, and to implement practical application prototypes that afford the
new interactions, and actuation mechanisms and 3D printing parameters will be
associated with significant design parameters. Third, toolkits will be developed
based on these design parameters to facilitate end-user visual literacy in 3D
object design, and to convey key information when developing new interactive
devices. Lastly, rigorous technical evaluation and user studies will be designed
to validate the approach both quantitatively and
qualitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.