* 2213917
* The Long-Run Causal Effects of Single-Sex High Schools on Adult Outcomes: Survey and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eugen Dimant, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 453,000.00

The proposed research focuses on the roles of an educational institution –
single-sex schools (vs. coeducational schools)– in affecting gender differences
in adult attitudes toward gender and family as well as demographic and
socioeconomic life-course outcomes. A unique policy in a large city until 2009
required random assignment of middle-school graduates to high schools regardless
of whether schools were single-sex or coeducational, and public or private. This
policy provides an excellent opportunity to estimate causal effects of single-
sex schools, compared to most other contexts where students or their families
typically select single-sex vs. coeducational schools and thus it is challenging
to draw causal inferences on the impacts of single-sex schools. Establishing
whether single-sex schooling experiences affect gender-related attitudes and
life-course outcomes can inform the design of school environments conducive to
gender equality in the broader society. This project is supported by the
Sociology Program and the Science of Broadening Participation
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project assesses whether single-sex high
school experiences have long-run effects on individuals’ gender and family
attitudes, attitudes toward competition, trust, and reciprocity, and major
demographic and socioeconomic outcomes in their 30s and 40s. Previous studies by
the research team and others have examined the impact of the random high-school
assignment on short-term educational outcomes. This extends the research to
longer-run effects into middle adulthood. In order to have data to assess long-
run causal effects of single-sex schools on three sets of outcomes (attitudes,
demographic, and socioeconomic outcomes), an online survey is conducted to
collect a variety of information on men and women in the ages 33-52 at the time
of the survey in 2023-24 who graduated from high schools during the random
assignment regime. In addition to traditional survey questions to measure
individuals’ attitudes toward gender, family, competition, trust, and
reciprocity, vignettes and behavioral experiments also are included in the
online survey. This design allows the team to capture attitudinal dimensions
that are considered difficult to measure with traditional survey questions and
to compare insights from survey experiments and traditional survey
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.