* 2213581
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Facilitation Effects of Structural Priming on Second Language Learning and Prediction of the Dative Alternation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Theres Gruter Nell, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,376.00

This project investigates the role of prediction during language processing,
which has been proposed as a mental operation that drives language learning.
Correct predictions confirm and enhance prior knowledge, whereas incorrect
predictions can provide learners with error signals that allow them to adjust
their knowledge so as to make more accurate predictions in the future. This
mechanism is known as error-based learning. Young adult native speakers are
found to engage in prediction in many processing situations. By contrast, second
language (L2) learners tend to show reduced, delayed or even no effects of
active prediction during real-time processing. As a result, L2 learners may have
less opportunity to learn from prediction error. Studies on the connection
between L2 learning and prediction are thus crucial for a better understanding
of how error-based learning can contribute to successful outcomes in language
learning and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to
determine whether structural priming can facilitate L2 learning and predictive
processing of a specific type of grammatical construction. Structural priming is
a research technique that provides participants with language input against
which they can check whether their predictions are correct or not. The project
consists of two experiments. Experiment 1 asks whether structural priming
facilitates L2 learning of the constructions. It employs a written structural
priming paradigm together with acceptability judgment tasks before and after
priming. Preliminary results indicate increased use and higher ratings of
correct constructions by classroom learners after priming. Experiment 2 asks
whether structural priming facilitates predictive processing. Through two visual
world eye tracking (VWP) tasks, this experiment examines to what extent learners
engage in predictive processing while listening to sentences containing the
relevant constructions, and to what extent they may adapt their predictive
processing in response to recent input (priming).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.