* 2213425
* NSF LEAPS-MPS: Macrocyclic Peptidomimetic Scaffolds for Sensing of Phosphate-containing Metabolites
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Arundhati Nag, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,923.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Arundhati Nag and her students at Clark University, Worcester, MA will work on
designing sensors for phosphate-containing metabolites. Metabolic pathways such
as glycolysis use phosphate to form intermediate metabolites, and the levels of
the phosphate containing metabolites can provide important information
implicated in human diseases such as cancer. The Nag lab will focus on
developing sensors for adenosine triphosphate, a nucleoside phosphate
metabolite, and for glucose-6-phosphate, a sugar phosphate metabolite, which
belong to two different important classes of phosphate-containing metabolites.
Underrepresented minority (URM) students will be involved in this research,
through summer fellowship and directed studies with Professor Nag. Prof. Nag
will also be involved in developing a community of URM students at Clark
University thorough mingles, and she and her students will participate in
outreach activities and develop workshops for regional high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Nag will develop a comprehensive
approach for sensing phosphate-containing metabolites by targeting
simultaneously both the phosphate moiety and the nucleoside or sugar component
attached to the phosphate. The binding motifs will be assimilated into cyclic
fluorescent peptidic or peptidomimetic libraries. The libraries will be designed
such that they can be easily converted in a one-step reaction to linear analogs
that can be readily sequenced using de novo sequencing. The cyclic libraries
will be screened for selectively binding the phosphate-containing metabolite of
interest, and the hits from the screen, once sequenced, will be studied to help
understand which interactions of the sensor with a metabolite are critical for
selective detection of metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.