* 2213444
* LEAPS-MPS: Nano-Projectile Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry for accurate molecular analysis at the nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Michael Eller, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,802.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Michael Eller and his students at California State University Northridge (CSUN)
in Northridge, CA will develop new analytical tools for examining nanoparticles
and molecular arrangements at scales approaching 5 nanometers. Examining these
materials with high spatial resolution will provide critical insights into
fundamental and materials processes occurring at the nanoscale. Professor Eller
will broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM research
through two approaches focused on providing hands-on experiences. (1) Developing
a new mass spectrometry laboratory course and (2) providing outreach
opportunities to local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Eller will
develop new analytical methods for nanoscale molecular analysis based on
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). The research will investigate the use of
massive gold clusters as SIMS projectiles to examine nanoparticles and molecular
assemblies, with the goal of elucidating molecular organization at a scale
approaching 5 nm. The results of the project will provide new insights into
nanoparticle-surface interactions with low-dimensional materials and
nanostructured surfaces. Professor Eller will develop an interconnected research
and educational program which will work in concert with CSUN’s institutional
goal of encouraging students from underrepresented groups to actively
participate and succeed in STEM research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.