* 2213891
* Domain Dynamics and Ultrafast Switching in Magnetic Weyl Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Liang Wu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 539,083.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Electronic materials are traditionally characterized as
metals or insulators based upon their ability to conduct electricity. Lying
between these are semiconductors, insulating when pure but conductive when
electrically or chemically doped. Researchers have uncovered whole new classes
of materials, "topological materials," that defy this established paradigm. This
project supports experimental research and education in magnetic topological
metals, materials with unique properties and potential for use in advanced
technologies. For example, magnetic topological metals host different memory
states with a fictitious magnetic field pointing in different directions. Such
states can be switched at fast than GHz frequencies and could be used as the
basis for a new type of memory logic. The investigators will use light to study
the properties of magnetic topological metals as a function of time and
position, and control ultrafast switching between states. This project will help
to establish a fundamental understanding of these materials and potentially
enable their practical use in future nanoelectronics and quantum computing.
Educational work fostered by this project includes new outreach methods that
will introduce quantum materials to STEM students and the general public. First-
generation college students will be involved to give them a sense of modern
research in quantum materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The discovery of Weyl semimetals is a breakthrough in
topological materials because unlike the quantum Hall effect and topological
insulators which need a bulk gap to protect their novel properties, Weyl
semimetals do not. Since the discoveries of magnetic Weyl semimetals such as
Co3Sn2S2, their characterization has been limited to surface-sensitive band
structure measurements and transport measurements. How the Berry curvature
(magnetic field in the momentum space) manifest in these topological semimetals,
as well as the effects of domain structures, their temporal dynamics and
ultrafast switching, remain critical and still-wide-open questions. In this
three-year project, the research team uses scanning and time-resolved magneto-
optical Kerr effect microscopy and magneto-terahertz spectroscopy to study the
domain evolution, the Berry curvature effect, and its dynamics in magnetic Weyl
semimetals. The principal investigator aims to establish these techniques as a
new platform to study magnetic topological materials that have been constantly
emerging in the field. This project will help to establish the comprehensive
fundamental understanding of various aspects of magnetic Weyl semimetals in both
the real and momentum space and also their temporal dynamics in order to
establish them as new platforms for topological spintronics and information
processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.