* 2213976
* PFI-TT:  Creating highly efficient waterborne self-sanitizing coatings that incorporate novel additives
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Greg Bertsch, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to significantly reduce the cost of
antibacterial and anti-viral coatings. The technology utilizes a additive to
create a layered coating structure, where antibacterial and antiviral reagents
are concentrated at the top coating surface. The same concept can be extended to
address many long-standing challenges in waterborne emulsion coatings, including
water resistance, adhesion, surface hardness, and film formation. The technology
proposed here can be further developed into a platform to control surface
properties for broad applications including adhesives and biomedicine. In
addition, the project will provide an opportunity to connect students, including
female students and underrepresented groups and broaden their research horizons.
The proposed education plan on project management skill training seeks to equip
students with important professional skills that are critical to their job
readiness and future success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
investigates the chemistry of forming a novel Janus particle additive, with
different functional groups on the two sides of a single particle. These
particles diffuse automatically to the coating surface and create a layered
structure. By incorporating the antimicrobial functional groups on the particle
surface, a new approach of creating optimized self-sanitizing surfaces may be
invented. This proposal will explore design ideas for creating such particles
and study the conditions to achieve a layered coating structure. The study seeks
to reveal how particle surface chemistry is correlated with the coating
structure formation and final coating performance. The new system offers an
opportunity to study the potential synergistic effect of particle properties and
self-sanitizing performance. This proposal may set the foundation for the
commercialization of the new particle additives. It provides an alternative that
improves surface properties by directing particle additives, without completely
redesigning the original coating chemistry. The results ,may help guide future
research directions of Janus particles and functional coating
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.