* 2213960
* Collaborative Research: Deconstructing Wordlikeness Judgments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Karthik Durvasula, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2026
* USD 136,392.00

Humans have different kinds of knowledge about the languages they speak.
Phonotactic knowledge refers to their knowledge about sound patterns in words.
Such knowledge is usually studied through behavioral experiments such as
wordlikeness judgment tasks, in which a speaker is asked to indicate whether a
nonce (made-up) word form could be a real word in their language. Such studies
have observed that wordlikeness judgements are gradient; that is, they form a
cline of acceptability. This project examines different types of computational
models and experimental designs to better understand the nature of the
grammatical system that underly this variety of gradient judgment. For example,
one class of computational models seek to account for this gradience in
wordlikeness tasks by incorporating fine-grained generalizations in
sophisticated statistical models. In contrast, other models based solely on
categorical generalizations appear to do just as well in accounting for
behavioral wordlikeness findings. This suggests that gradience observed in the
behavioral experiments may reflect the experimental setting rather than the
underlying grammar of the knowledge itself. This collaborative research project
develops a thorough investigation of these contrasting accounts of gradience in
human wordlikeness judgements. The project provides mentoring and research
training opportunities for graduate students in modern experimental and
computational methods; and it creates an open-access, online database of the
project's experimental results that serves as a resource for other researchers
in the language sciences. In addition, the investigators plan to engage in
outreach activities targeting members of the public in settings focusing on
informal science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
deconstructs the variety of factors involved in wordlikeness judgements. It
includes experimental studies that manipulate response measures and stimulus and
response modality to elicit human-subjects' wordlikeness judgments for nonce
forms from speakers of English and Korean. A variety of computational models are
assessed by comparing how well they can be fitted to the results of the
experimental studies. The project's interconnected studies aim to answer the
following questions: (a) how do different explicit computational models perform
against observed wordlikeness judgments, (b) to what degree is gradience in
acceptability judgments related to the probabilistic nature of human perception,
and (c) are the results obtained affected by the manner in which words forms are
presented to speakers (e.g., auditorily vs. visually) and/or in which speakers
record their judgments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.