* 2213985
* PFI-TT:  Novel Artificial Intelligence Approach for Automatic Identification of Genetic and Neuroimaging Markers of Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Ayman El-Baz, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to reduce the age of patients
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) to approximately six months and
produce a detailed picture of where an individual falls on the autism spectrum.
These aims will be accomplished via an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled
software framework that will analyze brain structure and other medical
information from children at risk for ASD. The system may reduce the burden of
obtaining a diagnosis of autism, which takes a significant amount of time and
thousands of dollars under current clinical practice. The detailed mapping of
ASD symptoms to brain regions may help pediatricians and other specialists
better communicate their diagnostic findings and inform their plans for
treatment. Furthermore, reduction in age at which autism can be diagnosed will
give parents and caregivers a greater window of time to apply early intensive
behavioral interventions which are known to improve outcomes in autistic
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to produce a computer-
assisted diagnostic (CAD) system for autism diagnosis based on objective metrics
derived from multimodal brain imaging and genomic risk factors. Pediatric autism
diagnosis currently relies on subjective evaluations of child behavior. A
diagnostic process can begin as early as one or two years of age, but it
continues with follow-up observations through age 3–4 years till a final autism
diagnosis is rendered. This process can cost $5000–$7000 in total. The proposed
CAD system is anticipated to produce a rapid diagnosis at a fraction of current
cost. It seeks to identify specific facets of brain anatomy (from structural
magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]), and brain connectivity (from functional and
diffusion MRI) that will correlate with specific behavioral subtypes of ASD.
Evaluating these neurological data in concert with ASD-related variations in the
patient’s genome, will produce a detailed profile of brain regions and neural
circuit maps implicated in ASD symptomatology. This map will be accomplished
using deep machine learning to train the system on a retrospective cohort of
high-risk infants, who underwent brain imaging prior to one year of age and were
later diagnosed with autism. The system will be validated against an independent
dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.