* 2213936
* Assessing Sense of Belonging, Climate, and Culture at the Departmental Level from the Perspective of Undergraduate STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Melissa McCartney, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,967.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a tool to measure
undergraduate STEM students’ perceptions about the climate and culture of STEM
departments. Students’ sense of belonging is key in retaining and graduating
STEM undergraduates, especially STEM students from populations marginalized in
STEM. The project plans to adapt questions from an existing tool, as well as
develop new questions about STEM department climate and culture based on student
interviews and focus groups with STEM department stakeholders. After initial
development in three institutions, the project team intends to implement the
tool in STEM departments in multiple institutions across the country.
Additionally, the project plans to develop a handbook to guide departments in
using this tool. This project should advance understanding of STEM student
experiences in STEM departments and support efforts to retain students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Florida International University
(FIU) aims to develop a research-based assessment tool to measure undergraduate
STEM students’ sense of belonging to their department, as well as their
perceptions about departmental climate and culture. FIU is a Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI) and will collaborate with California State University,
Fullerton and California State University, San Marcos, which are also HSIs. The
project plans to adapt an existing assessment tool that examines sense of
belonging and to develop new items to probe departmental culture and climate
through input gathered from student interviews and focus groups with a diverse
population of faculty, staff, advisors, and other departmental stakeholders. In
addition to traditional closed-ended Likert-type questions and open-ended
written assessment probes, the project plans to develop items based on visual
narratives to probe students’ perceptions of departmental climate and culture.
The new assessment tool will be piloted with a sample of ~1,400 undergraduate
students in biology, chemistry, and physics departments across the three
collaborating institutions to gather evidence of validity. Once initially
validated, the assessment tool will then be implemented across at least 14
additional STEM departments, with data from the study returned to departments
for reflection and discussion. Project evaluation will be guided by a 5-member
advisory board composed of scholars from across different institutions and
multiple relevant disciplines. Dissemination efforts include conference
presentations, peer-reviewed publications, and development of a departmental
handbook to guide use of the tool. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. This
project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of
enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the
recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing associate’s or
baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.