* 2213149
* SBIR Phase I:  Applying Machine Learning to Mitigate Disruptions in Novel Relay Trucking Model
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Aayush Thakur, CONNECT DYNAMICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,983.00

The broader impacts of this SBIR Phase I project include a more sustainable and
profitable trucking industry, enhanced conditions for the trucking workforce,
improved public road safety, reduced emissions, and a path to future
advancements using alternative energy and autonomous technologies. This project
centers on a patented technology that pools shipments and matches tractors and
drivers with trailers and cargo in a relay fashion that ensures equipment and
cargo keep moving while drivers return home daily. Research has established the
theoretical viability of applying relay models in long-haul trucking to solve
equipment and human capacity issues. Using relay trucking could potentially
double asset utilization, cut delivery times in half, and decrease the high cost
of truck driver turnover. To date, no company has created a technology to
implement scalable relays in American trucking. Customer discovery and research
suggests this is due to the complexity of predicting and mitigating real-world
trucking disruption events (e.g. traffic accidents, equipment breakdown etc.).
The project aims to assess the feasibility of developing a machine learning (ML)
based predictive analytics tool to make our relay technology resilient to
disruptions in the driver scheduling and truck route optimization problem. A
successful project would extend a relay trucking model beyond largely
theoretical studies to build the first real-world application in the U.S. It
aligns with NSF’s mission by transforming the trucking industry while creating
better jobs for new and existing truckers and reducing carbon emissions. We
estimate that resolving the inefficiencies resulting in the loss of $110 billion
per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prove the feasibility of
using machine learning (ML) techniques to build a predictive tool that
integrates with our relay scheduling algorithms to effectively estimate the
likelihood of occurrence of disruption events and provide actionable
intelligence for deployment of mitigation strategies. A successful outcome will
create resilient relay algorithms necessary to commercialize the first scalable
relay trucking operations in the U.S. While the use of ML has been explored in
predicting weather and traffic events in the recent past, no off-the-shelf ML
tools are known to exist that can be utilized for this patented relay
technology. This project leverages real-world proprietary operational data from
large trucking companies, combined with public data sources and artificially
populated datasets representing drivers and equipment informed by work with
local partners at relay nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.