* 2213750
* PFI-TT: Development of a Mapping and Visualization System to Inform Excavators of Buried Utility Pipes
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Hubo Cai, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project seeks to capture the accurate locations
of buried utility pipes and display them to the equipment operator during
construction excavation. In the U.S., excavation is a $60 billion industry.
Excavation using heavy equipment is the single largest cause of recurring
utility strikes (e.g., a gas, water, of sewer pipe damage), causing hundreds of
fatalities and billions of dollars in financial losses every year. The
technology may also assist excavator operators in maintaining high work
productivity, reducing their mental stress, and improving the profitability of
the excavation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to
develop a mapping and visualization system to address the root causes of
recurring utility strikes: the lack of accurate and complete information
regarding buried utility lines being communicated to the equipment operator in a
near real-time manner. The technology has the ability to: (1) detect and map
utility lines of varying size, material, and burying depth in near real-time,
(2) visualize the dynamic interaction between the excavator and its
surroundings, including above ground and underground scenes in multiple view
angles, and (3) convey visual warnings and guidance messages to operators during
excavation operations. Project objectives include determining the operation-
stage requirements of utility information, aligning the model performance in
ground penetrating radar (GPR) signal processing and interpretation to meet the
production-stage requirements, and visualizing the utility lines during
excavation operation. Ultimately, this project may improve excavation from an
experience-based skill to an information-assisted
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.