* 2213144
* LEAPS-MPS: Searching for the Dark Side of the Universe with Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Bartosz Fornal, Barry University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2024
* USD 173,064.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Standard Model of elementary particles and
cosmology describes remarkably well the evolution of the Universe starting from
one-trillionth of a second after the Big Bang up to the present day. Despite
this huge success, several fundamental questions remain unanswered: What is dark
matter? Why is there more matter than antimatter in the Universe? Why are
neutrinos massive? Solving these mysteries requires an understanding of what
happened before one-trillionth of a second after the Big Bang. The tool enabling
us to dive this far back into the Universe's history has only recently been
provided by the first successful detection of gravitational waves. A primordial
stochastic gravitational wave background, although not yet discovered, is
expected to carry information precisely about the very early period of the
Universe and is the subject of this proposal. This award supports Dr. Fornal at
Barry University to construct and investigate well-motivated extensions of the
Standard Model which solve the outstanding problems in particle physics (Dark
matter, Matter-antimatter asymmetry, and Neutrino masses) which can be tested in
present and future gravitational wave experiments. The project will provide
substantial contributions to advancing knowledge, training future generations of
scientists and highly specialized professionals acquainted with sophisticated
mathematical methods and conveying physics ideas to nonscientists through the
planned outreach activities. Given the gender and demographic diversity of Barry
University, the project will significantly affect women and other groups
underrepresented in the scientific community, who will receive training and
acquire skills preparing them for advanced-degree programs in science,
increasing their competitiveness on the academic and industrial job market, and
improving their admission rate into doctoral
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to produce
a mapping between the parameter space of the most attractive models of
elementary particles accessible in gravitational wave detectors, and the
parameter space which can be probed in other experiments. The new particle
physics models considered are hypothetical, but their predictions will be
verifiable in current and upcoming gravitational wave experiments. Combined with
a positive signal from gravitational wave detectors, the results of this project
would provide a breakthrough in understanding the structure of the Universe. The
educational goal is to establish an energetic and creative group of young
physics researchers among Barry University undergraduates. In addition, through
presenting the results at international conferences and meetings of the American
Physical Society, those students will be exposed to world-class scientists
working in STEM fields, which will offer them various career networking
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.