* 2213231
* SBIR Phase I:  A cognitive dashboard to support clinical decision making in neurosurgery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Maxwell Sims, MINDTRACE TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to support the ability of neurosurgeons to
remove brain tumors or brain tissue that is causing seizures while protecting
the patient’s mental function. As many as 4 in 5 neurosurgery patients self-
report a cognitive difficulty after surgery that negatively impacts their
quality of life. Neurosurgical interventions to remove brain tumors or treat
medically refractory epilepsy try not to cause post-operative cognitive deficits
in patients, but sometimes the pathological tissue that needs to be removed is
involved with brain tissue that supports critical abilities, like the abilities
to talk, remember, or move. Because there is inter-individual variability in the
precise location of higher critical functions (e.g., language, memory,
locomotion), each patient’s brain must be mapped in a personalized way.
Ultimately, patients want confidence they will be the same person coming out of
brain surgery as they were going into surgery, and clinical teams want tools
that support quantitative pre-operative surgical planning and evidence-based
projections of post-operative function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to support the development of a
software product that enables neurosurgical teams to track patients’ mental
function over the trajectory of their care, i.e., a type of cognitive dashboard.
Current practice lacks a tool that identifies brain tissue that, if removed,
would result in long-term cognitive deficits. This project’s core deliverable is
a turn-key software platform that supports brain mapping protocols, as well as
assessment, scoring, archiving and sharing of measures of mental function across
the timeline of care of each patient. The software platform will integrate with
critical existing systems already in place in all medical centers (e.g., cranial
navigation, electroencephlogram (EEG), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
stimulus display systems). Follow-on work to this project’s core deliverable is
based on the premise that data from prior studied patients can be used to train
artificial intelligence/machinge learning (AI/ML) algorithms which can then be
used to simulate the expected effect of a given surgical plan on a new patient’s
future cognitive function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.