* 2213140
* LEAPS-MPS: Functional Data Analysis for Conditional Quantiles with Applications in Medical Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Eliana Christou, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 213,462.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Functional Data Analysis (FDA) investigates data
containing information that varies over a continuum such as the temporal and
spatial domains, with tremendous implications for many real-world applications,
including finance, natural language processing, electric grid stabilization, and
especially the medical field. For example, data types such as functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalogram (EEG) provide
multiple observations for different locations of the brain and scalp, and are
prime contenders of FDA. However, both fMRI and EEG data are often highly skewed
and may contain outliers; currently, traditional FDA methods are not able to
analyze them fully and accurately. Despite the many recent advancements in the
FDA literature, this area is still in its infancy with much potential yet to be
uncovered. The project addresses this gap by developing a novel approach for
analyzing functional data that is better able to account for heavy skewness and
outlying observations. This approach will be used to examine both fMRI and EEG
data with the goal of investigating two important neurological disorders: (1)
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and (2) alcoholism. Neurological
disorders exhibit brain activity characterized by drastically different
biochemical and electrical behavior where the output is either atypically high
or atypically low, and hence more effectively analyzed using this new method.
The results will be incorporated into open-source software for reproducibility
and further research, and for encouraging possible future collaborations in the
medical community. A new summer research program will support students from
underrepresented backgrounds who will analyze the fMRI and EEG data sets and
will provide recommendations and suggestions to the medical community through
public dissemination. This experience will improve students’ attitudes towards
STEM careers, help them develop skills necessary for the 21st-century workforce,
and encourage them to seek advanced degree opportunities. The project will
provide research training opportunities at the graduate level as well. The
infinite dimensional nature of functional data motivates the use of dimension
reduction techniques, whereas the skewness and outlying observations often
encountered in medical data require the use of quantile regression (QR). Despite
recent advancements in FDA, there is no current work on the intersection of both
dimension reduction and QR for FDA. Therefore, the project addresses this gap by
(1) developing a dimension reduction technique for QR with infinite dimensional
functional predictors, (2) extending the method to incorporate additional
categorical predictors that are common in medical studies, and (3) integrating
the methods into students’ training through investigation of the medical
disorders of ADHD and alcoholism. This work will develop computationally
efficient algorithms that will be disseminated through the PI’s existing
software. Finally, this research will lead to new critically needed statistical
methods for medical researchers working with rare diseases and will help
clinicians to garner more actionable insight.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.