* 2213363
* LEAPS-MPS: Dynamical Parameter Estimation for Hydrodynamic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Vincent Martinez, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 238,904.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental feature in the
modeling of physical phenomena is the presence of parameters that encode various
relevant properties. In the study of fluid flows, parameters arise that capture
the ability of the fluid to generate friction by shearing against itself or
quantify how temperature differences within the fluid can drive its motion, such
as when the sun heats the ocean and a flame heats a pot of water, or more
generally represent external sources of energy, such as disturbances in the
atmosphere due to large-scale disruptive volcanic eruptions and anthropogenic
greenhouse gas effects. The role of these parameters is crucial in the
understanding of turbulence, climate dynamics, and other engineering
applications. Their precise determination is obtained empirically through the
collection of data. Often the data collected is incomplete or corrupted by noise
that may arise from the measurement procedure, or the devices used. This project
systematically addresses the issue of the accurate estimation of parameters in
the context of fluid flows, through the mathematical analysis and computational
study of a data-driven approach geared to identify conditions under which
recovery of the parameters can be provably guaranteed in several suitably
idealized practical situations. The project also builds infrastructure for
harnessing the data revolution through course redevelopment, provides training
and mentoring opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and fosters
a robust and diverse mathematical culture through a peer mentorship
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will carry out a mathematical study
of a data-driven dynamical algorithm for recovering unknown parameters arising
in partial differential equations of hydrodynamics via a paradigm of feedback
control. In this approach, observations on the system are directly inserted into
the prognostic equation as an exogenous term that enforces convergence towards
the observations. Several practical scenarios of parameter estimation are
conceived and systematically analyzed, which include the simultaneous recovery
of multiple parameters and the use of various modes of observations. A key
property underpinning the success of this strategy is the existence of a known
nonlinear mechanism found in a large class of dissipative systems that allows
small scale information to be asymptotically enslaved to large scale
information. The application of this property to parameter estimation is novel.
As a result, this study will shed light on the role of this mechanism for
parameter estimation in contexts beyond fluid flow and provide a comprehensive
exploration of the robustness and limitations of this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.