* 2213366
* LEAPS-MPS: Seeking Superlubricity at Single Molecule Level on Graphene Nanoribbons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* YUAN ZHANG, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Friction is an essential physical phenomenon. It would be
impossible to walk or drive without friction. On the other hand, friction has
negative impacts on mechanical devices because it causes wear, dissipates
energy, and wastes non-renewable natural resources. This project aims to
investigate superlubricity, a state where friction almost vanishes, on the
contacts formed by organic molecules and graphene nanoribbons (GNRs). By
measuring friction force on organic molecules sliding on GNRs, the project
investigates the laws of friction at atomic scale and explores the origins of
superlubricity, to complement the macroscopic laws of friction available in high
school textbook and to aim for breakthroughs in tribology. The project may lead
to GNRs as superlubricant monolayer materials applied to reduce the friction and
wear of spintronic devices and other micro- and nano-electromechanical systems.
The project is the first on physics and materials at the single atom/molecule
level at Old Dominion University (ODU). It introduces ODU to research expertise
and instrumentation resources not previously accessible on campus, and it
broadens research participation among faculty and students from various science
and engineering fields. This research also aims to inspire young minds,
involving an ODU graduate student, a large number of ODU undergraduate students
from minority groups, students from the Society of Black Physicists (SBP) formed
by African American students in the Hampton Roads community, as well as K-12
high school students from the surrounding area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes GNRs as solid-state
supporting platforms to accommodate organic molecules, to quantify the force
required to move a single molecule on GNRs using a low temperature Scanning
Tunneling Microscope (STM) and a qPlus Atomic Force Microscope (Q+AFM), and aims
to discover superlubricity on GNRs with static friction 1-2 orders of magnitude
smaller than previously observed. Various molecular systems including single
organic molecules, planar and non-planar, symmetric and non-symmetric in
structure, on top of three different types of GNRs are investigated to unveil
the origins of atomic scale friction and
superlubricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.