* 2213870
* Collaborative Research: From Culture to Child: How collective perceptions of affective divergence shape interracial relationships in middle childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Max Weisbuch, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 254,374.00

Racial segregation, tension, and discrimination continue to persist in U.S.
society and this project examines how racial discord may spread from culture to
child. This project uses a new paradigm to examine how subtle—but
recurring—depictions of interracial discord on children’s television contribute
to the erosion of children’s interracial relationships in middle childhood (~7
to 10 years of age). The proposed studies not only aim to identify a cause of
interracial discord among children but may also inform media based interventions
for improving children’s interracial relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on televised depictions of emotional discord in cross-race
interactions as one potential cultural source of racial bias. A preliminary
study documents that children’s television programming consistently depicts
“shared” expressions of emotion in same-race interactions but not cross-race
interactions. Exposure to this pattern of affective divergence may influence
children’s interracial beliefs and behaviors. In three proposed experiments,
this causal relationship is tested using the cultural snapshots paradigm.
Children aged 7-10 years are randomly assigned to view brief television clips
depicting (a) affective divergence, (b) affective convergence (shared emotion in
both same-race and cross-race interactions), or (c) no humans (control).
Exposure to affective divergence (relative to other conditions) is expected to
cause children to experience reduced interracial empathy and increased negative
expectations for interracial interactions, and in turn, cause reductions in
children’s supportive and friendly behaviors toward other-race peers. Moderator
and mediator variables are also measured, allowing for nuanced hypothesis-tests.
Ultimately, these studies provide critical information about the causes of
racial discord in children and a potential means for reducing such
discord.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.