* 2213241
* MPS-Ascend: A Proteomic Approach to Understand and Improve Endosomal Escape
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Daniel Brauer, Brauer, Daniel D
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Daniel Brauer is awarded a NSF Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by
groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Brauer supports the
research project entitled “MPS-Ascend: A Proteomic Approach to Understand and
Improve Endosomal Escape", under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The
host institution for the fellowship is the University of California Berkeley,
and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Alanna Schepartz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal intends to use the miniature protein ZF5.3 as a tool to increase the
understanding of the cellular machinery involved in endosomal escape and to shed
light on endosomal escape structure-activity relationships. The proposed work
will develop a novel, time dependent, photocatalyst based proximity labeling
strategy to identify the protein and lipid partners of ZF5.3 as it traverses the
endocytic pathway to reach the cytosol. The work will also create a high
throughput, quantitative assay for endosomal escape to establish structure
activity relationships that guide the escape of ZF5.3 with and without protein
cargo. Successful implementation of this work may allow for greater
understanding of intracellular protein therapeutics. The PI intends to use a
data driven framework for improving the academic climate and inclusion of
minoritized individuals in the UC Berkeley College of Chemistry. Quantitative
survey data will be used to generate targeted solutions to improve inclusion and
persistence among UC Berkeley College of Chemistry postdoctoral scholars so that
talented and diverse candidates advance to roles as future faculty
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.