* 2214038
* BII: INSITE: Institute for Symbiotic Interactions, Teaching, and Education in the Face of a Changing Climate
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Michele Nishiguchi, University of California - Merced
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,852,985.00

Society is currently experiencing an era of rapidly changing climate that
threatens to collapse Earth’s ecosystems. The planet is expected to warm by 2°C
by 2030 and exceed a 5°C increase by 2100 without immediate global action. These
new global and ecological conditions that define this era have led to steep
declines in global biodiversity, threatening organisms that depend on symbiotic
associations with microbes for essential benefits. Since all plants and animals
engage in a broad spectrum of interactions with microbes, it is important to
assess how hosts and their microbes will respond to this rapidly shifting
climate. The new Biological Integration Institute, INSITE - The INstitute for
Symbiotic Interactions, Teaching, and Education in the Face of a Changing
Climate - brings together a multi-disciplinary team at the University of
California at Merced, Michigan State University, and Resilient Oceans to
identify key threats of climate change through a symbiotic lens. INSITE will
develop tools to predict biodiversity loss and offer critical insight into how
to avoid such devastation. The project employs an integrative and collaborative
approach to determine how climate change will impact the ability of species to
survive and adapt to future environments. Results from this integrated research
will provide appropriate tools for conservation and policy advocates to
construct plans to mitigate biodiversity loss across a range of potential
climate futures. In addition, INSITE will serve as a symbiosis springboard,
forming a diverse group of scientists, educators, students, and community
partners who respect and celebrate those individual differences that can broaden
their comprehension of the world around us. INSITE scholars will leverage their
science communication skills with various activities designed to reach out to
local-rural communities. The Institute will further deliver a set of portable
tools and outreach resources that work to educate and train students in
symbiosis and climate change across K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoc
levels. Finally, INSITE seeks to increase equity and diversity in STEM, where
each individual’s input is equally respected by creating an atmosphere designed
to recruit and retain people from diverse backgrounds (race, socioeconomic,
gender, etc.) in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of INSITE is
to develop a framework for understanding the resilience of microbial symbiotic
systems to climate change that can be used to vertically expand symbiosis
research and training in a changing world. Collaboratively, INSITE will
integrate studies of three model systems under the themes of ecology, evolution,
physiology, bioinformatics, applied mathematics, and conservation biology to
establish a foundation of a set of expectations and a roadmap for the
integrative study of symbioses under climate crises. This integrated approach of
STEM disciplines will break down interdisciplinary barriers that prevent STEM
disciplines from effectively working together. Additionally, INSITE will develop
a set of standards that allow for rigorous, replicative, and comparative
research across other symbiotic systems. The Institute will provide the field of
biology with a rich resource of ecological, genomic, molecular, modeling, and
simulation data collected across varying time scales. The proposed experiments
will establish novel approaches and models that are useful for understanding not
only symbiotic systems broadly, but also as “canary in a coalmine” indicators of
climate change threats. Finally, a foundational goal of INSITE is to train
generations of new scientists to have a holistic view on the importance of
microbial interactions for conserving biodiversity. INSITE fellows will be
empowered to think integratively across disciplines and systems. The Institute’s
trainees will broaden the field of symbiosis to new biological systems and
scientific frontiers, making INSITE fellows more competitive for various
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.