* 2214949
* The Carbon Footprint of Multinational Production
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joseph Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2025
* USD 509,498.00

Where companies choose to produce goods around the world affects the climate
impacts of production since different countries have different production
technologies that impact the amount pollution emitted during production. This
innovative research will use four projects to study how the activity of
multinational firms that produce across different countries, (multinational
production (MP) for short), affects global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. The
research develops new theoretical and empirical methods to study interactions of
MP and the environment. The project also investigates the importance of
institutions in driving observed global patterns of emissions and how accounting
for MP changes how researchers study international trade and international trade
policy. In addition to theoretical modelling, the project also involves
assembling a large data set on MP, firm ownership, and CO2 emissions that will
be used by other researchers. The results of this research will help guide and
improve global climate negotiations that have set goals of resource transfers
from rich to poor countries to address climate change. The results will not only
guide policies to help improve the health of citizens across the globe but also
help to establish the US as the global leader in climate policy research. In
addition, the project will develop teaching materials and mentor and train
graduate students, undergraduate students, and junior faculty, in MP, trade, and
CO2 emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will study
how multinational production (MP) activities of multinational firms affect
aggregate global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. The research consists of four
parts. The first project uses microdata on global firms to analyze the
relationship between MP and CO2 emissions. The data for this part is built from
Orbis and merged with firm ownership data. This project will also use aggregate
data to study how host countries (countries where production takes place) differ
in their CO2 emissions as well as how a firm’s home country affects its CO2
emissions. The second project will develop a general equilibrium multi-country
model of MP, trade, and climate change that introduces realistic features to
standard MP analysis, such as tradable energy goods and energy resources, energy
technology blueprints, and a spatial separation of MP, production, and sales.
The third project will estimate parameters of the model using the large micro-
level data set constructed in the first project. The final project will use the
estimated model to study how MP and policy changes affect global CO2 emissions.
The results of this research project will provide major inputs into policies to
increase the adoption of “green technology” in production and reduce CO2
emissions, and thus improve citizens’ health. The results will not only guide
policies to help improve the health of citizens across the globe but also help
to establish the US as the global leader in climate policy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.