* 2214224
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disentangling causes and consequences of religious conversion
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Cristina Moya, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 23,643.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do people adopt a novel set
of religious beliefs and practices, especially if it is a minority one and doing
so is potentially costly? This doctoral dissertation research project explores
the conditions that make it more likely for someone to convert to a new religion
and measures the consequences of conversions for cooperation across religious
and ethnic boundaries. Results can help us understand the underlying drivers of
recent large-scale shifts in religious affiliation, and their potential
consequences for inter-group cooperation and market integration. Additionally,
this project will provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, offer methods training to underprivileged academic communities, and
disseminate results to both English and Spanish-speaking audiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;By using mixed methods in an ethnographic context experiencing high
rates of conversion from Catholicism to various forms of Protestantism, this
study can help adjudicate between the relative contributions of material
motivations, assortment along shared values, and social learning heuristics in
driving conversion decisions. This will include conducting retrospective semi-
structured interviews, vignette experiments, economic games, and analysis of
longitudinal census data. Economic approaches to conversion highlight the
economic outcomes that often follow shifts in religious affiliation, suggesting
that material motivations drive conversions. However, conversions are not always
followed by improved economic outcomes, and even when they are, they may not be
driven by material concerns. This project could shed light on the mechanisms
involved in conversion processes by introducing a cultural evolutionary approach
which focuses on the transmission pathways through which these ideas spread, and
their interaction with human motivations and cultural
norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.