* 2214309
* Forming Habit(us): A Video-Ethnography of Everyday Interactions Inside 21 American Families
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Joanne Golann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 251,327.00

The objective of this project is to examine through in-home video footage how
families from different social class backgrounds develop early-life skills,
attitudes, and expectations in their children. There is overwhelming evidence of
the importance of children’s earliest years and the power of parenting in
shaping young children’s skill development. Each year, the United States invests
billions of dollars into programs to support parents including through parent
education classes, parenting supports, and home visitation programs. Developing
parenting initiatives that better address families’ daily needs and reflect
their knowledge and expertise requires a deeper understanding of the
circumstances of children’s lives. This in-home video study of parent-child
interactions is an unprecedented examination of how families support their
children’s early learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for this study come from
5,700 hours of video footage contained in 463,000 discrete video clips, from a
two-week in-home video-ethnographic study of 21 families, each with a child aged
2-4. These data are analyzed through a multi-step process that includes
completing daily and thematic content logs, writing narrative summaries and
memos, and selecting episodes for closer analysis. Outcomes of the project
include rich descriptions of the everyday, in-situ parenting practices of
families with young, preschool-aged children, and new measures of parenting
behaviors and new concepts to be tested in future studies. These outcomes will
enhance public conversations concerning families’ daily accomplishments and
their challenges in supporting their young children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.