* 2214040
* Persuading People on More and Less Divisive Issues
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Marina Agranov, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 358,156.00

This project examines how people’s genuine beliefs about real world events
inform their responses to public information, and how hard it is to persuade
people to change their beliefs. This question is important as governments and
experts often try to persuade citizens to take certain actions based on the
information they collect. This happens in many settings ranging from an
individual’s decision to adopt health precautions to a business owner’s decision
to keep his/her business afloat in times of prolonged economic slowdown. Major
inefficiencies and coordination failures could ensue if these recommendations
made by the government are not followed. What is the best way to release
information to the general public? What affordances prevent persuasion in
practice from working as it does in theory? Studying how genuine beliefs respond
to information provided by a knowledgeable source is a complex task since such
beliefs are in general unknown and are likely to be different for different
people, especially on divisive topics. This research develops a new mechanism of
delivering information that allows testing for persuasion without needing to
know participants’ initial believes, and hence allows us to separate different
possible impediments to information policies. Using this mechanism, we test the
efficacy of information policies across various domains including political and
economic issues, sustainability concerns, and general knowledge questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, our new mechanism circumvents unknown and
heterogeneous prior beliefs by inducing a common posterior belief. We show that
this new mechanism is optimal from the perspective of the information designer,
i.e., attains the same expected payoff as the one in which the information
designer knows each receiver’s prior. To test this mechanism, we conduct two
sets of experiments: one in the laboratory with induced priors, and another in
the field with genuine priors. In the second set of experiments, we first elicit
homegrown priors people hold in a variety of domains and then examine their
evolution in response to publicly provided information structures. In addition,
we explore the propagation of information via cheap-talk communication between
respondents, representing gossip in a population; and we study how this
propagation is impacted by heterogeneity in respondents’ preferences and their
beliefs about the distribution of preferences in the population, i.e., the
degree of homophily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.