* 2214006
* PFI-TT: Novel Lithium-Ion Batteries with Adaptive Designs for Improved Safety, Range and Payload Capacity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Thein Kyu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in the development of lithium-ion
battery manufacturing and design processes removing the shape limitations of
current batteries. Today, lithium ion batteries are limited to regular
geometrical shapes like cylinders, discs and cuboids. Designing a battery-
around-a-product rather than a product-around-a-battery is novel and will enable
the reimagination of future designs of products. The product designer will no
longer have to make allowances for additional space in particular shapes nor
will the batteries demonstrate decreased power density (and shorter life). The
societal need for such 3-dimentional (3D) printed batteries stems from portable
mobile applications where there are severe limitations for weight, size and/or
space in diverse areas such as medical, transportation, and consumer wearable
products. If successful, the project may impact consumer/business products that
use batteries and electronics, where some or all of the electrical components
could be 3D-printed. The target markets include consumer wearables, medical
devices, and defense systems including wearable sensors, free-form solid-state
batteries, and energy harvesting devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this novel battery system stems from an interdisciplinary collaboration
between polymer scientists and manufacturing experts in 3D printing. The team
aims to use novel, patented, solid polymer electrolyte chemistries in scalable
technologies focued on freeform 3D printed battery components. As a first
commercial segment of interest, battery in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)
applications will be examined. This project will be used to subsequently print
layer-by-layer the electrolyte membrane cathodes and anodes over custom 3D
surfaces and encapsulate these electrodes to make complete, working, structural
battery/body frameworks for UAVs/drones. The goal and scope of the project
encompass developing methods of assembling the entire lithium ion battery from
start to finish to the freeform design with complex shapes that can eventually
be scaled to high-throughput, high-volume, custom-shaped
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.