* 2214375
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution SSSE 2022 - 2024
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Sarah Fuller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 373,157.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) on R/V
Atlantis, a 274’ general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a 238’
multidisciplinary vessel. Both are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic
Research Fleet (ARF) which is scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS). Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-
art instrumentation and support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The
vessels work in all the world’s oceans supporting science funded primarily by
U.S government agencies. R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching
and servicing Alvin, the human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of
the National Deep Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
proposal, WHOI provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition
of the following SSSE:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydro-boom Hydraulic Power Unit –
R/V ATLANTIS $135,032&lt;br/&gt;(2) Science Walk-in Refrigeration Units – R/V
ATLANTIS $155,716&lt;br/&gt;Internal Deployment Pole - R/V ARMSTRONG
$24,731&lt;br/&gt;(2) Lithium Battery Containment Units $9,525&lt;br/&gt;SBE
12-Position Central Pylon – R/V TIOGA $19,044&lt;br/&gt;Sonardyne USBL Head –
R/V ATLANTIS $191,581&lt;br/&gt;Teledyne RDI rapidCAST – R/V ARMSTRONG
$95,850&lt;br/&gt; $631,479&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.