* 2214877
* MRI: Acquisition of 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer Console and Probe to Bolster Excellence in Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* William Eckenhoff, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 09/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Rhodes College is acquiring an
upgraded console for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
with a broadband probe to support the research of Professor Larryn Peterson and
colleague William R. Eckenhoff. This instrument facilitates research in the
areas of organic, bioorganic, and inorganic chemistry. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of
students at all levels at Rhodes College as well as provides accessibility for
use at LeMoyne-Owen College. This instrument enhances the recruitment and
engagement in research and teaching for underrepresented groups at these
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing the research and education at all levels, especially in organic,
bioorganic, and inorganic small molecule research. The instrument impacts a
variety of research projects including the development of highly active proton
reduction catalysts with earth abundant metals and the design and synthesis of
dopamine derivatives and other catechols as probes for enzyme function. It also
assists with the synthesis, characterization, and biological activity studies of
antimicrobial peptides from animal venoms, and the synthesis of novel unnatural
amino acids and mutated peptides to determine FNII and CTLD1 domains.
Additionally, the instrument facilitates the design of inhibitors of the LpxC
enzyme, new methods to oxidize aryl ketones to carboxylic acids, the synthesis
of boronic acid analogues of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), and the
development of course-based undergraduate research experiences for the organic
chemistry laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.