* 2214992
* Public-Private Partnerships in Education: Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,038.00

Public-private partnerships (PPPs) for the provision of education have the
potential to provide high quality education to low- and middle-income
communities. However, most studies of the effectiveness of such partnerships do
not adequately control for student background of students enter these PPP
schools. This research combines randomized assignment of students to schools
with rich data on both student backgrounds and outcomes to study the
effectiveness of PPPs on several student outcomes. The randomized assignment of
students chosen through a lottery to a PPP school and a local public school
allows the researchers to adequately control for student socioeconomic
background hence able to isolate the effects of school type on outcomes. The
researchers will compare the outcomes of students chosen by the lottery to
attend PPP schools but were assigned to public schools to those of students who
did attend a PPP school after being chosen in the lottery. The findings will
inform the design and implementation of PPPs in the US and globally where
governments wish to expand the supply of high-quality education in low-income
settings and increase the supply of high-quality human capital. The research
results will also help establish the US as the global leader in PPPs for the
provision of high-quality education for students in low- and middle-income
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two key questions
regarding the efficacy and equity of PPPs in the provision of education. Do
these PPP schools improve student learning outcomes, compared to traditional
public schools? This question is addressed by measuring learning progress among
students assigned to PPP or traditional public schools using a lottery
instituted by the local school board, ensuring that differences in outcomes are
due to the schools rather than systematic differences between PPP and non-PPP
students. Administrative data on student characteristics and assignments will be
combined with survey data from students and their households, including
appropriate tests of learning outcomes. Given the potential benefits of PPP
schools and their goal of serving students from disadvantaged backgrounds, what
factors cause families to choose to apply to them? This will be explored by
surveying households with young children who are facing this decision, improving
understanding of the ways in which public policies can expand and diversify
access to effective schools. The findings will inform the design and
implementation of PPPs in the US and globally where governments wish to expand
the supply of high-quality education in low-income settings and increase the
supply of high-quality human capital. The research results will also help
establish the US as the global leader in PPPs for the provision of high-quality
education for students in low- and middle-income
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.