* 2214152
* GOALI: Microscale fundamentals of sweat evaporation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Konrad Rykaczewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 453,742.00

Sweating is important to human thermoregulation, thermal comfort, illness
diagnosis, and hygiene product development. However, little is known about how
droplets emerge and evaporate from our sweat glands. The scale of these
phenomena is in-between molecular processes that drive sweat generation revealed
by biochemists and macroscopic sweat rate measurements performed by
physiologists. Engineers have studied evaporation across all these length scales
but only in non-biological settings. This work will use three advanced imaging
techniques to provide a unique view of droplets during various sweating stages.
To identify the main physical mechanisms underlying sweat evaporation, high-
resolution photographs and videos will be interpreted with theoretical modeling
and additional experimentation with artificial sweating surfaces. These research
outcomes will potentially impact diverse fields ranging from medical diagnostic
development to energy-efficient building design. In addition, the work will
inform the industrial partner how to more realistically mimic sweating using a
thermal manikin. These devices are often used in apparel development and to
optimize airflow for human thermal comfort in buildings and vehicles. The
project will foster the academia-industry partnership with various joint
activities and engage with the broader public through multimedia platforms and
campus events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To systematically understand the role of
various thermofluidic factors in different sweat evaporation modes, the project
team proposes a two-pronged transdisciplinary approach that merges physiological
and engineering perspectives. First, a new method will be developed to integrate
ventilated capsule sweat rate measurements used routinely in physiology with
multimodal imaging. Specifically, the team will use fast macro videography, mid-
wave infrared thermography, and optical coherence tomography. A suite of non-
invasive methods will be used to simultaneously measure sweat evaporation rate
and visualize the corresponding microscale sweat dynamics at three skin sites.
The team will study these processes under neutral, moderate, and strong thermal
stimuli that will be asserted to induce out-of-pore, dropwise, and filmwise
sweating modes. Second, the contributions of various factors to sweat
evaporation through experimentation and modeling will be explored employing the
same method but with artificial sweating surfaces with gradually increasing
complexity. This knowledge will enable the formulation of reduced-order models
of the out-of-pore, dropwise, and filmwise modes. In addition, imaging sweating
onset and drying phases will deepen understanding of biological processes,
including how sweat traverses through the duct to the skin and what happens to
sweat on the surface once its secretion stops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.