* 2214640
* Deaton Review Country Studies: A Trans-Atlantic Comparison of Inequalities in Incomes and Outcomes over Five Decades
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* James Ziliak, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2024
* USD 198,124.00

Economics researchers and policy makers have worried about inequality in labor
market outcomes for several decades. The debate focuses on changes in skill
composition of the labor force, returns to skills such as education attainment
and unobserved skills, and in institutions such as unions, minimum wage, and
trade agreements. The Covid-19 pandemic shocked the global economy with
implications for earnings, education, skills, and jobs, and thus inequality and
the design of public policy responses. This project will use a coherent
framework, across the major economies of Europe and North America, to study a
broad set of inequalities and how the COVID-19 pandemic has changed these
inequalities , and how policy in each economy has responded. This research
project goes beyond the description and causes of inequality trends across
countries, to study the potential role of policies at different stages on
different groups. It also looks at how human capital policies and labor market
regulations influence market inequalities, and how taxes and transfers can
reduce inequalities in disposable income. The results of this will provide
important inputs into labor market policies that could increase incomes and
reduce income inequality in developed countries. The results will also help
establish the US as the global leader in equality of labor market
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a network of 17 groups of
researchers from across Europe and North America to understand the drivers of
economic inequalities across high income countries. The teams will mobilize a
vast array of data sources to study in detail differences across educational
attainment, race, ethnicity, and immigration status, and the mechanisms by which
households are able to smooth income shocks. In some countries the survey data
include a direct link to administrative records, permitting a more rich and
accurate assessment of inequalities across countries and the life course. The
team from the United States will use both public-access data from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) Annual Social Economic Supplement (ASEC), as well as
restricted access survey and administrative that provides a direct link between
the CPS ASEC and Social Security Administrationâ€™s Detailed Earnings Records
(DER). The project then proceeds with four related research strands. The first
strand uses harmonized data to study the evolution of several economic
inequalities before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. The second strand examines
labor market inequalities in detail. The third strand highlights the role of
education and training for non-university attendees and focusses on the impact
of large cross-country differences in educational systems on inequality. The
final strand looks at the tax and welfare systems and their effectiveness at
addressing family income inequality. The results of this will provide important
inputs into labor market policies that could increase incomes and reduce income
inequality in developed countries. The results will also help establish the US
as the global leader in equality of labor market
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.