* 2214765
* Collaborative Research: Measuring and Improving Physics Quantitative Literacy throughout the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Suzanne Brahmia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2024
* USD 262,112.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing tools to assess
and characterize students’ mathematical reasoning skills in physics across a
diverse student population. Introductory physics is required for many STEM
majors, in large part, because it can help develop mathematical reasoning skills
so that students can succeed in their degree program. New instructional
materials and methods are needed that can help students learn these essential
skills. This study plans to assess the development of these skills in physics
majors as they complete middle- and upper-division physics courses. A new
assessment instrument will be developed and validated to allow instructors and
researchers to measure mathematical reasoning skills across geographically and
socioeconomically diverse populations. Results from these assessments will be
used to design, develop, and test interventions to improve these skills. Project
results will be presented at national conferences and published in peer-reviewed
journals in STEM education. The assessment instruments will be made available to
the STEM education community through online repositories. The project addresses
a national need to improve students’ mathematical reasoning skills so that they
can describe and understand the world from a quantitative
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the recent development
of the Physics Inventory of Quantitative Literacy (PIQL) to meet the need for a
formative assessment of students’ mathematical reasoning in physics, referred to
as Physics Quantitative Literacy (PQL). The PIQL was validated with calculus-
based introductory physics students at a large public research university. This
project will map the development of PQL throughout the undergraduate physics
major by collecting PIQL data in introductory and advanced undergraduate
courses. The project will develop and validate a new test, based on the PIQL,
that is appropriate for populations with less exposure to formal mathematics
courses. This new test will be used to measure PQL in the breadth of physics
courses taken by many STEM majors, across multiple institutions. Evidence for
the validity and reliability of this new test will be established through an
iterative cycle of quantitative and qualitative analyses, based on the
successful procedures established while validating the PIQL. Ultimately, this
project will develop and pilot instructional activities to improve students’ PQL
as an outcome. The effectiveness of these materials will be assessed using
either the PIQL or the newly developed test. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.