* 2214135
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social network position and causes of fatigue within participatory water governance networks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 30,459.00

Resolving environmental and social challenges like water sustainability requires
participatory governance. This argument has been posed by scientists whose
research suggests that public participation can both secure democracy and
contribute to more sustainable use, allocation, and distribution of water.
Participatory forums—spaces where state- and non-state actors come together to
discuss public issues—are powerful governance platforms for negotiating societal
change and can support positive environmental policy outcomes. Bureaucrats are
key actors in participatory forums, and their unique position at the
intersection of government and civil society means that their work often
involves translating the ideas of others into policy. However, when governments
decide to involve non-governmental actors in public decision-making, new and
unexpected challenges emerge that can undermine the intended goals of public
participation. This doctoral dissertation project uses tools for social network
analysis and models of organizational fatigue to advance the theory and practice
of participatory modes of natural resources governance by developing a better
understanding of why and how frontline water managers—natural resource
bureaucrats who make decisions about water— experience and navigate
participation fatigue, intensified frustration and overwhelm that sometimes
accompanies participatory water governance. The findings of this project will be
disseminated to research participants and diverse governmental and non-
governmental organizations involved in designing and implementing participatory
water governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to understand how bureaucrats understand participation fatigue within the
context of participatory water governance (PWG) and why they experience it the
way that do using a combination of qualitative and quantitative methodologies
that&lt;br/&gt;progresses from an exploratory (Phase I) to a confirmatory (Phase
II) phase of data collection and analysis. These methods include active
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, social network analysis and
cultural consensus analysis. Because participation is a key challenge that
government actors face when implementing participatory water management,
developing a more formative understanding of this phenomenon can inform the
design of participatory governance spaces that mitigate fatigue and lead to
better water policy outcomes. The findings of this work hold global significance
as participatory water governance models become an increasingly popular strategy
among nations interested in addressing emerging environmental
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.