* 2214796
* Innovation Adoption by Committee: Evaluating Decision-Making in the FDA
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matias Iaryczower, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 441,000.00

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for the approval of new
drugs, biological products and medical devices in the United States. As part of
this process, the FDA relies on advisory committees (ACs) to provide
recommendations on the adoption of new products. In this project, the
researchers will quantify the effectiveness of the advisory committee system and
evaluate whether possible institutional innovations would improve the quality of
its decision-making. The project is composed of three papers. In the first
paper, the research team studies whether advisory committees use available
information about new products effectively. To do this, the authors combine a
game-theoretic model of decision-making in ACs with deliberation and voting data
from ACs’ meetings’ transcripts. The approach allows the researchers to conduct
policy experiments examining how institutional changes to the approval process
for new products by the FDA affect the likelihood of reaching correct
recommendations. In the second paper, the researchers exploit exogenous
variation in the composition of ACs to evaluate the effect of mandates for
diverse representation on deliberative outcomes. In the third project, the
authors study the quality of FDA advisory committee decision-making in the long
run, using information on the ex-post performance of approved products.
Altogether, the project will provide crucial new evidence to inform FDA’s
decisions about the adoption of new products, as well as its institutional
design. Moreover, the economic models and statistical methods developed in this
project could be applied to study how information is used in other policy-making
bodies, including regulatory bodies and central banks, as well as in boards of
directors in corporations. The implementation of state-of-the-art statistical
methods, data collection efforts, and development of new economic models will
allow significant mentoring opportunities for students, who will engage related
literature, explore results of simplified models under alternative assumptions,
and aid in coding and data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
advances knowledge in various ways. At the outset, the proposal assembles a new
microlevel dataset (from publicly available but dispersed and unprocessed
information) that is useful for both research and policy, tracking the entire
process of deliberation and voting for each advisory committee meeting in the
past fifteen years. In the first paper, the researchers structurally estimate a
dynamic model in which committee members with heterogeneous preferences
collectively decide when to stop gathering information, and vote to recommend
the approval or rejection of new products. This model carefully considers how
such members may influence their peers’ behavior when gathering information.
When taken to data, the empirical model provides a new approach to study
collective deliberation and information acquisition in the field, which can be
extended to other collective policy-making bodies. In the second paper, the
researchers leverage exogenous variation in the composition of advisory
committees and imperfect overlap in the network structure to evaluate the effect
of mandates for diverse representation on deliberative outcomes. The analysis
provides new insights of the effectiveness of such policies within the context
of deliberative bodies, which are subject to collective learning. The third
paper contributes to knowledge on long run outcomes from committee-made
decisions with imperfect information. To do so, it explicitly incorporates the
ex-post performance of approved products. As different devices may have
different baseline error rates (e.g., it may be more difficult to make correct
decisions as often with complex devices), the researchers will compare the long
run outcomes under committee decision-making with a counterfactual policy
experiment where the policy is set by a single decision-maker. This will further
inform the long-run benefits of committee-based decisions relative to individual
ones, keeping constant the information available in both
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.