* 2214258
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intersections of nationality and recovery status in shaping gender
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Zaith Lopez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,392.00

Drug rehabilitation centers have proliferated to assist communities fighting
addiction and associated problems. These centers are increasingly common in
areas with mixed nationalities, offering an opportunity to understand how
national status and the process of recovery work together to shape how
individuals understand and relate to different notions of gender, and how gender
and nationality feedback on the recovery process to affect its success and
duration. The study draws from social scientific research addressing drug
addiction, gender, and nationality to investigate whether, and in what ways,
masculinity and recovery are intertwined among individuals with varying
nationalities. In addition to training a graduate student in scientific cultural
anthropology, this research disseminates its work broadly to academic and non-
academic audiences and interested stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
twelve months, the researchers conduct participant-observation, semi-structured
interviews, and discourse analysis across a variety of rehabilitation centers,
and among recovering drug users and their families. The researchers analyze how
dominant masculine ideologies connect to various phases of recovery, and how
expressions of masculinity change across different settings, from very private
to very social, and among individuals of different nationalities. Doing so
offers important nuance to theories of recovery that focus primarily on
differences between men and women of the same nationality, and to changing
conceptions of masculinity as behavior and beliefs change in association with
recovery from drug use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.