* 2214852
* The Micro and Macro Effects of Supply-Chain Disruptions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kim Ruhl, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 438,000.00

Modern economies rely on complex supply chains for production. These more-
complex supply chains lower the cost of production, increasing the standard of
living across the world. These complex, global supply chains, however, are more
vulnerable to disruption: extreme weather, trade disagreements, cyber attacks,
and, most noticeably, the closing and reopening of the global economy in
response to the COVID pandemic. This project will investigate the impact of
supply disruptions on aggregate outcomes such as gross domestic product,
employment, and prices. Can large supply disruptions cause recessions?
Inflation? The models developed in the project will measure the contribution of
supply disruptions to the performance of the U.S. economy. A second goal of the
proposed research is to model the ways in which firms respond to the risk of
supply disruption. How do firms use inventories and transportation modalities to
guard against supply disruptions? The framework developed in this project can be
used to evaluate the effectiveness of government policies such as infrastructure
investment or risk mitigation measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium models are not well-suited to study supply
disruptions because they typically abstract from supply chains. The proposed
research builds on firm-level models in which firms face uncertain demand and
uncertain delivery of inputs. Ordering goods requires paying a fixed cost and
time to deliver, so firms hold inventories to buffer against supply and demand
shocks. This model of a firm is embedded into a two country, general equilibrium
model with aggregate shocks to productivity and shipping delays. Firms
infrequently place orders and a common shock to the time it takes to receive
inputs can generate non-linear responses. The model will be parameterized so
that it fits key features of the aggregate data allowing a decomposition of the
importance of each shock during episodes such as the post-covid reopening of the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.