* 2214108
* CRII: SaTC: Rowhammer Attack on Fresh and Recycled Memory Chips: Security Risks and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Md Rahman, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 103,500.00

Rowhammer is a software-assisted cyber attack that causes malicious changes to
the target memory cells of dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) due to charge
leakage, by crafting memory access patterns which rapidly access the same row
multiple times. This research focuses on proper hardware characterization
towards a Rowhammer-resistant memory system. This characterization will also
inform whether Rowhammer susceptibility increases with aging, and if so, will
enable a method for detecting recycled chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will (i) identify the Rowhammer-prone memory cells through hardware
characterization, (ii) develop a low-cost system-level technique to build a
Rowhammer-resistant memory system, (iii) experimentally study the vulnerability
of counterfeit (especially recycled) DRAM chips to Rowhammer, and (iv) develop a
framework that identifies recycled DRAM chips, if a relationship between
Rowhammer effectiveness and aging is found. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
findings and tools will be of high interest to the individual consumers, federal
agencies, data centers, healthcare, enterprise, and automobile systems, that are
the targets of Rowhammer attacker. The cross-cutting nature of this research
will broaden the advancement of knowledge in the field of computer systems,
security, and reliability and will enable collaboration between various
communities (systems/device/reliability/hardware-security/algorithms). The
graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will receive
training and grow expertise in the related fields. The research findings will
also be used in existing and new graduate/undergraduate courses on hardware-
security for training and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All publicly released
data, source codes, and peer-reviewed research articles will be made available
during the period of performance and afterward, and will be posted at
https://www.trust-hub.org/data and
http://webpages.uah.edu/~mtr0011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
funded by the Division of Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.