* 2214243
* The B chromosome of maize: Drive and Genomic Conflict
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jianlin Cheng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,228,250.00

Varieties of corn have an extra chromosome that is not essential called the B
chromosome. This chromosome has properties that, based on analysis of its DNA
sequence, have allowed it to persist from one generation to the next for
millions of years, despite the fact that it is not needed for the plant. While
these properties are beneficial to the success of the B chromosome, they often
have negative consequences for the normal corn chromosomes such as chromosome
fracture and the activation of transposable elements that have the potential to
jump around the genome and cause mutations. A genetic and molecular analysis
will be conducted to learn the nature of these B chromosome properties and how
the corn genome has been impacted by the presence of the B chromosome. The B
chromosome appears to have been involved in restructuring the corn chromosomes,
so an understanding of these properties will help provide insight into the
nature of, and variation in the maize genome. The research will involve
participants at all educational levels and will involve training in genetics,
genomics, and computational biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supernumerary B
chromosome of maize is a novel, selfish genetic system involving a whole
chromosome that impacts genomic processes in general. The B chromosome has
manipulated cellular processes to ensure proper segregation in male meiosis by
increasing recombination in heterochromatin, by using a novel meiotic process to
stabilize itself in meiosis, by delaying replication of the centromere at the
one mitosis that makes the two sperm, and by mediating fertilization of the egg
by B containing sperm. Experiments will examine the mechanism of centromere
nondisjunction, the identity and function of the trans-acting factors needed for
nondisjunction, the nature of the univalent stabilization process, the nature of
the modulation of recombination across the genome, and aspects of genomic
conflict such as de-silencing of transposable elements, identifying the gene
responsible for genomic shattering by B chromosomes in some backgrounds, and the
gene responsible for variation in preferential fertilization. The completion of
this project will provide data that support a new paradigm in the understanding
of a suite of co-opted functions by a mega selfish genetic entity. The
interdisciplinary team will seek to understand this selfish entity to gain new
insight into concepts previously unexplored in any system about genetic drive
and genomic conflict. A training program across biological disciplines with
computational analyses will be conducted at all educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.