* 2214872
* CAS- Climate. SRS: U.S.-China: Infrastructure-Driven Decision System for Sustainable and Equitable Urban-Rural Development
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Dong Zhao, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2026
* USD 505,501.00

2214872 (Zhao). Electrification is the future for much of sustainable
transportation, and expanded use of electric vehicles (EVs) is a significant
part of future urban-rural systems. EVs have the potential to improve
environmental sustainability substantially, since 29% of U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions are from internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs). It is estimated
that 18.7 million EVs will be on U.S. roads by 2030, with a 37% annual growth.
Charging infrastructure is critical to the continued growth of EV and its
upstream industries. A lack of convenient and ubiquitous charging infrastructure
is one of the key factors that impedes EV adoption. Increasing investments to
the U.S. infrastructure, for example, the recent $1.2 trillion Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act, envision and plan a network of hundreds of thousands of
new charging stations along roads and highways by 2030. Investments in charging
infrastructure involve not only financial and economic decisions but also social
and environmental decisions, as they influence regional sustainability and
equity across urban and rural areas. However, current decision-making models and
tools for infrastructure investment focus on project-level economic and
engineering efficiency and rarely consider region-level environment and equity.
Therefore, the goal of this project is to create a GIS-based decision system to
integrate regional economic/engineering efficiency, environmental
sustainability, and social equity into EV charging infrastructure planning and
design. Built upon preliminary data on engineering-focused optimization models
for charging infrastructure design and construction, this project will further
(1) assess regional environmental impacts, (2) assess regional social equity,
and (3) identify urban-rural spatial mismatches via case studies in real-world
testbed regions in the U.S. and China. The project will produce case studies to
demonstrate the use of a decision system and the impacts of EV charging
infrastructure on regional development. The project will produce new knowledge
about the impacts of EV charging infrastructure on region-level economic,
environmental, and societal development, and will create a decision system that
can assess infrastructure investment plans to ensure economic and engineering
efficiency, environmental sustainability, and social equity for regional urban-
rural systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In prior work, the research team developed
optimization models to guide the design of EV charging stations (e.g., producing
locations and construction plan). The optimization models are to maximize
economic cost/benefit based on engineering simulation and computation. Also, the
team developed the GIS-based Michigan Spatial Mismatch (MSM) Tool to visualize
spatial mismatches and issues of regional equity. To extend the MSM
economic/engineering-based decision model (Module #1), this project will add
modules that assess regional environmental sustainability (Module #2) and social
equity (Module #3). Modules #1-3 together will constitute the decision system.
To create the decision system, the research team will perform Tasks 1-3 as
follows. Task 1: Assess regional environmental sustainability to be enabled by
EV charging infrastructure. Task 2: Assess the regional social equity to be
impacted by EV charging infrastructure. Task 3: Demonstrate the decision system
to support EV charging infrastructure design. The decision system will (1)
enable big data analytics and interactive graphics to visualize regional
consistency and mismatches, (2) add layers of environment and equity to
complement current models and tools for charging station optimization, and (3)
highlight regional interactions and urban-rural typology that is an important
factor for EV charging infrastructure investment. Project outcomes will help
guide planners, designers, and engineers on charging infrastructure investment
towards sustainable and equitable economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.