* 2214697
* Diagnose and Understand the Mechanisms behind Warm Season Extreme Weather over Central and Intermountain United States
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rong Fu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 741,498.00

Extreme weather, such as persistent dry spells, heatwaves, fire weather, is a
major cause of natural disasters. Its impacts on lives, public health, economy,
and environment have been escalating rapidly in recent decades. For example, the
wildfires in 2018 over California, induced by intensive fire weather, have
caused over $126.1-192.9 billion economic loss. Yet, we do not fully understand
its underlying causes. For example, the following questions are still perplexing
the scientific community. Why do extreme events occur sometimes, but not at
other times under similar atmospheric flow patterns? Why do warm season extreme
dry spells and hot days occur together sometimes, but not at other times? Why do
some extreme weather types, such as fire weather during the largest wildfires in
western United State, appear to become less explainable by the synoptic
circulation since 2000 compared to those from the time in the 1980s’ and 90s’?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply state-of-the-art statistical
analyses to capture the variety and complexity of the synoptic wind patterns
responsible for the extreme events. More importantly, the roles of clouds,
precipitation, and aerosols relative to atmospheric dynamic process in
intensifying extreme weather will be investigated. Furthermore, an integrated
approach will be applied to systematically characterize the atmospheric physical
and dynamic processes and land surface feedbacks behind extreme dry and wet
spells, hot days, fire weather and floods. The multifaceted and integrated
approach will clarify the relative roles of the atmospheric dynamics and
physical processes in determining extreme weather and concurrence of multiple
extreme weather types. Such an approach could lead to a paradigm shift from
event-based and synoptic-circulation-focused approaches that have dominated the
literature in this research area, and significantly advance our understanding of
extreme weather, especially for that which cannot be sufficiently explained by
synoptic circulation anomalies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train a
woman PhD student, undergraduate summer research interns, and a postdoctoral
researcher, and incorporate its research results into a large upper-division
undergraduate science course. These activities will contribute to the NSF
educational mission and future workforce of physical and dynamic meteorology.
The proposed public outreach through media will enable the PI to translate the
latest research result about extreme weather from this project to meaningful or
even actionable information for society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project was
co-funded by NSF Physical and Dynamic Meteorology and Climate and Large-scale
Dynamics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.