* 2214995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Economic Understandings of Work under Ecological Restoration
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Alexander Dent, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 25,132.00

Responses to the scale of environmental degradation today requires the
coordination of multiple workers with specialized labors, skills, and knowledge
systems. Existing research exploring the relationship between environmental
action and labor tend to focus on individual actors who participate voluntarily.
Less is known about how workers contracted in projects of ecological restoration
come to understand themselves and their labor. This doctoral dissertation
research investigates the efficacy of ecological restoration through its impacts
on worker behavior. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, findings from this research will be shared with
governmental and non-governmental organizations, and others with the aim of
improving working conditions for those actively involved in ameliorating
environmental pollution and degradation. The project also endeavors to enhance
public understanding of science and the scientific method, specifically
regarding the scientific management of ecological
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While restoration projects are critical for
ensuring the integrity of the biosphere, the research hypothesizes that the
responsibilities of carrying them out are unevenly distributed, often along
lines of pre-existing social inequalities. It extends theoretical perspectives
from the anthropology of work and environmental anthropology, while integrating
under-represented perspectives into the history and sociology of science. The
doctoral researcher uses a combination of ethnographic, visual, and archival
methods (including infrastructural mapping, reflexive memos, participant
observation, life history interviews, workflow observation, and textual and
discourse analysis) to investigate the infrastructural labor of ecological
restoration and demonstrate how environmental injustice plays out in various
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.