* 2214934
* CISE-ANR: SHF: Small: CHAMELEON: CompreHending And Mitigating Error in AnaLog ImplEmentations of On-Die Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 623,753.00

Considering the widespread deployment of machine-learning hardware in myriads of
modern-life applications, ensuring its reliable and safe operation is crucial to
advance the national prosperity and welfare and to secure the national defense.
While software and/or digital hardware implementations of neural networks
currently enjoy the lionâ€™s share of the market, a number of emerging realities
are necessitating the development and deployment of analog neural networks.
Specifically, the exponential growth of sensory data from world-machine
interfaces, known as the analog data deluge, along with the area, power
consumption and response-time constraints of distributed edge-computing systems,
necessitate autonomous sensing, perception, reasoning and rapid action. While
analog neural-network implementations promise to deliver this ability, their
robustness and reliability are susceptible to parametric differences introduced
by manufacturing process variation, operational conditions variation, as well as
silicon aging. Accordingly, this project seeks to enable robust and resilient
operation of analog neural networks and the applications wherein they are
deployed, as well as to educate the next generation of engineers on the risks
and remedies of using analog machine-learning hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
a technical level, this project combines state-of-the-art methods for designing,
testing, and calibrating analog integrating circuits, with advanced concepts
from training machine-learning models, in an effort to comprehend the
vulnerability of analog neural networks, develop error-mitigation solutions, and
assess their effectiveness. To this end, the research activities undertaken by
this project include (i) investigation and mitigation of the impact of
parametric and operational differences on machine-learning models implemented as
analog neural networks, (ii) development of methods for specifying and
evaluating the learning capacity of such designs, and (iii) demonstration of the
efficiency of the proposed methods through custom analog neural-network
experimentation platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.