* 2214580
* RAPID: Drinking Water System Contamination Response and Recovery Following the 2021 Colorado Wildfires
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Youngblood, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 212,000.00

Wildfires are causing significant destruction in the Western United States
including damages to drinking water systems. During wildfires, the plastic
components of drinking water distribution networks can undergo combustion and
pyrolysis with a subsequent release of toxic volatile organic chemicals (VOCs)
that can contaminate drinking water. This RAPID project will test the hypothesis
that VOCs released by the damaged plastic components of drinking water
distribution systems are partially responsible for the water contamination that
was observed following the Marshall Fire in Boulder County, Colorado. To test
this hypothesis, the researchers and collaborators from the affected water
utilities will carry out field studies to collect and analyze ephemeral samples
of water and fire-damaged plastic water infrastructure including pipes, gaskets,
meters, and premise plumbing. By combining the field studies with targeted
laboratory experiments, the researchers and their collaborators hope to
elucidate the role of plastic water infrastructure damage and plastic pipe
formulation on VOC drinking water contamination following a wildfire. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development of new knowledge to advance our fundamental understanding of the
impact of wildfires on drinking water distribution systems and water quality.
Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of three doctoral students and an undergraduate
student at Purdue University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many polymers that are
utilized in the manufacturing of the plastic components of drinking water
distribution systems (DWDS) such as polyethylene (PE) can generate volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) during combustion and pyrolysis. However, a fundamental
understanding of the relationships between VOC water contamination and fire-
induced damages to the plastic components of DDWS (e.g., pipes, gaskets, meters,
and premise plumbing) has remained elusive. The overarching goal of this project
is to address these knowledge gaps. To advance this goal, the investigators of
this project propose an integrated field and laboratory study to (1) identify
VOCs of concern by exhuming and characterizing damaged plastic components from
the DWDS of the collaborating utilities affected by the Marshal Fire, and 2)
simulate and quantify VOC generation profiles from fire-induced damages to
plastic water infrastructure materials using PE flat sheets with antioxidant
stabilizers (e.g., butylated hydroxytoluene) as model systems. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the development of new fundamental knowledge to understand and mitigate the
adverse impact of wildfires on drinking water quality and distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.