* 2214208
* Collaborative Research: A Quantitative Study of Reaction Pathways in Oceanic Serpentinites
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Thomas McCollom, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 261,152.00

The alteration of seafloor mantle rocks by seawater (referred to as
serpentinization) is a widespread process. It affects global chemical cycles,
earthquake potential, and possibly the origin of life. However, the process of
serpentinization remains poorly understood. This work will conduct laboratory
experiments to enable a better understanding of the underlying processes of
serpentinization. The results will improve models and allow scientists to better
interpret altered mantle rocks and fluid compositions. This project provides
student training in geological oceanography, petrology, and aqueous
geochemistry. To broaden participation in science, the researchers will involve
undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities in this project. The
students will be offered training in project design, sample analysis, data
interpretation and presentation of results. Results of this project will be
broadly disseminated through open access manuscripts, at international
conferences, and workshops, and as well as through seminars, and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that distinct dissolution
rates of minerals that constitute mantle rocks are decisive in controlling the
fluxes of elements from the mantle rock and, therefore, in controlling the
timing of secondary (hydrothermal) mineral formation events which dictate the
temporal evolution of physical rock properties and compositions of vent fluids.
To test this hypothesis, this work aims at systematically exploring the
succession of chemical reactions recorded in altered mantle rocks by integrating
chemical, isotopic, and quantitative mineralogical analyses with theoretical
modeling. Chemical compositions, as well as mineralogical maps of partially
altered mantle rocks will be used to reconstruct the original proportions of
mantle minerals. By comparing mineral abundances of fresh and reacted rocks,
relative dissolution rates and chemical fluxes will be inferred. To reconstruct
the sequences of chemical reactions, abundances of minerals will be co-
registered with the overall extents of alteration. Results from previous studies
will be applied to determine the effect of temperature on the succession of
dissolution-precipitation reactions. The analytical outcomes of this study will
inform theoretical models that will take rock compositions, alteration
temperature, surface areas, and distinct dissolution rates of minerals into
account. By systematically varying the individual input parameters, these models
will be developed that match the rock record. These models will then provide
detailed insight on the evolution of fluid compositions associated with specific
combinations of rock compositions, alteration temperatures, and mineral
assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.