* 2214129
* Immigration Law as Development Policy: The H-2A Visa Program
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Beatriz Magaloni, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 307,660.00

Guestworker programs generate income for temporary migrants, while
simultaneously allowing host countries to fill domestic labor demands and
address labor scarcity. Current research suggests that the economic returns to
temporary migration—both for foreign workers as well as for the home and host
countries at large—are substantial. In the United States alone, more than one
million temporary foreign workers are employed annually in both agricultural and
non-agricultural capacities. However, we know very little about how guestwork
and the remittances that guestworkers send to their families alter consumption
behaviors back home, shape intra-household dynamics, and investments in
children’s education and human capital. Our study focuses on farmworkers who
come to the U.S. on H-2A visas. Our study will be able to assess how
participation in guestworker programs can help families rise out of poverty; the
extent to which guestworker programs serve as an alternative to unauthorized
migration; and if the wages they receive can serve as a deterrence to criminal
behavior and participation in illicit economies, such as drug cultivation.
Understanding whether and why U.S. immigration policy can have developmental
effects abroad will be crucial for reforming existing programs regulating
foreign labor as well as for informing policy debates over temporary migration,
food security, and poverty alleviation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on the H-2A program, which issues visas to temporary or seasonal
agricultural laborers for work on U.S. farms for a maximum of one year Through a
randomized controlled trial (RCT), this project will manipulate the immigration
status of would-be guestworkers in order to understand how access to temporary
work abroad alters economic, sociological, and ideological outcomes by comparing
differences across “treatment” and “control” groups. For this project, the
treatment group will comprise of those who received a guest visa and the control
group will comprise of those who did not. The investigators will measure
outcomes at the individual and household levels, and will collect metrics
relating to human development, victimization, illegal behaviors, as well as
political, civic, and social attitudes, Using remote high-frequency survey
tools, the investigators will also collect data at all stages of migrants’
journeys from to the U.S. and then back home; this will allow investigators to
measure guestworkers’ final locations, independent of whether they leave their
home locations. The investigators will also seek to directly quantify the
substitution between authorized and unauthorized forms of migration by tracking
the location of persons in their control group who did not receive a guestworker
visa. Findings from this research will help inform domestic policy-making on
immigration policy and contribute to ongoing conversations about H-2A program
reform, which has long operated in the absence of rigorous impact evaluations.
We also seek to contribute to conversations over international and domestic
policies aimed at ensuring food security and alleviating
poverty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.