* 2214278
* The Seventh Module of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Kenneth Kollman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2026
* USD 311,880.00

The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) is composed of researchers
from more than 60 countries with the shared goal of investigating critical
questions around elections, turnout, and voting in the United States and
worldwide. Each participating researcher raises their own funding and uses
agreed-upon, high-quality scientific methods to select and interview a
representative set of persons from each country. The interview includes a
questionnaire designed by the CSES and changed every five years to address a new
set of important issues. The resulting interviews are combined into a single
data resource with information about their countries and electoral systems which
CSES distributes on its website at no cost. The ability to compare across
countries helps scientists, students, policymakers, and the public better
understand how people feel and behave around elections and voting, to what
extent the country they find themselves within influences them, and how and why
elections proceed differently across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has two broad goals: to complete in-progress Module 6, which is designed to
support new discoveries regarding citizens’ roles in representative democracy
under stress, and to design Module 7. CSES Module 6 provides data from 50+
countries to advance discoveries on questions regarding how citizens view the
functioning of their democratic political systems, and with what consequences
for electoral attitudes and behavior. To complete Module 6, the project will
continue to audit, clean, and harmonize newly-contributed election study
datasets from around the world and disseminate individual and comparative
(cross-national) datasets that contain both micro (individual) and macro
(district, country, administrative) data. To design Module 7, CSES will
constitute a new international planning committee that will crowd-source
proposals from leading scholars around the world and determine the thematic
focus of that module. In addition to these core activities, the project features
a new “data playground” to disseminate awareness of and access to CSES datasets;
supports and expands the project’s network of international and US
collaborators; and continues to set new standards for the scientific methods for
the comparative study of elections, disseminating awareness of these via white
papers, conferences, and other engagements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.