* 2214830
* MRI: Acquisition of Autonomous Plug-In Hybrid Vehicle Platform for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at the University of Michigan-Dearborn
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hafiz Malik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 244,610.00

This NSF MRI project aims to acquire a high-performance autonomous electric
vehicle platform with a sensor suite for research and education to advance
fundamental science and engineering research and education. The intellectual
merits of the project include the following. The platform will accelerate the
development of critical algorithms in machine learning and analysis methods
tailored to the safety and stability of autonomous vehicles while enabling
transformative research on cybersecurity by providing real-world scenarios.
Research on energy systems for advanced mobility will also be able to be
extended and further explored. The broader impacts of the project entail the
following. The platform will support undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as post-doctoral fellows by offering research training opportunities
through experiential learning with a programmable electric vehicle. The
University of Michigan-Dearborn (UM-D) is located in the Metro-Detroit area, the
home to the “Big Three” (GM, Ford, and Chrysler), and automotive suppliers. The
U.S. automotive and advanced mobility industries need more skilled and
knowledgeable scientists and engineers who are ready for new technologies such
as intelligent systems powered by artificial intelligence and machine learning,
energy and power systems, cybersecurity, and human-vehicle interfaces. The
project will help in contributing to the high demand for skilled workers from
the advanced mobility industry with the acquired instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform will be crucial research instrumentation to
significantly enhance interdisciplinary research and education at UM-D in
several research activities, including embodied cognitive vehicle, in-vehicular
network security, energy consumption, environmental perception, cybersecurity,
and driver behavior analyses in electric and advanced mobilities. The instrument
will also substantially improve undergraduate and graduate research training in
the electrical, computer, robotics, mechanical, and industrial engineering
departments at UM-D. Active research is going on in the fields of automotive,
robotics, cybersecurity, energy systems, and human-vehicle interface at UM-D.
The proposed platform will enable collaborative research in a realistic
environment with a full-scale programmable vehicle in the aforementioned
emerging research areas. The project team will work on ten transformative
research topics to be enabled by the platform that will substantially improve
the current research and experimentation capabilities at
UM-D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.