* 2214141
* RI: Small: Large-Scale Game-Theoretic Reasoning with Incomplete Information
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 12/31/2025
* USD 398,958.00

Game-theoretic analysis has been a crucial tool across a broad array of
disciplines, including economics, political science, operations research, and
computer science. With the increased impact of algorithmic decision-making
throughout the economy and the associated improvement in computing
infrastructure, the nature of strategic interactions that we wish to understand
and control has become increasingly complex. As a result, purely mathematical
methods for game-theoretic analysis need increasingly to be complemented by
effective computational tools to study them in depth. However, despite dramatic
progress in computational game theory over the last several decades, there
remain important broad classes of strategic interactions for which no scalable
solution approaches exist, particularly, reasoning in the presence of incomplete
information, which involve participants that are uncertain about the preferences
of others. For example, combinatorial auctions, commonly used in online
settings, and strategic interactions in security among many defenders and
attackers, have no effective general-purpose analysis techniques. Our goal is to
significantly advance the state of the art in analyzing such multiparty
interactions by taking advantage of the deep learning revolutionâ€”in particular,
the myriad of highly effective tools for function representation and gradient-
based optimization that can be used to grapple with large, complex problems like
these.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, while there has been some progress in
gradient-based methods, they have been restricted in practice to situations with
complete information that are either one-shot, two-player Stackelberg games,
like decision-making in markets dominated by a single large firm, or zero-sum
games (including those with imperfect information). Our research will leverage
more heavily the representational power of modern deep neural network
architectures to develop equilibrium approximation algorithms that significantly
extend the class that can be analyzed at scale, with many of the proposed
advances specifically aimed at automatically discovering and leveraging symmetry
and sparsity in the presence of incomplete information. Additionally, this
project will contribute to developing undergraduate and graduate curricula on
game-theoretic modeling and analysis, and will support graduate and
undergraduate interdisciplinary research in economics and
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.