* 2214016
* PFI-TT:  Three Dimensional (3D) Printing of Ceramic Components with Hierarchical and Interconnected Pore Structures for Carbon Capture Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Chao Ma, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to address global warming and climate
change by reducing the operational costs of carbon capture technologies. If
successful, this project will enable manufacturing of innovative ceramic
monolithic adsorbents, the key components in carbon capture technologies. The
new adsorbents may require less energy for regeneration and adsorption than
existing amines-based absorbents. The project seeks to generate the scientific
and technological knowledge necessary for producing the adsorbents through three
dimensional (3D) printing. The wide-spread adoption of carbon capture
technologies may help alleviate global warming and climate change, as well as
save lives and economic losses from extreme weather events. Furthermore, the
fast-growing carbon market will create new jobs in the U.S. Through this
project’s educational and leadership development program, the graduate students
will gain a solid understanding of innovation and entrepreneurship and sharpen
their research, project management, and leadership skills. The undergraduate
students will strengthen their critical thinking and problem-solving abilities
and gain a basic understanding of innovation and entrepreneurship. The
involvement of students from underrepresented groups will increase the diversity
of the future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
develop the entire 3D printing process for producing ceramic components with
hierarchical and interconnected pore structures that can be used as adsorbents
for carbon capture applications. It is very difficult and costly to produce such
ceramic components using existing manufacturing methods. The proposed project
utilizes binder jetting three dimensional (3D) printing with granulated powders.
The novelty of the proposed adsorbents is that they contain interconnected pores
with a quadrimodal size distribution. The research objectives are: (1) to
develop the feedstock powder preparation process, (2) to identify a compatible
binder for the feedstock powder, and (3) to develop the binder jetting 3D
printing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.