* 2214739
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Ethan Roth, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2023
* USD 70,062.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261-foot,
global class ice-capable oceanographic research vessel owned by the NSF as part
of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF) fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose
platform for multidisciplinary research missions from polar to temperate
latitudes. The ship was delivered in 2014 and has completed six years of funded
operations. UAF requests funds to purchase and install Oceanographic
Instrumentation that would be custom engineered to enhance the vessel's
capability in support of NSF-sponsored research to be undertaken on Sikuliaq in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2021, Sikuliaq completed 233 days, 181 (78%)
of which were for NSF. In 2022, the vessel is scheduled to sail 275 days with
217 (79%) days of the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, UAF provides
technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following
Oceanographic Instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSS receiver w/ Iridium
augmentation $18,200&lt;br/&gt;Ice Coring System $6,980&lt;br/&gt;Stop Gap LAN-
LAN Firewall $20,847&lt;br/&gt;Video encoders for underway displays
$51,580&lt;br/&gt;Compact CTD system for underwire winch $24,035&lt;br/&gt;
$121,642&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.