* 2214740
* Using storytelling and a justice oriented STEM after-school club as critical tools for cultivating African American youths' STEM identities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Corliss Outley, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 07/31/2027
* USD 830,322.00

This Innovations in Development project explores radical healing as an approach
to create after-school STEM programming that welcomes, values and supports
African American youth to form positive STEM identities. Radical healing is a
strength-based, asset centered approach that incorporates culture, identity,
civic action, and collective healing to build the capacity of young people to
apply academic knowledge for the good of their communities. The project uses a
newly developed graphic novel as a model of what it looks like to engage in the
radical healing process and use STEM technology for social justice. This graphic
novel, When Spiderwebs Unite, tells the true story of an African American
community who used STEM technology to advocate for clean air and water for their
community. Youth are supported to consider their own experiences and emotions in
their sociopolitical contexts, realize they are not alone, and collaborate with
their community members to take critical action towards social change through
STEM. The STEM Club activities include mentoring by African American
undergraduate students, story writing, conducting justice-oriented environmental
sciences investigations, and applying the results of their investigations to
propose and implement community action plans. These activities aim to build
youth’s capacity to resist oppression and leverage the power of STEM technology
for their benefit and that of their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clemson
University, in partnership with the Urban League of the Upstate, engages 100
predominantly African American middle school students and 32 African American
undergraduate students in healing justice work, across two youth-serving,
community-based organizations at three sites. These young people assume a
leadership role in developing this project’s graphic novel and curriculum for a
yearlong, after-school STEM Club, both constructed upon the essential components
of radical healing. This project uses a qual→quant parallel research design to
investigate how the development and use of a graphic novel could be used as a
healing justice tool, and how various components of radical healing (critical
consciousness, cultural authenticity, self knowledge, radical hope, emotional
and social support, and strength and resilience) affect African American youths’
STEM identity development. Researchers scrutinize interviews, field
observations, and project documents to address their investigation and utilize
statistical analyses of survey data to inform and triangulate the qualitative
data findings. Thus, qualitative and quantitative data are used to challenge
dominant narratives regarding African American youth’s STEM achievements and
trajectories. The project advances discovery and understanding of radical
healing as an approach to explicitly value African Americans’ cultures,
identities, histories, and voices within informal STEM
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.