* 2214044
* Lightning and Thunderstorm Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ronald Thomas, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,092,025.00

This research focuses on furthering our understanding of how lightning is
produced inside thunderstorms, and how some lightning flashes occasionally
produce strong bursts of gamma rays. Gamma rays are similar to but much more
powerful than x-rays, and studying how they are produced helps us better
understand how lightning begins and develops. The bursts, called terrestrial
gamma-ray flashes (TGFs), were first detected by satellites, and are upward-
directed events caused by in-cloud (IC) lightning. Although upward TGFs continue
to be detected by satellites, the detection rate at any given location is very
low, and there have been no close observations of IC flashes that produced
satellite-detected TGFs. More recently, studies at the large-area cosmic ray-
detecting Telescope Array facility in west-central Utah have shown that cloud-
to-ground (CG) lightning can produce downward TGFs. The studies, which are being
conducted in collaboration with colleagues at the University of Utah, have
provided the first detailed observations of how TGFs are produced by lightning,
and are to be expanded upon in the studies going forward. At the same time,
similar studies are to be conducted at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida,
where there is a greater chance of obtaining observations of IC flashes that
produce satellite-detected TGFs. The studies are important because they advance
our understanding not only about how TGFs are produced, but also provide
valuable information about the lightning discharge processes themselves. They
are also cross-disciplinary, in this case between traditional lightning
investigations and high-energy particle physics, and provide excellent learning
opportunities and experiences for graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies utilize observational data obtained from a
comprehensive set of lightning detection techniques and systems, including
lightning mapping arrays (LMAs) that use multi-station time-of-arrival
measurements of the VHF radio signals produced by lightning to determine the 3-D
structure and development of flashes, and dual broadband VHF interferometer
systems that show the detailed development of flashes continuously in time, with
sub-microsecond resolution. Combined with high-speed measurements of the
electric field change produced by the different discharge processes, the
observations provide complete pictures of the development of lightning flashes
both in time and space. The Telescope Array detects Compton electrons produced
by the gamma-ray bursts, not only with sub-microsecond resolution and
continuously over time, allowing the TGFs to be accurately correlated with the
lightning data, but also with 1.2 km grid spacing over tens of kilometers extent
â€“ a major factor in detection efficiency. The comparisons show the TGFs occur
during energetic initial breakdown pulses (IBPs) of CG flashes, and are playing
a crucial role in understanding how IBPs are produced and their effect on how
lightning is initiated and continues to develop. The combination of large areal
extent and continuous time coverage of the Utah study allows several to ten or
more TGFs to be detected in a given summer monsoon season. Similarly continuous
coverage of the lightning activity will be obtained in the east central Florida
area around Kennedy Space Center, which has a much higher incidence of lightning
and thunderstorms, and is within the latitudinal coverage range of the orbiting
TGF-detecting satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.