* 2214070
* III: Small: Purposeful Conversational Agents based on Hierarchical Knowledge Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rohini Srihari, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 566,944.00

There has been tremendous progress recently in the area of open domain
conversational agents (CA), also referred to as chatbots or socialbots, by
leveraging neural response generators and large, diverse training corpora. The
recent Alexa Prize competition resulted in socialbots that can engage in
prolonged conversations on any topic, paving the way for meaningful use. These
systems are limited to chitchat, where the conversation meanders from topic to
topic without any specific goal. There is now an opportunity (and need) to
develop models for purposeful conversations, motivated by societal goals. This
facilitates compelling solutions such as chatbots to assist with mental health
issues, providing companionship to senior citizens, and even combating
disinformation. CAs can be configured for different personalities, diverse and
multilingual populations and thus hold great potential to address societal
problems at scale. Realizing this goal requires advances on multiple fronts,
including ethical issues and trustworthiness. This project addresses two key
technical challenges. First, the project eliminates artifacts of neural response
generation such as inconsistency, incoherence, and repetition. These responses
diminish the trustworthiness of socialbots and hence their impact. Second, the
project addresses the computational frameworks for purposeful conversations,
specifically, persuasion. This project will result in a fully functional CA,
that incorporates factual knowledge, logical reasoning, and conversational
strategies found in human-to-human dialogue, to engage in coherent, interesting
and persuasive conversations across several topics related to societal
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purposeful conversational agents must engage in
meaningful exchanges with a motive: a persuasive conversation may cycle through
inquiry, negotiation, or deliberation interspersed with chit-chat and anecdotes.
In order to realize these objectives, this project incorporates the use of
specially constructed multi-layered knowledge graphs, along with state-of-the-
art neural response generators, intent classifiers, and a robust natural
language understanding and dialogue management module. The core layers of the
open knowledge network consist of consolidated concepts and relationships from
existing open knowledge networks and causal graphs, suitably enhanced to
facilitate neuro-symbolic approaches for knowledge grounded conversation. The
peripheral layers constitute argumentation graphs which are automatically
constructed through processing existing corpora of persuasive conversations and
extracting elemental discourse units and relationships between them. An
innovative neuro-symbolic approach is necessary to (i) avoid the typical
“hallucinations” exhibited by neural response generators alone and (ii)
intelligently navigate through the various stages of a persuasive conversation.
The neural response generators are configured to efficiently retrieve, reason
and incorporate information from the open knowledge network, in order to
generate factually correct, coherent, engaging and persuasive responses. Both
novel and traditional metrics will be used in order to assess the quality of the
generated conversations and measure its impact. Automated evaluation will be
conducted on representative data sets; the prototypes will also be evaluated by
experts who will provide feedback regarding viability for future
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.