* 2214482
* Collaborative Research: Variables Influencing the Efficacy of Civilian Oversight Commissions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ramona Perez, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 96,582.00

In response to the present conflicts surrounding policing, local and national
organizations and policy makers have called for increasing civilian oversight
and supervision of police departments as one approach to improving police-
community relations. Civilian oversight commissions are locally constructed,
making it difficult to effectively assess the impact of these commissions on a
broader scale. This project is centered in three counties across the US to ask:
what factors shape local oversight practices, and what can we learn from these
different entities that can be used to effectively assess outcomes across
diverse commissions? Selecting sites with distinctive racial dynamics and
varying structures of civilian-led police oversight commissions, this project
focuses on the varied histories, forms, practices, and successes and failures of
civilian oversight. Investigators and student researchers analyze the variations
in discourses and practices to understand the specific implementations of
civilian oversight of police and to gauge the potential value of civilian
oversight commissions on a broader scale. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in quantitative and qualitative data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses team-based multi-sited
ethnography to study and analyze locally specific features of oversight
commissions including their institutional structures, histories, and
institutional dynamics. This project develops methods to offer comparative
insights into the ways in which oversight commissions operate, with particular
attention to what demographic variables are predictive of participation.
Tracking the issues that oversight committees engage, researchers will develop
theories of the forms through which commissions address community relations and
policing. The mere establishment of civilian oversight may be a first step
toward a public democratic forum, but this study explores civilian oversight
commissions as an institution that can survey possible avenues of accountability
and reform, while simultaneously reinscribing the power and influence of
policing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.