* 2214742
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment - 2022
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Ethan Roth, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 130,356.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261-foot,
global class ice-capable oceanographic research vessel owned by the NSF as part
of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF) fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose
platform for multidisciplinary research missions from polar to temperate
latitudes. UAF requests funds to purchase and install Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment that would enhance the vessel's capability in support of NSF-
sponsored research to be undertaken on Sikuliaq in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2021, Sikuliaq completed 233 days 181 (78%) of
which were for NSF. In 2022, the vessel is scheduled to sail 275 days with 217
(79%) days of the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, UAF provides technical
descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following Shipboard
Scientific Support Equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Electromechanical hybrid
winch cable $18,760&lt;br/&gt;2) Winding and tension carts for spooling
$79,411&lt;br/&gt;3) Water weight bags for load testing $32,185&lt;br/&gt;
$130,356&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.