* 2214658
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-throughput/High Resolution Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer to Enable Multidisciplinary Research and Education in the South-East Wisconsin Area
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Madhusudan Dey, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 538,699.00

An award is made to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) to acquire a
Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer. This new mass
spectrometry (MS) instrument enhances the core analytical infrastructure at UWM
creating new research and learning experiences at all levels. It provides
opportunities to students who are first-generation and underrepresented in the
STEM fields, outreach programs for local K-12 students, science teachers and the
public. The enhanced MS infrastructure will create new research and learning
experiences and will expand the existing MS curriculum. It includes hands-on
training with advanced research instrumentation to undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers. The use of this instrument will inspire STEM interest
among students, including women and underrepresented individuals, who are doing
research in the labs of the project faculty. UWMâ€™s MS facility has a strong
record of industrial collaborations, which will be expanded with the new MS, by
providing expert support in applications development, experimental design, and
data analysis. Collaborations also play a vital role in financial sustainability
of MS facility operations, diversify the scope of applications and projects, and
give students hands-on experience working with industrial scientists and
commercial problems. Students gaining this experience will be highly competent
in their future jobs in a variety of chemistry-related
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new MS instrumentation will enable a
diverse cadre of early-career and senior researchers at the UWM and regional
universities to perform advanced proteomics, metabolomics, and high-resolution
mass spectrometry analysis. The instrument will be used for the comprehensive
characterization of small compounds like organic molecules and metabolites as
well as large molecules like proteins, peptides and oligonucleotides with a high
degree of precision and accuracy. This instrument will have immediate impacts on
several ongoing projects such as (1) understanding the role of acid ceramidase
in ceramide metabolism pathway; (2) identifying proteins and their PTMs that are
secreted by the type IX secretion system of Flavobacterium johnsoniae; and (3)
identifying and quantifying phosphorylated and acetylated proteins that are
targeted by the stress response pathways in yeast and metazoan cells. In
addition, this instrument will advance the cross-disciplinary research pursued
by scientific teams at the UWM and other local academic and industrial
institutions in the fields of biochemistry, microbiology, neurochemistry,
environmental chemistry, and biomaterial engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.