* 2214315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological Dependencies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Maria Gouskova, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 6,761.00

This project investigates how speakers of a language know the various forms a
word can take. For many decades, linguists have established that speakers can
learn and generalize over statistical trends in the language to create new forms
of words that they have never previously encountered. On the other hand, in some
cases speakers must memorize the behavior of individual forms that do not follow
common patterns. This project explores the interplay between generalization and
memorization by examining whether speakers take one form of a word into account
when figuring out how to make another form. It aims to show that speakers can
form these sorts of generalizations, thus improving our understanding of how
speakers learn and maintain complicated systems in which a word can appear in
many different forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the four languages studied in
this project involves a case where two forms of a word show interpredictability:
if a word takes suffix A in one context, it is also likely to take suffix B in a
different context. These statistical tendencies will first be established by
analyzing a dictionary or corpus of texts in the language. Next, a series of
experiments will be run with speakers of the relevant language. In each
experiment, speakers will be shown plausible but unattested words of their
language with different suffixes in a number of contexts and asked to provide an
additional suffixed form. The given forms will vary; the hypothesis is that
speakers will similarly vary the suffixes they choose for the new forms, roughly
mimicking the statistical tendencies of their language. To account for these
correlations, this project develops a theoretical approach in which the forms of
a word are associated with markers on that word's mental entry, and speakers
learn generalizations over which sets of markers tend to cooccur within a single
entry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.