* 2214418
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Virtual Observatory of Culture for Equity in Academia at the University of Puerto Rico Rio Piedras (VoCEA)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Grisel Melendez, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

The goal of the NSF ADVANCE Catalyst at the University of Puerto Rico Rio
Piedras campus (UPRRP) is to assess critical components of the organizational
culture of the institution that prevent effective “counting” of academic women
and their efforts and contributions in STEM. Using a cultural organizational
(SCO) framework the project will address four questions: 1) What role does
institutional research and institutional data dissemination play in
organizational culture, 2) Are gender equity and inclusion integrated into
observable artifacts, values, norms, and underlying assumptions at UPRRP, 3)
What role does gender equity and inclusion play in the socialization of new
UPRRP members, including gaining academic citizenship, and 4) ) To what extent
can strategic microplanning catalyze change at UPRRP?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UPRRP Catalyst project is called VoCEA for Virtual Observatory for Culture
Equity in Academia, vocea means “to raise your voice” in Spanish. The project
will collect and analyze institutional data about STEM faculty to identify and
understand systemic gender-based equity and organizational culture issues. The
project is designed to open discussions across the institution and question the
status quo. VoCEA will result in the development of a five-year STEM faculty
equity plan for UPRRP with performance indicators tied to equity,
multiculturality, and accountability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at academic, non-profit institutions of
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported with co-
funding of the HSI Program which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.