* 2214370
* The Association between Population Policies, School Safety, and Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Anthony Peguero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 354,662.00

In this project, the effects of state-level population approaches both on
school-level safety and educational outcomes and on student-level perceptions of
school-level safety and educational outcomes are examined. It is likely that
healthy and safe schools are important for educational progress, success, and
attainment. As the United States becomes more demographically diverse, it
becomes more important to understand how states’ approaches to population may
affect school safety and education and students’ perceptions of school safety
and education. Results of this research are relevant to decision makers and
stakeholders concerned with education. This project is supported jointly by the
Sociology Program and the Science of Broadening Participation
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will draw from multiple nationally
representative datasets. The National Conference of State Legislatures data will
be used to assess change in state approaches to populations. The different
outcome variables will be taken from the School Survey on Crime, Safety; the
High School Longitudinal Study of 2009; and Common Core Data. Various
statistical analyses will be employed to investigate the association between
population approaches, school safety, education, and related student
perceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.