* 2214449
* Advancing the Conversation on Scaling National Informal STEM Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Erin Stafford, National Girls Collaborative
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 245,882.00

The National Girls Collaborative Project and Education Development Center are
convening “Advancing the Conversation on Scaling National Informal STEM
Programs,” a two-and-a-half day knowledge-building conference that brings
together key stakeholders in informal STEM education (ISE) to examine what scale
looks like across informal learning settings. Currently, there is not a common
definition or set of dimensions related to what it means to scale programs in
informal learning settings. Approaches to scale in ISE too often center on the
perspectives and needs of people who are developing and spreading programs while
less consideration is given to the realities of those responsible for
operationalizing programs in hyper-local contexts. This conference approaches
the question of scale from the perspective of the program implementers, who are
the beneficiaries of capacity building and serve as facilitators of these scaled
programs. The conference also gives voice to program developers, researchers,
evaluators, and funders of national informal STEM programs who study and support
scale in education. The aim of the conference is to develop a new framework for
scale in ISE that centers partnership and capacity building of informal
educators. Such an approach to scale addresses issues of local access and
diversity, equity, and inclusion, and promotes sustainability of ISE in high-
need communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference discussions challenge three
common misperceptions of scale across ISE: (1) simple spread and replication of
turnkey programs lead to effective scale in ISE; (2) definitions of scale
derived from formal learning settings should be used to scale across ISE; and
(3) scale across ISE should be defined by program developers and those that seek
to study it. Participants with a wide range of perspectives and who represent a
diversity of organizational types will attend the conference and work together
to articulate scaling success factors, barriers, diversity, equity, and
inclusion strategies, and intended outcomes, distilling themes, questions, and
concerns about current approaches to evaluating and researching scale in ISE.
Together, conference participants will co-create a framework for scale in ISE
which will define new and expanded dimensions of scale that center on capacity
building and diversity, equity, and inclusion, as well as a Program Developer’s
Guide for scaling ISE programs through the lens of the framework. These products
will increase the knowledge and capacity of informal learning organizations
involved in nationally scaled initiatives, STEM-rich institutions wanting to
scale their own locally developed programs, informal STEM researchers and
evaluators, and the broader field of ISE including program funders. Conference
findings will be broadly disseminated through publications, conferences, and a
national webinar co-hosted by the National Girls Collaborative Project and
Education Development Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance
new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.