* 2214230
* New Approaches to Strain Engineering and Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Martin Greven, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2026
* USD 497,547.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is among the most important
materials properties for both fundamental research and practical applications,
and the development of novel experimental approaches to superconductivity is of
great interest. Building on recent break-through results, this work focuses on
using innovative experimental methods to expand the boundaries of understanding
superconductivity. Two main approaches are being pursued: the combination of
tuning and engineering the properties using stress applied along multiple
directions, and investigation of the effects of stress leading to permanent
deformation of the material. Both approaches have great untapped potential and
are virtually unexplored. The work provides the exciting and timely opportunity
to investigate the influence of defects related to deformation on both
superconducting and normal-state properties in certain quantum materials.
Furthermore, the team is testing a recent prediction of stress-induced
metallization and superconductivity in semiconductors. This research provides
rich educational and research opportunities for a number of undergraduate and
graduate students who are gaining valuable experiences in crystal growth and
characterization, transport and thermodynamic measurements, neutron and
synchrotron x-ray scattering at US national laboratories, and in the use of
innovative strain cells and measurement
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Building on the
recent success with novel high-force pneumatic strain cells to significantly
modify and enhance desirable properties of bulk oxides, this project begins to
explore a vast parameter space in materials physics, with focus on the
superconducting properties of select non-oxide materials that are either
plastically deformed or subjected to multiaxis stress. Two main approaches are
being pursued: the combination of stress along multiple spatial directions,
including shear stress; and the effects of stress that exceeds the elastic limit
and leads to permanent, plastic deformation of the material. The research
involves crystal growth and characterization, transport and thermodynamic
measurements, neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering, and collaboration with
experts in complementary spectroscopic probes. It focuses on three select
materials families: telluride superconductors, including SnTe and PbTe;
superconducting half-Heusler compounds, most importantly YPtBi; and conventional
semiconductors, such as Si and Ge. Broadly, the first two groups involve Dirac
and topological semimetals and, moreover, tellurides are of technological
relevance due to their outstanding thermoelectric properties. In conventional
semiconductors, the team is testing a recent prediction of shear-induced
metallization and superconductivity. The novel approaches applied to these
materials can be expected to transcend the field of superconductivity and become
invaluable to future studies of quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.