* 2214009
* PFI-TT: Cost-Effective Anchor for Offshore, Floating, Energy-harvesting Wind Towers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Charles Aubeny, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the reduction of capital costs for
floating, offshore, wind power development. An estimated 60% of offshore wind
occurs in deep waters requiring floating units. The proposed technology is
adaptable to any type of mooring system for floating structures. This
adaptability provides a high degree of flexibility in system design to
accommodate environmental constraints and competing ocean uses such as
commercial fisheries. The high efficiency and compact design is intended to
minimize material requirements (and therefore supply chain issues) and reduce
the required number and size of transport and installation vessels, which are
critical constraints affecting offshore wind power development. The technology
is designed to be installed into the seabed using methods which minimize impacts
(e.g. noise) on marine life. This research will also provide training to a
postdoctoral student on innovation, intellectual property protection, and
commercialization of research products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will focus on the commercialization of a new anchor design for floating
offshore wind turbines. A key feature of the anchor is its high efficiency,
which permits a compact size that is still capable of resisting the load demand
from 15 MW or larger wind turbines. The anchor is installable in virtually any
soil profile and can provide a high vertical load demand, overcoming major
limitations of most existing anchors. As the load capacity does not depend on
transient suction, the anchor capacity does not diminish under sustained
loading. The circular symmetry permits use in a shared anchor system when site
conditions permit. The anchor can be deployed in catenary, taut, and tension-leg
systems, maximizing the flexibility of mooring system designers to accommodate
environmental constraints. A key task in this research will be reduced scale
model tests simulating the insertion and pullout of the anchor, so installation
disturbance effects can be assessed. This project also seeks to refine the
structural design of the anchor and the installation follower system with a view
toward minimizing fatigue damage. This research may produce an anchor and
follower system design fully ready for field-scale pilot
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.