* 2214855
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoindenter for Materials Science and Biomaterials Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ilwoo Seok, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 586,231.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
nanoindenter for fundamental investigations of advanced engineering materials
and biomaterials. The mechanical properties of materials are intricately linked
to how they function. Understanding how these properties influence material
behavior is critical for both the design of advanced engineered materials and
the response of biological tissues to disease. This instrument will enable
quantitative mechanical characterization of materials impacting several
scientific disciplines and provide foundational understanding of engineering,
construction, and biological materials. Additionally, targeted K-12 educational
outreach activities will allow students and teachers to participate in hands-on
experiments and explore STEM careers. These opportunities will impacting low
socioeconomic status communities in the Arkansas Delta.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This nanoindenter acquisition will provide a comprehensive
nanomechanics platform for quantitatively measuring elastic modulus, hardness,
deformation/wear, fatigue strength, and friction of materials. The unique
capabilities of the tool will impact the following research projects: 1)
Investigating strengthening mechanisms and the role dislocation dynamics in
novel high-strength core-shell nanostructures; 2) Assessing the hardness of
caries-affected teeth to understand how the pathogen Streptococcus mutans causes
tooth decay; 3) in vitro mechanical characterization of cardiovascular tissues
at physiological conditions; 4) Understanding the nanomechanistic properties of
polymeric asphalt binders with high-resolution spatial mapping of elastic
modulus, hardness, and complex shear modulus; 5) Precision nanomanufacturing
research to improve the uniformity metallic nanopatterned surfaces produced by
thin film dewetting and pulsed electric wave generation; and 6) interfacial
strain measurements of III-V semiconductor quantum dot wells grown on sapphire.
Together, these projects represent multi-disciplinary research collaborations
across engineering and biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.