* 2214266
* Multifaceted Causes of Poverty
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Emma Riley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2024
* USD 387,267.00

Understanding the drivers and causes of persistent poverty is an important issue
that economists have been grappling with for decades. Poverty is complex and
multifaceted; therefore, it must be addressed by targeting multiple constraints
simultaneously. Most anti-poverty programs have focused on targeting only the
poorest in a community, an approach that limits their large-scale applicability
and considerably adds to their cost. However, no evidence exists as to whether
constraints are specific, requiring individual support to address, or whether
households within a community may be subject to similar constraints, enabling
poverty alleviation to be tailored at the community-level. This project asks
whether a program that targets everyone within a community can be more effective
for poverty reduction than one that targets only the poorest. To answer this
question, the researchers will use experiments involving several households
across many low-income communities. The project will examine effects of the
program 2 years after its start, focusing on the effects on household poverty,
income, and wealth as well as women’s empowerment. Through this, the researchers
will also be able to shed light on the question of whether the causes of
persistent poverty are specific to individual households or are common within a
community. The results of this research can be used as major inputs into the
design and implementation of antipoverty programs and help to establish the U.S
as the global leader in anti-poverty research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduation
programs, where combinations of input handouts, individualized training,
coaching, and saving support are provided, are effective at reducing long-term
poverty among the poorest households. However, these programs target only the
poorest households in a community, limiting their scalability to raise incomes
and productivity in entire communities. Such targeting is ineffective as
households share transfers with each other, and frequently move in and out of
extreme poverty thus reducing the potential for positive spillovers. This
research project investigates whether extreme poverty can be reduced if everyone
in a community is included in poverty reduction programs. Are there common
elements to poverty within a community which mean that providing trainings in
groups is effective? The project uses an RCT with many households in which
clusters of communities are randomly assigned to receive a multi-faceted
antipoverty program or not. The PIs will measure the impact of this program on
the economic status of households, prices and economic activity in the
community, and women’s empowerment, as well as study the mechanisms through
which any impacts occur. The findings from this study will benefit anti-poverty
programs in the U.S. and governments across the world that seek to find the most
effective program to reduce poverty. The results of this research can also be
used as major inputs into the design and implementation of antipoverty programs
and help to establish the U.S as the global leader in anti-poverty
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.