* 2214160
* Comparing Coverage of Public Events Across Different Types of News Sources
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 313,805.00

This study uses rigorous methods to compare mainstream newswires to local
specialty newspapers in their coverage of related public events in the 1990s and
2000s, an under-studied period in US history. The project simultaneously
develops a catalog of such events–what happened–and a catalog of news stories
that shape the impressions a reader would form about what happened. This allows
demonstration of how perceptions of controversies based in mainstream national
media can differ from those based in more local targeted media sources.
Democracy inherently involves conflicts between people with different issue
preferences, and this conflict is sometimes expressed publicly. News media shape
public perceptions of controversial issues and events, but news sources differ
in which issues and events they emphasize and how they cover them. While most
events are mentioned only once and receive sparse news coverage, a few events
are discussed in dozens of articles and become central to public discussions.
Understanding these media differences is an important part of understanding
democratic deliberations in a diverse society. Data about the 1990s and 2000s
helps provide historical context for understanding current debates. These high-
quality data will also be useful to other social scientists, and the new
research methods we have developed will improve research in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;News sources for this project are: (1) Three newswire
services archived in the Annotated English Gigaword file available from the
Linguistic Data Consortium; and (2) local specialty newspapers archived in
Proquest Ethnic Newswatch. The main study period is 1994-2010. This study
provides novel and unique data that permit enhanced investigation of the mutual
relationship of public events and news coverage. Methodologically, this project
develops important innovations in studying social movement events (and public
events more broadly) using news sources. The methods emphasize verifiability,
error-correction, and the relationality of these events. Relational databases
provide rigorous links between events and the articles describing them, which
both permits event data to be verified and structures the data to be consistent
with theories of the interplay of events and news coverage. Consistent with
theory, relational data structures are used additionally to capture the
structuring of protests into specific issue clusters and the structuring of some
events as complex events with subevents. These data structures permit new lines
of research. Comparison across source types permits investigation of the
different narratives and collective memories they construct about this period.
Special attention is paid to the small number of events that receive
disproportionate coverage in news sources and thus dominate public discourses.
This new high-quality public event data will inform historical studies of this
under-studied period and be useful for secondary analyses by other scholars. The
use of relational data structures will improve data collection
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.