* 2214700
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multicollector – Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometer at the University of Arizona for Earth and Planetary Science Research, Education and Outre
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 809,775.00

This MRI award provides funding to acquire a next-generation Multicollector –
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) equipped with a
collision/reaction cell and MS/MS mass filter. The instrument will be housed
within the Arizona LaserChron Center (ALC), an NSF-supported Community Facility
at the University of Arizona (UA) that supports research in Earth Sciences. It
will be co-managed between ALC and the Arizona Heavy Isotopes Laboratory (AHIL).
Science questions pursued by ALC and AHIL researchers include reconstructing the
igneous evolution of Earth, Moon, Mars, and other planetary materials; the
timing of volcanic eruptions; tectonic evolution and uplift of mountain ranges;
transport and accumulation of sediments; formation of base metal deposits and
other strategic and energy resources; reconstructing the history of Earth’s
climate, including patterns of ice sheets and tracing of aeolian (loess)
deposits. The new instrument will directly support the research efforts of ~350
faculty members, professional geologists, and students that visit the ALC each
year, by making state-of-the-art analytical methods accessible to the broader
Earth Science community. Furthermore, the instrument will provide new
opportunities for students and researchers to learn the theory and methods of
mass spectrometry; data acquisition and processing; and offer educational and
outreach activities for a broad user base including participants from under-
represented minority groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new MC-ICPMS will
complement other ICPMS and laser-ablation systems available at ALC by enabling
improved accuracy/precision using existing analytical methods, development of
new techniques only achievable with the proposed instrumentation, as well as
increasing analytical capacity. In particular, research in ALC will emphasize:
i) developing new techniques in laser-based MC-ICPMS geochronology that take
full advantage of the novel collision/reaction cell and MS/MS capabilities
(e.g., Rb-Sr); and ii) providing greater capacity to meet the growing community
demands for U-Th/Pb geochronology and complementary Lu-Hf isotope analysis. We
anticipate that in-situ Rb-Sr methods applied to feldspar and mica will
transform petrochronology and detrital mineral studies in much the same way that
zircon U-Pb has impacted many different areas of Earth science research. AHIL
research will emphasize the development and application of emerging techniques
in non-traditional stable isotopes of Ti, Zr, and Hf in bulk-rocks and minerals
to study high-temperature petrologic processes influencing magmatism, fluid
flow, crust-mantle differentiation, and the distribution of critical elements.
Through connections with researchers in the UA Lunar and Planetary Laboratory,
we will leverage these novel capabilities to study aspects of planetary
geochemistry/geochronology that bear on Earth’s origin and evolution. Through
community outreach and research training for underrepresented students and
postdoctoral researchers, the PI/Co-PIs will ensure that the new MC-ICPMS takes
advantage of UA’s position as an R1 Hispanic Serving Institution and American
Indian and Alaska Native-Serving Institution for enhancing diversity in
geosciences, while addressing exciting new questions in petrology, geochemistry,
tectonics, and planetary sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.