* 2214933
* The typology of subordinate clauses: A case study
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Aaron White, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2025
* USD 439,222.00

This project investigates inferences that can be drawn from sentences with
subordinate clauses, such as 'I forgot to lock the door' or 'I forgot locking
the door'. It has been observed that languages use specific verb forms to encode
specific inferences. For instance, the form 'to lock' above implies that the
door wasn’t locked, while using the form 'locking' implies the opposite. Such
mappings between form and meaning/inference have been investigated in English as
well as a small number of other closely related languages, and these
investigations have led to interesting hypotheses about how human language
connects form with meaning in general. The current picture is incomplete,
however, since it is not clear whether these hypotheses cover languages outside
the circumscribed collection on which they were developed. This project aims to
address this gap by investigating the topic in an understudied and under-
resourced language whose subordinate clauses differ in important ways from those
found in well-documented languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two
main components: a large-scale data collection component and a computational
modeling component. The data collection component uses a novel staged
elicitation methodology that interleaves standard elicitation methodologies with
both corpus-based methods and web-based experiments. The computational modeling
component develops a computational model for finding underlying semantic classes
of predicates across multiple unrelated languages. This research not only helps
to reveal a fuller picture of how human language connects form with meaning in
general; it also serves to develop resources crucial for developing applied
technologies for natural language understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.