* 2214925
* CISE-ANR: Small: Evolutional deep neural network for resolution of high-dimensional partial differential equations
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Tamer Zaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2025
* USD 598,939.00

A vast number of phenomena across engineering, physics, economics and
operational research are difficult to computationally predict because they
depend on a large number of dimensions. A familiar example is the breakup of a
liquid jet into a very large number of droplets, interacting with the background
time-dependent and spatially varying field. A direct connection can be drawn
between this example and the continuing pandemic where aerosol transmission of
airborne pathogens is an important aspect of the contamination process. In such
high-dimensional problems, the computational complexity increases with the
number of particles. Therefore, developing an efficient and fast computational
algorithms for solving the underlying equations will have a considerable impact
on the engineering community, and will also come with significant ramifications
across a wide range of disciplines including physics, medicine and public
health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Machine-learning holds significant promise to
revolutionize this vast range of applications by accelerating the solution of
these high-dimensional, complex problems. Conventional machine-learning
approaches rely on training data to approximate solutions of the governing
equations, but such data are often either costly to generate or may not be
available. One unique exception is the recently invented evolutional deep neural
networks (EDNN) which do not rely on training. Instead, these networks forecast,
or predict, the evolution of the pertinent physics by solving the governing
equations. This unique feature is possible because the governing equations are
recast in terms of the network parameters which can then evolve according to the
physical laws to accurately predict the evolution of the system. In this
effort—a collaboration between the United States and France—EDNN algorithms are
developed for accurate and efficient solution of high-dimensional partial
differential equations. Fundamental challenges related to the design of the
optimal network architecture, dynamic adaptivity of the solution and scalability
for massive parallelism are addressed, and evaluated against benchmark high-
fidelity data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.