* 2214901
* American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference on Climate and Health in Africa; Washington, District of Columbia; June 7-10, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Extreme weather events are hazardous to human health in many ways. Some health
risks, such as heat stroke, result directly from human exposure to exreme
conditions. Others, such as cholera outbreaks, occur indirectly as extreme
weather overwhelms infrastructure for clean water, sanitation, and other
necessities of human health. Such health risks are expected to worsen due to
climate change, as warmer temperatures lead to increased incidence of heat
waves, droughts, fires, and floods. They are also of greatest concern in regions
of social vulnerability, including much of Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides support for a conference which brings together researchers,
practitioners, and policy makers to consider the health impacts of climate
extremes in Africa and develop strategies to respond to them. The conference is
motivated in part by recent advances in the prediction of African weather and
climate extremes which have not yet been incorporated into health early warning
systems and other public health efforts. Interactions across multiple research
disciplines and between researchers and stakeholders will be required to fully
realize the heath benefits of better climate information. This conference serves
as a starting point for such interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is
organized as a Chapman Conference of the American Geophysical Union (AGU), to be
held June 7-10 at the AGU headquarters building in Washington DC. Deliverables
of the meeting, in addition to its role as a venue to foster interactions,
include conference proceedings published as an AGU monograph or special issue, a
meeting report intended for a non-technical audience, and a while paper with
recommendations for the use of climate information to improve health outcomes in
Africa. Funds provided by the National Science Foundation support the travel of
students, early-career scientists, and invited speakers to attend the meeting.
Support for the meeting comes from the Geosciences (GEO), Biological Sciences
(BIO), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE) Directorates, and
complements support provided by other federal agencies and non-governmental
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.