* 2214718
* Bioinspired Structural Composites: Advances in Experiments, Simulations, and AI Based Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Hendrik Heinz, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 8,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a symposium at the 2022
Spring Meeting of the Materials Research Society (MRS), entitled “Bioinspired
Structural Composites—Advances in Experiments, Simulations and AI-Based Design”
(SF12). The event will be held during May 8-13, 2022, at the Hawaiʻi Convention
Center in Honolulu, HI, as well as during the Virtual MRS Spring Meeting during
May 23-25. The symposium will bring together many of the world’s leading experts
in bioinspired composites research, which has applications in functional
materials, defense, aerospace, and commercial transportation technologies. The
event also emphasizes topics from artificial intelligence (AI) and simulation in
chemistry, physics and engineering of composites that have not been covered in
previous meetings. The symposium will bring together leading scientists, junior
scientists, and attendees from an interdisciplinary and diverse research
community to foster cross-cutting idea exchange and new collaborations in the
topical area of bioinspired composite materials and data-driven design of
complex materials. The aim of the symposium is the integration of advances in
multidisciplinary areas into convergent research efforts to improve the
performance of existing materials and uncover emergent promising materials,
including high-throughput and automated experiments, computation, and data-
driven discovery. NSF funds will help to broaden participation at the symposium
and will support speakers and attendees with an emphasis on including women and
under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the symposium on “Bioinspired
Structural Composites—Advances in Experiments, Simulations and AI-Based Design”
(SF12), to be held May 8-13, 2022, at the Hawaiʻi Convention Center in Honolulu,
HI, as well as during the Virtual MRS Spring Meeting during May 23-25. The
symposium aims at connecting scientists and engineers with expertise in
different research fields related to structural and functional composites, such
as physics, materials science, biology, polymer science, bioengineering,
chemistry, mechanical engineering, and data science to advance cutting-edge
research tools and design innovative materials for transportation, aerial
vehicles, aerospace, electronics, and medical device technology. Contributions
will include tailoring material interfaces and hierarchical design, advances in
characterization using electron microscopy (STEM, EELS, and electron
tomography), scanning probe microscopy (AFM, AFM-IR, peak force, K-AFM, STM-AFM,
C-AFM), fluorescence microscopy, spectroscopy, and nano X-ray tomography to
visualize and assess morphology-property relationships at multiple length scales
from atoms to meters. In addition, there will be contributions that focus on
inspiration from nature, biology, and bioengineering will form an integral part
of the symposium. Recent developments in data analysis, autonomous optimization,
multiscale simulation (quantum-mechanical, atomistic, coarse-grained) and AI for
a better understanding of molecular and interfacial interactions, chemical
reaction kinetics, growth of different phases (nodules, amorphous, crystalline,
interdigitated), and property predictions will be presented. Through
presentations and discussions, the symposium will foster advances in convergent
research efforts that integrate traditional and high-throughput experiments,
applications in medicine, data science, simulation, and ML
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.