* 2214603
* Non-Binding Suggestions, Self-Enforcing Norms and the Determinants of Cooperation in Repeated Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Geoffroy de Clippel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 267,912.00

It is often difficult to achieve the common good in the face of opportunistic
incentives. Repeated interaction can alleviate this difficulty: rewards and
punishments in future interactions can possibly overcome shortsighted
considerations. Cooperation then becomes a possibility, but not a necessity. The
project experimentally investigates the self-sustainability of such cooperative
norms, and addresses the question of how to make better norms focal. Society
often expects leaders (such as CEOs, politicians, and school principals) to make
pronouncements in the hope that such 'soft nudges' impact institutional culture
and norms. This project investigates whether it is feasible, through the power
of suggestion, to effect and sustain desired outcomes in the context of repeated
relationships and communities. It will shed light on the determinants of
leadership’s ability to shift behavior towards desirable outcomes; investigate
which suggested behaviors yield the greatest adherence, and which have little
hope of emerging; examine whether suggestions have persistent effects; and
consider whether suggestions couched in moral language are more effective than
those phrased in neutral language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social dilemma is
pervasive but theoretically solvable in the context of repeated interactions.
Yet theory only reveals that the set of possible outcomes expands. It does not
shed light on how to bring about an equilibrium achieving the desired societal
outcomes. The recent experimental literature on repeated games considers what
norms will spontaneously crystallize in the lab, after filtering out transitory
behavior. However, the equilibrium that arises in the lab may not come close to
those arising in richer settings, where historical context, strategies' shared
meaning, and pre-play communication play a role. As such, current experiments
may be overly harsh when it comes to assessing the limits of cooperation: not
seeing cooperation spontaneously emerge may not reflect the full potential for
cooperation in real-life problems. A laboratory environment cannot recreate the
many ways in which an equilibrium might become focal. This study takes the more
modest approach of testing the self-enforcing nature of different strategies
using non-binding suggestions, akin to the pronouncements made by leaders. This
does not require having to witness the self-emergence of strategies, nor does it
require introducing uncontrolled elements that defy the purposes of a lab
setting. Failing to voluntarily follow a non-binding suggestion of some
cooperative equilibrium strategies is evidence that it is unlikely to
spontaneously crystallize and persist in real life. The methodology involves
varying the continuation probability, as a natural treatment-control for demand
effects arising from statements made by third parties (in this case, the
experimenter). This study will investigate many questions, including whether
efficiency is higher when making a non-binding suggestion such as grim-trigger
or tit-for-tat strategies, as opposed to when letting a convention emerge
spontaneously; and how non-binding suggestions interact with previously studied
determinants of cooperation (e.g., the role of risk dominance, risk aversion and
altruism). In addition to standard repeated games, this project will also
explore the empirical validity of established theoretical notions of community
enforcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.