* 2214728
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography Scanner for Specimen-Based and Material Science Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Felisa Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 466,700.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports the purchase of an X-ray
tomography scanner. X-ray tomography has revolutionized the medical field,
providing three dimensional reconstructions of our bodies without the need for
invasive surgeries. This same technique is now being applied to the study of
biological, geological, and manufactured materials. Cutting-edge research using
X-ray tomography can non-destructively image the interior structure of samples
with micro-scale resolution, and these reconstructions are opening research
opportunities in reconstructing the fossil history of life on Earth,
characterizing samples that can provide deeper insight into records of climate
change, and developing new lightweight manufactured materials and new
generations of electronics. There are currently no X-ray micro tomography
scanners at University of New Mexico, thus this instrument will modernize sample
characterization in working groups across both the main and satellite campuses.
These capabilities will further promote research and collaboration across
disciplines, expanding the impact of university research within the academic and
broader community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro X-ray computed tomography
(MicroXCT) scanners map differences in X-ray attenuation as specimens rotate to
generate 3D reconstructions, non-destructively revealing intact internal
structures and morphologies. 3D quantification enables discovery of
morphological relationships that are not visible in 2D, virtual dissections, and
digital archiving of research samples. This proposal supports the acquisition of
a Zeiss Xradia Context System that is capable of 3D reconstructions relevant to
diverse fields of study, with a 30-160 kV X-ray source and maximum spatial
resolution of 0.95 Âµm for the smallest samples. We are specifically focusing on
the Zeiss-Xradia Context System due to its versatility and upgradability for
future applications. The system is upgradable to an Xradia 510 Versa X-ray
microscope to leverage Resolution at a Distance technology for the maximum
performance tomographic imaging of samples within in situ chambers, provide
diffraction and phase contrast imaging. In addition to transforming research on
campus, acquisition of a MicroXCT scanner would expand educational and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students through direct
participation in sample processing and analysis, as well as development of
teaching materials for classroom and laboratory
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.