* 2214573
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Acquisition of a Biomolecular Imaging System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Eric Rubenstein, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 184,267.00

An award is made to Ball State University (BSU) to support the acquisition of a
laser-based biomolecular imaging system to advance biochemical and molecular
biology research projects, as well as to improve the quality and expand the
scope of research and student training. This new biomolecular imaging system is
an essential tool which will allow researchers to detect, visualize, and
quantify proteins, nucleic acids, and other biomolecules at the molecular and
cellular levels, opening a wide range of possibilities for hands-on experiences
for a diverse group of next generation of scientists and teaching students to
think critically with problem-based learning modules. The biomolecular imager
will cultivate significant societal impact by becoming a shared resource open to
investigators from all areas of scientific research not only across the
departments at BSU but also from regional universities including Anderson
University, Taylor University, Indiana Wesleyan University, as well as high
schools such as The Indiana Academy for Science, Mathematics, and Humanities.
Using this unique instrumentation, faculty in BSU’s Chemistry and Biology
Departments will broaden the dissemination of their research and knowledge by
actively participating in several outreach programs. These programs include the
Chemistry Research Immersion Summer Program, Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation, and a “DNA-Day” activity for high school students to encourage
them to consider careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This state-
of-the-art instrument supports multiple imaging modes, including red/green/blue
and long/short wavelengths of near-infrared fluorescence, optical densitometry
of proteins in stained gels, and phosphor imaging. At least seven research
groups will use the biomolecular imaging system from BSU’s Chemistry and Biology
Departments for individual research, research training programs, and teaching.
The new system will advance investigators’ broad and multidisciplinary research
objectives, which include (1) the design of various Logic Gated nucleic acid
complexes; (2) the development of novel molecular probes derived from a natural
glycolipid; (3) understanding of the mechanism of apolipoprotein degradation
with relevance to cholesterol related pathologies; (4) uncovering details of the
mechanism of modulation of G-quadruplex helicase activity by non-coding RNAs;
(5) the development of modern expression systems for novel enzymatic catalysts;
(6) elucidation of the roles RNA modification plays in fungi; and (7) searching
for a mechanistic explanation for how mitoNEET (mitochondrial membrane protein)
serves as a redox sensor across evolution. The critical capabilities of this new
instrument, such as exceptional imaging quality, high image resolution, and
increased accuracy of quantification, will benefit the faculty's research goals.
The outcome of the research projects will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and presented at regional, national, and international scientific meetings
within investigators’ respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.