* 2214972
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration and Indigenous Ecological Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 21,975.00

Anthropogenic climatic change is predicted to increase migration from
marginalized agrarian and indigenous communities to wealthier cities. Already,
many agrarian households rely on family membersâ€™ incomes from migrant labor to
supplement their agricultural livelihoods, even as this reliance on migration is
changing long-held agricultural practices and associated knowledge systems. This
doctoral dissertation project examines the link between climatic change and
migration by centering how indigenous agrarian households understand and respond
to climatic change through their agricultural and economic practices. In
addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in
anthropology and environmental studies in the methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, this project will contribute to an emerging
empirical and theoretical understanding of how climate change impacts migration.
The results of this project will be disseminated to organizations working at the
nexus of climate change, agriculture, and migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a multi-sited ethnographic study of indigenous subsistence farming
households and their international migrant communities. This project forwards
the following three hypotheses: that indigenous farmers rely upon local climatic
knowledge in managing the risks and uncertainties of agriculture, that
households manage the risks and uncertainties of migration by maintaining the
land and resources necessary for cultivation, and that migration-induced changes
in agricultural practices insulate or expose agricultural households to the
effects of climatic change. To test these hypotheses this project employs the
methods of participant observation of agricultural and household economic
practices, semi-structured interviews, economic diaries, and participant remote
sensing, in which the researcher will work with participants to take aerial
photographs and make spatial visualizations of their farming practices. This
project contributes to scholarship on the environmental impacts of migration,
the household economy of subsistence farmers, and the impact of climate change
on migration, in addition to advancing scholarship in environmental anthropology
and human geography more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.