* 2214594
* The Tutor Engagement Assistant (TEA): Promoting High-Quality TA-Student Interactions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Barbara Ericson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,128.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a new software
tool to support teaching assistant (TA)-student interactions. Increasing class
sizes in computing have led to a greater reliance on undergraduate TAs to
support student learning. Many TAs are often only slightly more experienced than
the students they help. Providing help to a learner is a complex cognitive
process that requires: 1) Understanding the problem, 2) Debugging the learner's
incorrect solution, 3) Identifying conceptual gaps, and 4) Determining how to
best fill the conceptual gaps. The goal of this project is the development of
the Tutor Engagement Assistant (TEA) system. The TEA system will help
undergraduate TAs to quickly debug student code and construct personalized
problem sets to structure their interactions with students. This project hopes
to lead to more efficient and educationally effective TA help in computing
courses nationwide, and should contribute to research in the learning sciences,
HCI, and computing education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is based on two
theories: social constructionism and cognitive load. It draws on the ICAP
framework that links cognitive engagement with active learning outcomes. The
project will explore the impact of TEA on time on task, type of help, cognitive
load, learner engagement, self-efficacy, attitude towards help, help-seeking
behavior, and learning. The research plan consists of three phases: 1) baseline
data collection, 2) formative evaluation, and 3) TEA deployment. The project
will lead to 1) a detailed understanding of tutor-student interactions through
observation studies, 2) new approaches to help tutors quickly understand student
errors via a guided walkthrough of automatically generated corrections, 3)
techniques for identifying and curating personalized problem sets for students,
and 4) an evaluation of the impact of personalized problem sets on the quality
of tutor-student interactions and student learning. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.