* 2214244
* Data-driven detection of waves in Earth's core and geophysical interpretation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,314.00

Earthâ€™s magnetic field is an important element of the Earth system because it
contributes to the habitability of our planet. Its existence protects the
surface environment from charged particles that stream from the Sun. However,
the origins of the magnetic field lie deep inside the liquid metal core, where
it is continually generated by turbulent fluid motions. Many aspects of this
generation process are poorly understood. Vast quantities of data from recent
satellite missions create new opportunities to probe the generation process. The
goal of this project is to combine modern methods in Data Science with the
recent satellite observations to detect waves in the liquid metal core. These
waves contribute to time variations in the magnetic field and provide broader
insights into the underlying dynamics. These insights inform our understanding
of the generation process, which enables predictions of changes in the magnetic
field (much like weather forecasts). The objective is to assess changes in the
protection of our surface environment, which benefits society. The project also
supports fundamental research into the Earth system and supports the education
of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite
observations have substantially improved the quality of information that can be
recovered from the magnetic field. Reliable estimates for the second time-
derivative (known as secular acceleration) have become feasible in the past few
years, and these records are well suited for detecting waves at the top of the
core. This study uses a method known as dynamic mode decomposition to extract
waves from huge volumes of satellite data. Detection of waves, and the recovery
of the wave speeds, provides unique information about conditions at the top of
the core. Many of the candidate waves depend on stratification at the top of the
core, so detection of waves can offer strong constraints on the strength of
stratification. Ultimately these questions are related to the geological
evolution of the core and Earth as a whole. Factors such as the vigor of mantle
convection or the extent of chemical interactions contribute to conditions at
the core-mantle boundary. While useful records of secular acceleration are
necessarily restricted to the satellite era (last twenty years), the duration of
observed fluctuations means that the available record is now sufficient to
extract novel insights into the dynamics of our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.