* 2214883
* RUI: Molecular evolution and regulation of the anthranilate branch point in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Cynthia Holland, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 375,390.00

To defend themselves against herbivores, plants such as grape, maize, citrus,
and strawberry emit a volatile called methyl anthranilate, which acts as a
natural bird deterrent and attracts parasitic insects. While at least ten plant
families produce methyl anthranilate, all plants synthesize the precursor,
anthranilate, as an intermediate in the biosynthesis of the amino acid
tryptophan (Trp), which is essential for plant growth and development. The goal
of this research is to understand how plants regulate anthranilate metabolism at
the interface between amino acid synthesis and defense metabolism. Since methyl
anthranilate is used commercially as a grape flavoring agent in the food and
beverage industry and as an anti-avian spray for fields and crops, knowledge
gained from these experiments may have implications in biotechnology and
agriculture. In addition to training diverse undergraduates in protein
biochemistry, structural biology, systems biology, and plant genetics at a
primarily undergraduate institution, this project will be used to develop a
laboratory kit for elementary and middle school students in rural counties in
Massachusetts and Vermont to investigate the importance of plant chemicals in
defense against herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant chemical
defenses are typically specialized metabolites that are synthesized from primary
metabolites, like amino acids, or intermediates in primary metabolic pathways.
Despite the fundamental role of amino acid biosynthesis in plant defense, the
early steps of the Trp biosynthetic pathway remain to be biochemically
characterized outside of microorganisms. The Trp pathway starts by forming
anthranilate, which is then conjugated to a phosphoribosyl sugar using a
transferase (PAT1). Some plants siphon anthranilate away from the Trp pathway by
methylating it, forming the volatile O-methyl anthranilate, while the Citrus
family generates N-methyl anthranilate as a precursor to toxic acridone
alkaloids. The goals of this research are to identify the molecular mechanisms
governing anthranilate allocation to Trp versus methyl anthranilate biosynthesis
and to trace the evolution of pathway regulation. This project will take
advantage of the wealth of available plant genome sequence data and use
integrative approaches to investigate anthranilate-using enzymes. Aim 1 will
identify the molecular determinants and evolution of PAT1 regulation using
mutagenesis, activity assays, and X-ray crystallography. Aim 2 will trace the
convergent evolution of anthranilate O- and N-methyltransferases using a
structure-guided phylogenetic approach coupled with ex vivo metabolomics assays.
Aim 3 will further our understanding of anthranilate modulation using a systems-
level approach to investigate phenotypic, metabolic, and gene expression changes
in planta. This study will shine new light on the regulatory mechanisms of a
fundamental amino acid biosynthetic pathway, as well as aid in our understanding
of the evolution of convergent specialized metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.