* 2214028
* PFI-TT: Decarbonizing concrete using carbon-negatively processed solid waste
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Mahelet Fikru, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the conversion of municipal solid
waste incineration (MSWI) ashes – a type of negative-value, hard-to-recycle
solid wastes – into high-value (&gt;$50/ton) blended supplementary cementitious
material (SCM) through enhanced mineralization using flue gas-borne carbon
dioxide (CO2). SCMs are a commodity in the concrete industry used for
performance enhancement and/or decarbonization. Many states facing with a severe
shortage pf SCMs. The MSWI ashes-derived SCMs not only absorbs CO2 during
production (i.e., carbon-negative), but also reduces the CO2 included in
concrete by replacing a large portion of cement (the binder phase of concrete).
Using 1 ton of SCMs reduces, on average, 1.2 ton of CO2 emissions. This carbon-
negative SCMs technology, which can be extended to a broad range of solid wastes
using flue gas-borne CO2, may benefit both the concrete industry and other
waste-generating and CO2-intensive sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to simultaneously address three un-met market needs: (1) upcycling
negative-value solid wastes, specifically, MSWI ashes,(2) addressing the
shortage of SCMs in the concrete industry, and (3) facilitating large-scale CO2
utilizations in concrete production. The technology may result in the ability to
co-decarbonize multiple carbon-intensive industrial sectors (e.g., waste-to-
energy and concrete production), by upcycling the indigenous waste using flue
gas-borne CO2 and producing carbon-negative SCMs that can be consumed by local
concrete producers. To fill the knowledge gaps towards commercialization of this
technology, the project seeks to understand and address the compositional
variability of MSWI ashes in forming consistent products. The team also seeks to
design and prototype an industrially viable process to convert MSWI ashes into
carbon-negative SCMs amd optimize processing parameters for maximal cement
replacement. Additionally, the research will test critical performance metrics
of concrete proportions using the carbon-negative SCMs in order to establish
their performance credibility and guide their practical applications. Faculty
and students will conduct preliminary techno-economic and life-cycle analyses
and develop a market transition plan in collaboration with industrial partners.
To mitigate potential technical and technoeconomic risks, both a slurry-based
carbonation method and a dry-carbonation method will be developed for the
carbon-negative waste-to-commodity conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.