* 2214058
* Biomedical Decision-Making with Adolescent Patients
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Allison Silverman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This research investigates the decision-making frameworks used in adolescent
medicine in order to contribute to theories of personhood, adolescence, and
biomedical care. Decision-making in adolescent medicine is particularly complex,
as adolescent patients often seek to make their own decisions while remaining
enmeshed in family contexts. While biomedical frameworks for adults emphasize
patient autonomy, adolescents are not yet considered full social or legal
persons. This project has the potential to contribute to scientific theories of
the meanings and values of care and kinship that inform frameworks of biomedical
decision-making, specifically for non-adult patient populations. In addition to
supporting a doctoral student’s training, study results will be disseminated
widely to academic and non-academic audiences, including clinicians and
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project aims to investigate:
1) What meanings and values do clinicians, adolescent patients, and families use
to develop decision-making frameworks? 2) How is decision-making managed in
practice in adolescent medicine, particularly among different social groups? 3)
What are the implications of these decision-making frameworks for adolescent
personhood and kin relations in biomedical contexts? Data will be collected
through ethnographic observations in adolescent medicine clinics and in-depth
interviews with clinicians, adolescents, and family members. The results aim to
contribute to scientific understandings of adolescent personhood and forms of
biomedical and familial care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.