* 2214509
* Glacier Extremes: The Role of Glacier Snow Albedo Feedbacks From Wildfires and Heatwaves in Enhancing Present and Future Mass Loss in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Hamish Gordon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 456,029.00

Glaciers are rapidly losing mass, which impacts sea-level rise, water resources,
ecosystems, climate, culture, and tourism. Improving our understanding of the
drivers of mass change and our ability to project mass loss is therefore
essential to support adaptation and mitigation efforts. This project seeks to
advance our understanding of the role that wildfires and heatwaves have on
enhancing present and future glacier mass loss in Alaska. The project will use
and develop state-of-the-art glacier and climate models to account for important
physical processes and feedbacks that are not included in current models. We
will produce the first projections of the enhanced glacier mass loss caused by
wildfires and heatwaves, which are projected to become increasingly frequent and
widespread in the future. More broadly, we commit the project to the education
and training of students and the public. Activities will include co-developing
K-9 education modules on glaciers and climate change with local educators,
lecturing in K-12 classes and posting Meet the Researcher interviews to help
humanize us scientists, and developing educational materials geared towards the
public for national parks in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
wildfires and heatwaves on glacier mass loss is poorly understood. This project
will focus on advancing our process-based understanding and quantifying the
impact that wildfires, heatwaves, and corresponding feedbacks have on glacier
mass loss in Alaska. We will use in situ measurements, remote sensing data,
regional and global climate models, glacier energy balance models, and glacier
evolution models to investigate the impact of these extreme events across a
range of spatial and temporal scales. The investigators will develop new
parameterizations for glacier energy balance and glacier evolution models to
account for how the deposition of black and brown carbon from wildfires onto
glacier surfaces enhances glacier melt. Case studies and controlled simulations
will advance our process-based understanding of the primary and secondary
feedback mechanisms driving glacier changes. The investigators will integrate
this knowledge into state-of-the-art glacier evolution models to produce the
first projections of glacier mass loss in Alaska that account for wildfires,
heatwaves, and corresponding glacier feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.