* 2214346
* DDRIG in DRMS: Exploring the Spread, Use, and Impact of Imprecise Language on Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Marco Janssen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 24,888.00

This project explores the spread, use, and impact of imprecise language (such as
buzzwords) on collective action and decision-making, with a specific focus on
environmental conservation issues. When navigating these complex issues,
individuals and organizations must make decisions and communicate about how
priorities are defined, how resources are allocated, what actions are to be
taken, and with whom to cooperate. Not enough is known about the role that
imprecise language and buzzwords play in this decision-making process. They may
lead to confusion by creating ambiguity, but they may also bring diverse
stakeholders together by increasing trust or a shared sense of purpose. Because
there are limited resources available for the increasingly urgent issues of
environmental conservation and a transition to a just climate future, this
research serves an important role in informing how language may influence the
allocation of such scarce resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
multi-study, mixed methods approach, this project examines the use of one type
of imprecise language – buzzwords – within the context of environmental
conservation as a case study. It examines publications and engages with actors
from academia, non-governmental organizations, international environmental
conventions, and mainstream news media focused on conservation. Utilizing a
computational text analysis, a series of interviews, and an experimental survey,
this project seeks to: (1) develop and deploy a novel definition of buzzwords,
(2) identify a list of buzzwords used across the conservation sector, (3) build
an expert mental model of imprecise language and buzzwords, and (4) empirically
test the impact of buzzwords on decision-making. This research meets a growing
need to further our understanding of how language influences decision-making in
contexts characterized by urgency and uncertainty, while providing useful
information to the conservation community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.