* 2214168
* RAPID: The Impact of COVID on Childrens Well-being in 2022: Continued Evidence from the Understanding America Study
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Morgan Polikoff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/28/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has been a tremendous disruption to the education of U.S.
students and their families, and evidence suggests that this disruption has been
unequally felt across households by income and race/ethnicity. While other
ongoing data collection efforts focus on understanding this disruption from the
perspective of students or educators, less is known about the impact of COVID-19
on children’s prek-12 educational experiences as reported by their parents,
especially in STEM subjects. This study will build upon the team's prior
research from early in the pandemic. Researchers will continue to collect data
from families and aims to understand parents’ perspectives on the educational
impacts of COVID-19 by leveraging a nationally representative, longitudinal
study, the Understanding America Study (UAS). The study will track educational
experiences during the Spring and Summer of 2022 and into the 2022-23 school
year. The team will analyze student and family overall and for key demographic
groups of interest as schooling during the pandemic continues. This RAPID
project allows critically important data to continue to be collected and
contribute to continued understanding of the impacts of and responses to the
pandemic by American families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since March of 2020, the UAS
has been tracking the educational impacts of COVID-19 for a nationally
representative sample of approximately 1,400 households with preK-12 children.
Early results focused on quantifying the digital divide and documenting the
receipt of important educational services--like free meals and special education
services--after COVID-19 began. This project will support the continued targeted
administration of UAS questions to parents about students’ learning experiences
and engagement, overall and in STEM subjects. The team will conduct data
analysis and disseminate findings and results to key stakeholder groups.
Findings will be reported overall and across key demographic groups including
ethnicity, disability, urbanicity, and socioeconomic status. This project will
also produce targeted research briefs addressing pressing policy questions aimed
at supporting intervention strategies in states, districts, and schools moving
forward. All cross-sectional and longitudinal UAS data files will be publicly
available shortly after conclusion of administration so that other researchers
can explore the correlates of, and outcomes associated with,
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the DRK-12 program in
the Division of Research on Learning. The Discovery Research PreK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers,
through the research and development of new innovations and approaches. Projects
in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.