* 2214060
* BRC-BIO: Adaptive variation through space and time in American pikas (Ochotona princeps)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessica Castillo Vardaro, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 501,088.00

Environments around the world are rapidly changing. As a result, many animals
must either alter their behaviors or biology to adjust, move to a more suitable
area, or risk going extinct. Characterizing how animals changed in the past is
crucial to understanding risks they face in the present. A “space-for-time”
approach allows for investigation of how populations in dissimilar environments
differ in their biology. This then allows researchers to infer how they might
respond to future environmental changes. For instance, Yosemite National Park is
at high elevation and gets a lot of snow compared to the low-lying mountain
ranges of Nevada, which are relatively hot and dry. As Yosemite gets warmer and
drier, animals in that area may start looking and behaving more like the
populations found in Nevada. In contrast, a “temporal” approach involves
analyzing data from animals found in the same location but separated in time by
a century or more. By using natural history museum collections, this project
will employ both a space-for-time and a temporal approach with American pikas.
Pikas are small, temperature-sensitive, rabbit-like creatures that live in rocky
areas. The work aims to better understand how these populations have responded
to past changes with the goal of better predicting their response to current and
future environmental change. In addition, this project will provide research
experiences to undergraduate and master’s students from historically
underrepresented backgrounds. Finally, the researchers will collaborate with
local community college professors to develop material for biology
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research applies whole genome
sequencing and landscape genomics to analyze modern and historic museum
specimens of American pikas (Ochotona princeps). Importantly, the historic
specimens were collected prior to the onset of current, rapid climate change.
Specifically, this research will identify adaptive genetic variation along
spatial and temporal environmental gradients. It will examine associated
physiological pathways and investigate whether populations from different
genetic lineages have experienced parallel evolution for these traits. Finally,
the work will develop a panel of neutral and functional genetic markers to
noninvasively survey and monitor populations across the species’ range. Using
both a space-for-time substitution and a temporal framework across a broad
geographic area allows for more robust inference on the environmental drivers of
local adaptation. Furthermore, making spatial and temporal comparisons among
pairs of populations in divergent genetic lineages enables analysis of parallel
evolution. This research will be an important step in quantifying the
evolutionary response of a temperature-sensitive species to rapid climate
change. Likewise, it will significantly improve our ability to predict future
response and vulnerability of American pikas and species with similar
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.