* 2214633
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope with enhanced resolution, sensitivity, and speed to serve as a regional resource for research and education
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Klebert Feitosa, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 730,395.00

An award is made to James Madison University (JMU) to fund the acquisition of an
advanced light microscope system with enhanced resolution, sensitivity, and
speed to serve as a regional resource for research and education. The
instrumentation will expand the scope of research and education in multiple
departments at JMU, in neighboring institutions, and in the surrounding
community by enabling faculty and students to study microscopic biological and
physical processes at spatiotemporal resolutions exceeding those offered by
conventional light microscopes. JMU and its neighboring colleges are primarily
undergraduate institutions and are committed to engaging students in learning
through faculty-mentored research. Indeed, students are responsible for
approximately 90% of the total research use of the core microscopy facility. In
doing so, they not only conduct original research, but also become competent
microscopists. The funded microscope system will become a key component of the
core facility and will enhance student research training by exposing them to
advanced imaging technologies. This instrumentation will also benefit formal
upper-division courses at JMU such as Developmental Neurobiology and Biophysical
Chemistry by providing students with practical and theoretical education in
cutting-edge light microscopy techniques. Moreover, in an effort to expand the
impact on undergraduate research training, the investigators will develop a
scientific image data management training module, focusing on best-practices
that promote rigor and reproducibility in scientific research. The module
materials and outcomes will be disseminated to inform scientific data management
training in other sub-disciplines of science and at other institutions. Finally,
the microscope system will support general science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) education in the surrounding northern Shenandoah Valley region
through outreach to neighboring high schools and colleges. A new outreach module
incorporating hands-on classroom activities and a remote demonstration of the
new microscope will be developed to teach students the concept of size at the
micro-scale and will be offered through JMUâ€™s STEM outreach
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded microscope system will open new
investigative avenues for researchers at JMU and in the region by enabling the
study of biological and physical processes across broad spatiotemporal scales.
While it is useful to study processes within one size regime, it is also
essential to study how phenomena are integrated across spatiotemporal scales,
e.g., from cells to tissues, molecules to sub-cellular organization, rapid/brief
events to slow/long-lived behaviors. The funded microscope will enable the study
of how small-scale events and patterns combine to determine larger-scale
properties and will, in particular, enable the visualization of very small
features and fast processes that are beyond the sensitivity of conventional
light microscopes. It will advance the research programs of at least 16 faculty
across multiple STEM fields including biology, physics, biochemistry, and
science education. Projects that will be particularly impacted include studies
of: formation and refining of neuronal connections during development; cell
migration; materials that convert between liquid and solid phases depending on
physical confinement during flow; how neurons in the eye regulate non-image-
forming behaviors; bacterial biofilm structure and development; and cartilage
tissue patterning during development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.