* 2214065
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Village Organization in Non-complex  Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Robin Beck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,162.00

This project investigates the transition from seasonal to permanent settlement
among hunter-gatherers by studying how foraging populations organized their
settlement and social relations at large ceremonial centers. Ceremonial centers
with impressive monuments and extensive domestic zones have often been
interpreted as early villages, making them among the first permanent settlements
in their respective regions. Characteristics of early villages such as year-
round occupation, integrative social institutions, and incipient forms of
complex social organization usually developed in contexts of regional population
pressure and circumscription, which limited the ability of people to move freely
across the landscape. Limitations on mobility are thought to be a necessary part
of this process to counteract the pressure to disperse due to social conflict
that accompanies daily life in densely populated, permanent settlements.
However, Eastern North America seems to be an exception, as hunter-gatherer
populations in this region came together to form large, monumental centers
resembling villages in the absence of strong external constraints on mobility.
Does the emergence of hunter-gatherer ceremonial centers in Eastern North
America represent an alternative trajectory for the development of sedentism and
social complexity? Contemporary American society is subject to some of the same
tensions that characterized the beginnings of sedentary village life, such as
that between autonomy and communalism, making the topic of how and why people in
the past voluntarily aggregated into large, dense, and permanent social groups
an important area of inquiry. Research conducted as part of this study will
provide archaeological education and training opportunities for local volunteers
and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
hunter-gatherer ceremonial centers in Eastern North America to outline how the
process of settlement aggregation occurred and how it may have differed from
other world regions. The researchers will focus on one large ceremonial center.
This site witnessed the development of several large mound centers that have
been characterized as early villages. Despite its exceptional size, the site has
received comparatively little attention from archaeologists and the nature of
its settlement is still largely unknown. Integrating data from excavation,
radiocarbon dating, botanical analysis, and ceramic provenance will permit the
evaluation of differing models of settlement, mobility, and social organization.
These data will then be compared with other ceremonial centers and early
villages from North America and other parts of the world to better understand
the various trajectories that led hunter-gatherer populations to develop large,
permanent settlements and complex societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.