* 2214544
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biosocial Consequences of Food Insecurity Among Chronic Disease Patients
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Craig Hadley, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 22,528.00

Amid a rise in chronic diseases, there is a pressing need to understand how
social and economic inequalities impact disease management. As a fundamental
human need, food provides one valuable window into these dynamics. The
relationship between food insecurity and diet-related chronic disease is well-
documented, yet the pathways that underlie this relationship remain poorly
understood. This doctoral dissertation project aims to provide greater clarity
on this relationship by exploring food as a vehicle of both nutritional and
social significance in the everyday lives of individuals managing diet-related
chronic disease. In addition to providing scientific training for a graduate
student, this project involves cooperative institutional partnerships, which
broaden scientific participation and allow for insights and data to be directly
shared with those who shape clinical practice. The findings will be disseminated
widely to academic and non-academic audiences, health and nutrition
practitioners, and community organizations, with important implications for
improving clinical practice, nutrition counseling, and food security efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research applies a biosocial
theoretical lens to investigate 1) healthcare providers’ perceptions and
practices related to food insecurity and diet; 2) meanings patients attribute to
the lived experience of food insecurity; 3) patients' food access, preferences,
and choices; and 4) the effects of these factors on patients’ health outcomes. A
combination of qualitative and quantitative methods, including interviews with
providers and patients, structured surveys, and biological measurements (height,
weight, blood pressure, cholesterol, and glycated hemoglobin), will be used to
achieve these research aims. The study will be conducted in collaboration with a
rural community health clinic. This combination of theoretical approaches and
methods from nutrition and the social sciences provides a novel approach to the
examination of food insecurity and chronic disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.