* 2214279
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of children in driving language change in multi-ethnic communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Barbra Meek, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 7,988.00

Language change is constant and may be used to document how populations have
interacted with each other over time. How this arises varies across scenarios
and are subject to cultural and political interventions concerned with language
endangerment and revitalization. Yet, how terms like endangerment and
revitalization are defined with respect to language in different cultural
contexts remains poorly understood. Moreover, scientists know relatively little
about what role children play in enacting language preservation or endangerment.
This project fills this gap by investigating how language endangerment versus
vitality are measured and discussed in different contexts and how this
correlates to the ways children use language across settings. In addition to
contributing to training a doctoral student in scientific cultural anthropology,
the project cements relationships among multiple institutions of higher
education and disseminates findings broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on aspects of language that
are not considered to be endangered by international standards but are
considered at risk among native speakers. Data is collected through participant
observation with families and their children in homes and schools, as well as
recordings made of everyday language use. Surveys and semi-structured interviews
are used to investigate how linguistic practices have changed over time, and to
elicit beliefs about language use. The findings are complemented by analysis of
linguistic practices and discussions about the status of languages online, on
local television, and on the radio. The research provides a clearer
understanding of language change at different stages of shift and the social
factors influencing it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.