* 2214437
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The interaction of discourse status and memory retrieval in real time language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 16,814.00

This dissertation research project explores the cognitive underpinnings of how
humans read and comprehend sentences. More specifically, the project will
advance linguistic theories in semantics and pragmatics by investigating how
different types of linguistic information in a discourse context are represented
and processed. Results from this experimental investigation will inform our
understanding of the interplay between working memory and language and
psycholinguistics, and will potentially be of use to fields such as behavioral
marketing and journalism, where understanding one’s interpretation of rhetorical
and discourse structure is of crucial importance. The project will also enrich
the co-PI’s mentoring and managerial skills, and will provide undergraduate
assistants with valuable research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is comprised of multiple sentence processing experiments that will manipulate
relative clause types that differ in discourse status--appositive relative
clauses (ARCs) and restrictive relative clauses (RRCs)--to investigate the
organization and maintenance of discourse structure and information in working
memory. Multiple methods (self-paced reading and eye tracking) are deployed to
assess the impact of relative clause type on reading costs: Number agreement
attraction effects in ARC and RRC contexts are compared in Experiments 1–5;
processing costs for subject- versus object-relative clauses are investigated in
Experiments 6–7; and pronominal reference and presupposition resolution across
ARCs and RRCs is examined in Experiments 8–11. Findings will contribute to the
understanding of how discourse status impacts working memory retrieval in real-
time language processing, and will also provide insight for advancing linguistic
theories related to discourse structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.