* 2214604
* Identifying pathways to mitigate the negative impact of urbanization trends on croplands
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Patricio Grassini, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2026
* USD 129,017.00

The United States (U.S.) and China accounted for 40 percent of the global
increase in urban area during the past three decades. Through this process,
urbanization has appropriated millions of hectares of cropland. The overall
objective of this project is to identify pathways to reconcile urban growth with
crop production, while minimizing negative environmental footprint. The central
hypothesis is that current trajectories in urbanization are fostering cropland
expansion into less-productive marginal environments and promoting unsustainable
crop yield gains on existing cropland, both leading to higher negative
environmental impact. Specific aims are to (i) quantify long-term trends in
converted land (that was previously cropland and has changed to urban use) and
new cropland (due to expansion of cropland on acres not previously used for
crops) for key staple crops in U.S. and China, (ii) estimate potential
productivity and environmental footprint associated with converted and new
cropland for each crop, and (iii) explore future scenarios of land-use change,
crop production, and environmental impact for different trajectories of
urbanization, intensification, and climate change. To accomplish these aims,
remote sensing data will be used to investigate spatio-temporal trends in
urbanization and associated changes in planted area for key staple crops in the
U.S. and China, coupled with crop modeling and climate and soil datasets to
estimate the potential productivity and environmental footprint of the converted
and new cropland. The research will provide an assessment of urbanization impact
on area and production of key staple crops in each country and evaluate pathways
to reconcile urban growth with crop production via better land-use planning and
sustainable crop intensification in a context of changing climate and increasing
food demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an approach that combines use of
remote sensing, crop modeling, and spatial analysis, the project will contribute
in-depth understanding of current crop-specific dynamics in cropland conversion
for urban uses and the productivity and environmental footprint associated with
the converted and new cropland. It will also provide insights on the available
room to mitigate these impacts via sustainable crop intensification on existing
cropland. Findings from this study will serve as a foundation for future
regional studies assessing interactions between urbanization, food production,
and environmental impact. From a broader perspective, the research will increase
the scientific knowledge for regional modeling of agro-ecosystems and improve
current capability to inform land-use policy and prioritize agricultural
research and development programs for more sustainable urban-rural interactions.
U.S. and Chinese researchers with diverse racial and gender backgrounds will
work under the umbrella of this project. Several dissemination activities will
be conducted to communicate the research findings to the public, aiming to
increase societal awareness about urban expansion and the concomitant need to
protect croplands, which, ultimately, can help the U.S., China, and the rest of
the world meet the goal of improving food security and economic development
while protecting natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.