* 2214216
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-R: Dynamics and Mechanisms of Information Spread via Social Media
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Boleslaw Szymanski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2025
* USD 336,644.00

There has never been so much information available at everyone’s fingertips than
there is today. Unfortunately, with so much information comes a lot of
misinformation that can be spread to human populations and adopted by them as
the truth. Understanding how information flows and its impact on human behavior
is important for determining how to protect society from the effects of
misinformation, propaganda, and “fake news.” This project traces how information
spreads on social media channels and how ideas, opinions, and beliefs change as
they spread. Conducting this research requires combining concepts from
computational social sciences, computer science, sociology, and statistics to
understand the fundamentals of information spread in social
media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new approach to the study of
information diffusion that brings together several different mechanisms for
information flow. Together these are used to analyze how information spreads in
social media. The research has two main goals: First, it will spot and predict
opinion trends and identify users’ polarization on topics of broad interest to
society (e.g., climate change or the Covid-19 pandemic). Second, it will track
information propagation to understand its role in shaping opinion trends and
identify the factors that are important for its spread and adoption. The
researchers have access to a large amount of data that permits them to build and
test large-scale models of information diffusion. The outcomes of this project
include new computer algorithms that are capable of understanding information
flow in social media and new avenues for research in the science of information
spread and diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.