* 2214011
* Collaborative Research: From Culture to Child: How collective perceptions of affective divergence shape interracial relationships in middle childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kristin Pauker, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 195,626.00

Racial segregation, tension, and discrimination continue to persist in U.S.
society. This project examines how racial discord may spread from culture to
child. This project uses a new paradigm to examine how subtle--but recurring--
depictions of interracial discord on children’s television contribute to the
erosion of children’s interracial relationships in middle childhood (7 to 10
years of age). The proposed studies not only aim to identify a cause of
interracial discord among children but may also inform media based interventions
for improving children’s interracial relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on televised depictions of emotional discord in cross-race
interactions as one potential cultural source of racial bias. A preliminary
study documented how children’s television programming consistently depicts
"shared" expressions of emotion in same-race interactions but not cross-race
interactions. Exposure to this pattern of affective divergence may influence
children's interracial beliefs and behaviors. In three proposed experiments, the
investigators test this causal relationship using the cultural snapshots
paradigm. Children between 7 and 10 years of age are randomly assigned to view
brief television clips depicting (a) affective divergence, (b) affective
convergence (shared emotion in both same-race and cross-race interactions), or
(c) no humans (control). Exposure to affective divergence (relative to other
conditions) is expected to cause children to experience reduced interracial
empathy and increased negative expectations for interracial interactions. The
researchers predict that this latter effect will cause reductions in children’s
supportive and friendly behaviors toward other-race peers. The research team
will also assess moderator and mediator variables, allowing for nuanced
hypothesis-tests of this general prediction. Ultimately, these studies seek
critical information about the causes of racial discord in children and a
potential means for reducing such discord.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.