* 2214606
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual-Source Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractometer.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Emily Tsui, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 287,021.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Notre Dame is
acquiring a dual-source single crystal diffractometer equipped with high-flux Cu
and Mo microfocus X-ray sources, a CPAD detector, and a cryogenic device to
support the research of Professor Allen Oliver and colleagues Vlad Iluc, and
Emily Tsui. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The facility serves
as a regional XRD resource benefitting students and faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions within the state of Indiana with impacts outside ND
through active collaborations with researchers at institutions such as Tennessee
Tech University, St. Maryâ€™s College, Elizabethtown College, and the University
of Victoria, B.C., and maintains private sector affiliations. They have
developed international collaborations with colleagues from Chile, Canada, and
New Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. Research enabled by the instrument is focused on the
study and characterization of a wide variety of substances including enantiopure
and chiral organic compounds, drug precursors and other biologically important
molecules, organometallic and inorganic complexes and mineral-like materials.
Structure determination of metal complexes (e.g., catalysis), solid-state
materials (e.g., energy conversion), and absolute configurations of light-atom
molecules (e.g., natural products) is essential to drive research in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.