* 2214054
* PFI-RP: Advanced Membrane-Contact Reactor for Fuel Alcohol Productions from Distributed Resources
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Qisheng Ma, Power Environmental Energy Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnership for Innovation –
Research Partnership (PFI-RP) project is an efficient small-scale gas-to-liquid
(GTL) conversion technology for use with distributed waste biomass and “stranded
gas” resources. The conversion of "nuisance" or noxious gases emitted as waste
to valuable liquids is not presently available in the marketplace. Today, most
of the natural gas produced during the production of crude oil, also known as
“associated gas”, has to be flared. The flaring process destroys this
potentially important energy resource, while contributing to greenhouse gas
emissions and increasing public health concerns. Gasification of biomass with
the goal of producing liquid fuels/chemicals offers an opportunity for effective
utilization of this abundant and readily available renewable energy resource.
The current lack of advanced small-scale conversion technology has become a
bottleneck to continuous biomass utilization. Developing a small and profitable
gas conversion unit also offers an opportunity to produce methanol and other
value-added chemicals from alternative and renewable
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a highly-
efficient methanol production process from synthetic gas by employing a sweep
liquid-facilitated membrane contact reactor (MCR) system in which both the
reaction heat and the produced methanol are removed in situ. This process may
lead to a higher one-path conversion rate that overcomes inherent equilibrium
limitations. With excellent heat management features and enhanced single-pass
conversion rate, the proposed process may not require the energy-demanding and
technically-complex recycle step of un-reacted syngas, making it beneficial for
the utilization of distributed biomass and untapped natural gas resources. The
use of the MCR system avoids the direct contact of the sweep solvents with
catalysts, overcoming a key challenge related to industrial applications of
competitive reactive separation processes. In addition, the MCR configuration of
the system, which is equivalent to a “tube-and-shell” heat exchanger reactor,
allows for the effective removal of heat from the reactor environment via the
solvent sweep. Such a MCR-based methanol production process may have potential
for expanding the application of GTL technology to a growing class of
distributed-type applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.