* 2214726
* Adaptive Dependent Data Models via Graph-Informed Shrinkage and Sparsity
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Kowal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 287,536.00

This research project will advance statistical modeling and computing strategies
for dependent data. Dependent data are widespread and important. Many
socioeconomic, cultural, and political data are measured on spatial areal units,
most economic data are time-ordered and co-dependent, and modern monitoring
systems record social, environmental, and economic exposure data at near-
continuous resolutions. However, this growing abundance of dependent data has
outpaced the development of statistical methods and algorithms for such data.
The project will develop new statistical tools that will allow researchers to
extract reliable information and make decisions from such dependent data. The
methods to be developed will be motivated by specific, timely, and important
problems in the following areas: local elections and redistricting; inflation
modeling and forecasting; spatial pattern extraction for economic, health, and
urban data; and modeling of monitoring and exposure data. The project will
provide training and mentoring for undergraduate and graduate students, develop
publicly available software and visualization tools, and showcase local, state,
and federal government data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop new statistical tools to adequately capture a broad array of data
dependencies, provide computational scalability for massive datasets, and
leverage the dependence structures for more adaptive and localized estimation,
uncertainty quantification, and imputation of missing data. Unmodeled dependence
renders inferences suboptimal or invalid, resulting in underpowered analyses and
erroneous conclusions. In addition, dependent data are often high-dimensional
with substantial missingness, leading to significant computational and
statistical challenges. Within a Bayesian framework, the project will
simultaneously integrate the dependence in (i) the model for the signal to
provide smoothness and regularization, (ii) the accompanying shrinkage or
sparsity prior for enhanced local adaptivity, and (iii) the computational and
numerical strategies for scalable posterior inference. Dependence will be
encoded as a graph that links together observational units, such as consecutive
observations for time-ordered or functional data, adjacent pixels for image or
lattice data, and neighboring areal units for spatial data, among many other
examples. This graph-based formulation will lay the foundation to unify and
advance a broad collection of models, shrinkage and sparsity priors, and
inference algorithms for dependent data. The tools to be developed will be
customized for a variety of settings, including trend estimation and imputation,
shrinkage or sparsity priors, graph-informed regression analysis, factor models,
and discrete data, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.