* 2214493
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Co-curricular Service and Outreach Activities on Persistence and Success for Undergraduate Physics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tatiana Erukhimova, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2025
* USD 184,742.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying how undergraduate
student participation in informal physics outreach programs for K-12 students
affects their success as physics majors. Significant research efforts have
focused on improving retention in STEM in formal educational settings, such as
the classroom or laboratory, while the impact of student participation in
informal physics outreach programs remains unclear. Prior work suggests that
improving students' sense of belonging, defined by the feeling of being valued
and accepted as a legitimate member of their chosen scientific discipline can
reduce attrition rates and increase resilience, particularly among students from
underrepresented populations. Participating in outreach experiences may develop
skills and abilities beyond the focus of formal education, including
communication, teamwork, and creativity. The American Physical Society and
American Association of Physics Teachers have identified these skills as a high
priority for physics programs to prepare students for 21st century careers. Thsi
project intends to conduct a national survey of undergraduate physics majors to
assess student engagement in informal physics programs and to study how the
engagement is related to student success factors. The analysis of survey results
should inform a set of best-practice recommendations for physics departments for
improving outreach programs and transforming culture to help students
succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to study the impact of
informal, co-curricular physics outreach programs, which are often designed and
facilitated by undergraduate students, on students’ physics identity, retention
and persistence, sense of belonging, and the development of 21st century career
skills. Data will be collected via a survey instrument distributed to physics
programs at US colleges and universities. This project intends to create and
validate a new survey instrument with closed and open-ended questions to probe
students’ perceived value of the outreach experience and its impact on measures
of confidence, sense of community, ability to work in teams, competence in
communicating science, perceptions of ability to develop creative solutions to
problems and perceived impact of experiential and collaborative learning on
physics knowledge. The survey will be given to undergraduate students across the
US through the existing network of active Society of Physics Students chapters,
creating a large dataset that allows for an objective examination of how
outreach programs support undergraduate student populations, including those
traditionally underrepresented in STEM. Analysis of the survey responses will
explore the relationship of outreach activities to physics identity including
internal and external recognition as a member of the physics community, interest
and motivation in physics, beliefs related to performance and competency within
physics, confidence and physics self-efficacy, and desire to persist in the
field, as well as acquisition and development of career skills important to 21st
century careers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. This project
is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing
the quality of undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing associate’s or
baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.