* 2214913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: An Experimental Study of Confirmation Bias
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Emel Filiz Ozbay, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 19,313.00

Humans have proven to be far from objective when they assimilate information. As
various media and social media platforms have become deeply integrated within
our everyday lives, it has become more important than ever to understand how
people truly react to new information. Confirmation bias refers to the biased
treatment of evidence in favor of a certain hypothesis, and plays an influential
role in people’s information interpretation process. However, confirmation bias
is not fully understood as recent empirical research have produced mixed
evidence in regard to how confirmation bias is triggered and how it affects
people’s beliefs. This study will investigate, and provide more insight into,
how confirmation bias affects individuals’ abilities to update their beliefs
about probabilistic events when they are presented with information. The results
from this study will help policymakers design optimal policies that aid people
in forming correct beliefs, and prevent information sources from manipulating
people’s beliefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two forms of
confirmation bias: motivated confirmation bias, which refers to the biased
treatment of information that is motivated by underlying preferences, and
unmotivated confirmation bias, which refers to the biased treatment of
information that arises simply because the individual believes her hypothesis is
more likely to be true than alternative ones. This study will be among the first
to utilize a controlled lab experiment to separately identify, and examine the
potential relationship and interactions between the two forms of confirmation
bias. Identification of the biases lies within eliciting experimental subjects’
beliefs about probabilistic events, incentivized with a binary scoring rule, and
measuring their deviations from the Bayesian posterior beliefs. Separation of
the two forms of confirmation bias relies on varying the treatment variable that
is motivation. This study connects two topics that have attracted growing
attention – confirmation bias and motivated reasoning. Additionally, this study
will test the validity of a new theory-based framework for analyzing
confirmation bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.