* 2214998
* MRI: Development of a Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer Using a Laser Multicharged Ion Source
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Thomas Schenkel, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 610,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award will develop a secondary ion mass spectrometer with higher
sensitivity than current commercial instruments and also with better depth
resolution. Secondary ion mass spectrometry is used for chemical analysis of the
surface layer of solids with up to part per million sensitivity and nanometer
depth resolution. In this chemical analysis method, an ion beam is used to
remove material from the outermost surface of the sample. This beam is referred
to as the primary ion beam. Some of the removed materials lose electrons forming
secondary ions that escape the surface of the studied material along with
neutrals. These secondary ions are then analyzed to find their mass which yields
the material composition. An increase in the ratio of secondary ions to neutrals
increases the detection sensitivity and resolution. Current commercial secondary
ion mass spectrometers use singly-charged ions to remove molecules from the
surface of the sample. In this project, multicharged ions from laser ablation
will be used as the primary ions, which can enhance the ratio of secondary ions
to neutrals from the studied sample and, correspondingly, increase chemical
detection sensitivity and resolution. The developed instrument will enable the
chemical analysis of ultrathin layers used in nanoelectronics for high-speed
computers, advanced electronic devices, and sensors. The instrument will also
enable fundamental studies to better understand the interaction of multicharged
ions with materials, therefore, advancing the use of multicharged ions in
nanofabrication. At least three Ph.D. students will be involved in the
development of the instrument, while many faculty and graduate and undergraduate
students will utilize the instrument once it is commissioned. Also, over the
duration of the project, 20‒24 Old Dominion University undergraduate students
will participate in the project as part of their engineering and physics senior
projects, and 2‒4 University of California-Berkeley undergraduate students will
participate in the simulation of the ion beam components of the
instruments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a secondary ion mass
spectrometer (SIMS) with higher sensitivity than current commercial SIMS and
also with better depth resolution. The key technological improvement is the use
of multicharged ion (MCI) pulses generated from a compact laser ion source as
the primary beam. Current commercial SIMS uses singly-charged ions or clusters
for the primary beam, which causes secondary ion ejection by collisional
sputtering from the surface of a sample. Multicharged primary ions with high
potential energy cause potential energy sputtering in addition to collisional
sputtering, in which the ionization fraction for the secondary beam can be two-
to-three orders of magnitude higher than for singly-charged ions or clusters.
The higher ionization fraction results in a corresponding increase in SIMS
sensitivity and depth resolution. A pulsed laser will be used to ablate bismuth
or gold targets, producing an intense source of MCIs. These ion pulses will be
accelerated and shortened to a few nanoseconds. Then, a specific charge will be
selected and incident on the sample to be analyzed. A time-of-flight ion
spectrometer will be built to identify the mass of the secondary ions. The
instrument sensitivity, mass resolution, and depth and lateral resolutions will
be tested under static and dynamic SIMS. The MCI-SIMS will enable elemental
depth profiling of shallow-implanted dopants, identification of the composition
of the surface region of thin films and ultrathin layers with much reduced pre-
equilibrium region and mixing effects, and nanoscale ion implantation for
implantation-based quantum devices. The instrument will enable further research
on MCI interaction with surfaces and the study of synergy between MCI-surface
interaction and laser surface excitation. At least three Ph.D. students will be
involved in the development of the MCI-SIMS, while many faculty and graduate and
undergraduate students will utilize the instrument once it is commissioned.
Also, over the four years, 20‒24 Old Dominion University undergraduate students
will participate in the project as part of their engineering capstone senior
design and physics senior thesis, and 2‒4 University of California-Berkeley
undergraduate students will be introduced to particle-in-cell simulation as
undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.