* 2214463
* Fostering AI Literacy through Embodiment and Creativity across Informal Learning Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Duri Long, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,751,706.00

Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is in many of our everyday activities—from unlocking
phones to running Internet searches to parking cars. Yet, most instruction on
how AI works is only in computer science courses. The unique role that AI plays
in making decisions that aﬀect human lives heightens the need for education
approaches that promote public AI literacy. Little research has been done to
understand how we can best teach AI in informal learning spaces. This project
will engage middle school age youth in learning abouts AI through interaction
with museum exhibits in science and technology centers. The exhibits employ
embodied interactions and creative making activities that involve textiles,
music making, and interactive media. The research will build on three exhibit
prototypes that teach about concepts including bias in data in machine learning,
AI decision-making processes, and how AI represents knowledge. Female-
identifying and Title 1 youth will be recruited as participants during the
exhibit design iterations and testing. The project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will explore two key
research questions: 1) How can the design of interactive museum exhibits
encourage interest development in and learning about AI among learners without a
Computer Science background by using embodiment and creative making? and 2) How
do embodied interaction and creative making mediate learning about AI in
informal learning environments? The project will take a design-based research
approach, iteratively building on existing exhibit prototypes and testing them
in-situ with learners. Data sources and modes of analysis will include
retrospective surveys to assess interest, content knowledge gain, creativity,
learning talk analysis of audio recordings, and coding of embodied movements in
video recordings. Learning talk analysis will identify instances of joint
sensemaking during naturalistic interactions with our exhibit to reveal
connections between sensemaking talk; learners' behaviors and embodied actions
during real-time collaborative knowledge building; and outcomes in knowledge,
interest, and creativity measures as elicited in retrospective surveys. The ﬁnal
set of exhibits will be rigorously evaluated with over 500 museum visitors. The
key contributions of this work will include a set of rigorously tested exhibits,
publicly available exhibit designs, a set of design guidelines for developing AI
literacy museum exhibits, and an improved understanding of the relationship
between AI-related learning and interest development, embodiment, and
creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.