* 2214516
* Data Science Learning Experiences for Middle School-aged Girls in Informal Gaming Clubs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gary Goldberger, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,499,156.00

Data is increasingly important in all aspects of people’s lives, from the day-
to-day, to careers and to civic engagement. Preparing youth to use data to
answer questions and solve problems empowers them to participate in society as
informed citizens and opens doors to 21st century career opportunities. Ensuring
equitable representation in data literacy and data science careers is critical.
For many girls underrepresented in STEM, developing a "data science identity"
requires personally meaningful experiences working with data. This project aims
to promote middle school-aged girls’ interest and aspirations in data science
through an identity-aligned, social game-based learning approach. The goals are
to create a more diverse and inclusive generation of data scientists who see
data as a resource and who are equipped with the skills and dispositions
necessary to work with data in order to solve practical problems. The research
team will run 10 social clubs and 10 data science clubs mentored by women in
data science recruited through the University of Miami’s Institute for Data
Science and Computing. Participants will be 250 middle school-aged girls
recruited in Miami, FL, and Yolo County, CA, through local and national girls’
organizations. Youth will participate in a data science club and will learn key
data science concepts and skills, including data structures, storage,
exploration, analysis, and visualization. These concepts will be learned from
working with their own data collected in personally meaningful ways in addition
to working with data collected by others in the same social game eco-system. The
project will also develop facilitator materials to allow adult volunteers to
create game-based informal data science learning experiences for youth in their
areas. The project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments and is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST), which seeks to engage underrepresented students
in technology-rich learning environments, including skills in data literacy, and
increase students’ knowledge and interest in information and communication
technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will focus on two
primary research questions: 1) Across gameplay and club experiences, in what
ways do participants engage with data to pursue personal or social goals? 2) How
do gameplay and club experiences shape girls’ perceptions of data, data science,
and their fit with data and data science? The project will use design-based
research methods to iteratively design the game and social club experiences. To
ensure that uses of data feel personally and socially meaningful to young girls,
the virtual world’s goals, narratives, and activities will be co-designed with
girls from groups underrepresented in data science. The project will research
engagement with game data in two informal, game-based learning scenarios:
organic, self-directed, social play club, and structured, adult-facilitated data
science clubs. The research will use a combination of quantitative and
qualitative methods including surveys, focus groups, interviews, and gameplay
and club observations. Project evaluation will determine how gameplay and club
experiences impact participants' attitudes toward and interest in data-rich
futures. The project holds the potential for broadening participation and
promoting interest in data science by blending game-based learning with the rich
social and adult mentoring through club participation. The results will be
disseminated through conference presentations, scholarly publications, and
social media. The game and facilitator materials will be designed for
dissemination and made freely available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.