* 2214460
* Collaborative Research: Macroeconomic Implications of Economic Policy in Imperfectly Competitive Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* David Berger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 186,904.00

This project measures the macroeconomic consequences of imperfectly competitive
labor markets. In his 2022 AEA Presidential Address, David Card argued that
imperfect competition in the labor market is pervasive. Few firms dominate many
local labor markets giving them the ability to set wages and pay workers less
than their marginal product. Workers are often reluctant to search for a new
job, further reenforcing firms' market power. What types of policies can improve
outcomes in the labor market and what are their macroeconomic effects? This
project consists of a research agenda focused on this question. This project
builds on a tested quantitative framework for imperfect competition in labor
markets and then extends this framework to (i) account for empirical evidence
from applied microeconomic studies and our own empirical contributions and then
(ii) analyze policy. The frameworks developed in this project will generate
several public goods. First, the frameworks allow economists, legal scholars,
and policymakers to better inform minimum wage policy, merger guidelines, and
optimal taxation. Second, as part of this project's ongoing efforts to study the
distributional consequences of mergers, this project will develop a new set of
Census database linkages between the Decennial Census, the LEHD, and the LBD in
order to study the effects of mergers across race, gender, occupation and other
policy-relevant characteristics of workers. The codes for the models developed
in this project will be available online, and the Census maintains a repository
of our empirical analysis for all future researchers. Lastly, the models
developed in this project provide a set of theoretic and computational tools
that enable researchers to solve models of oligopsony quickly and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our agenda builds on our tested quantitative
framework for imperfect competition in labor markets. We propose four sub-
projects that apply and extend oligopsony models featuring rich worker and firm
heterogeneity to: (i) understand the capacity of minimum wage policy to retrieve
a portion of the efficiency losses due to wage setting power in the labor
market, (ii) study the trade-offs for antitrust policy in terms of productivity
improvements in output versus efficiency losses due to greater monopsony power,
(iii) describe and analyze a novel link between the design of income tax policy
and labor market efficiency while laying out a complete framework for analysis
of distributional consequences of monopsony, (iv) revisit all three policies
within a framework that allows for market power due to both `classical'
monopsony via preference heterogeneity, and `frictional' monopsony due to search
in a job ladder setting. In each case we either (i) provide new empirical facts
to test our new theory, or (ii) hold the new theory accountable to the most up-
to-date empirical evidence from the applied microeconomics literature, building
a bridge between quantitative and empirical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.