* 2214062
* Intelligent Biology and Medicine in 2022: Enhancing Interdisciplinary Education, Collaboration, and Innovation in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Zhongming Zhao, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 18,776.00

In the era of artificial intelligence and data science, covering data process
and standardization, algorithm and tool development, statistics, machine
learning and related approaches provide critical new opportunities for dealing
with the amazing data growth rate. This coupled with new technologies leads to
advances in health and biomedical research. The 2022 the International
Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) will be held August 7-9,
2022, led by a stellar field of keynote speakers to address themes of omics- and
data-based systems, translational science and personalized medicine. The
conference promotes extensive interaction and provides opportunities for junior
faculty and students to participate and learn.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The mission
of ICIBM is to promote information science, technology, and education to a great
variety of trainees and young investigators, including trainees, faculty,
teachers, scientists, and engineers, and to provide a forum for the cross-
fertilization of ideas. ICIBM will provide a forum to accelerate data science
method development and application, to explore complex and dynamic functions and
regulation in cellular systems and organisms, and to improve algorithms, deep
learning, computational tools, knowledgebase, and biotechniques for better
diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases. ICIBM 2022 conference programs
will include four distinguished keynote speakers, eminent scholars' talks, flash
talks for junior investigators, tutorial and workshop sessions, scientific
presentations, a poster session, and other activities. Top manuscripts will be
selected for special journal issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.