* 2214015
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Large: Runtime Programmable Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Aditya Akella, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2026
* USD 263,041.00

Programmability is fuel for network innovation. In today’s programmable
networks, new features can be easily developed without having to rely on vendor
support. However, deploying new features still requires fleet-wide maintenance
to avoid disruption because device reprogramming incurs downtime. This severely
constrains the speed of change, as maintenance operations require meticulous
planning well ahead of time. This project proposes runtime programmable
networks, where the end-to-end network infrastructure, vertically from the host
kernels down to the network interface cards, and horizontally extending across
switches to the other end of the network, can be reprogrammed on-the-fly without
packet drops and with strong consistency guarantees. This represents a major
leap from today’s programmable networks, which are reconfigurable at compile
time but become fixed functions at runtime after
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to this project's vision, FlexNet,
the network infrastructure provides a collection of basic utilities and, on
demand, extensions are partially reconfigured into the infrastructure by
injecting, removing, or overriding specific functions. This accelerates the
speed of delivering new features to end users, increases the manageability of
large networks by lowering the barrier for change, and creates new possibilities
unavailable in today’s programmable networks, such as powerful, dynamic security
defenses. With FlexNet, this project can summon security defenses into the
network precisely when needed. Defenses can migrate to the attack location or
replicate across the network to maximize their effectiveness. They can even
shapeshift in real time to mitigate changing attacks. When attacks subside,
these defenses can be soon removed from the network to reduce overhead. This
project aims to elevate network programming from a “one-shot” endeavor at
compile time to “continuous” activities throughout the lifecycle of the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to realize our vision, this project needs
to innovate across the stack. Concretely, this project proposes a four-pronged
approach to programing, compiling, verifying, and managing runtime programmable
networks end-to-end. First, runtime network programming requires controlling
disparate datapaths and their real-time changes as a whole, while ensuring
runtime portability across devices; thus, this project will develop a new
programming system. Compiling a whole-network program to a heterogeneous
substrate, while continuously reoptimizing for runtime changes, requires a new
compiler design. To ensure the safety of network changes, this project must
simultaneously innovate on runtime verification and validation. Finally, FlexNet
programs have dynamic footprints in the network—migrating, expanding, and
shrinking across devices—so this project needs a new management system to
control such unprecedented dynamics. This project will produce an integrated
platform upon which the FlexNet techniques will be evaluated comprehensively at
various scales and with diverse workloads. To achieve a wider community
engagement, this project will release software and hardware prototypes and
educational materials in open source, and by collaborating with industry
partners, this project will transition the FlexNet technologies into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.