* 2214441
* MRI:Acquisition of a Network Emulator for Cyber Security Research of Electric Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Janie Chermak, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 102,289.00

This NSF MRI project aims to seek funding for purchasing network communication
and cyber-attack co-simulation tool to increase the power grid’s cybersecurity
research capacity at the University of New Mexico (UNM) and its collaborators.
The project will bring transformative change to secure the national defense by
designing and creating cyber-attack detection and mitigation algorithms and
techniques for power grids. This will be achieved by utilizing the requested co-
simulation tool which facilitates high-fidelity and scalable modeling of cyber
systems. The intellectual merits of the project include performing cybersecurity
studies on the distributed control architectures, protection systems, advanced
metering infrastructure, and phasor measurement units. Moreover, the requested
co-simulation tool will be utilized to study the societal impacts of power grid
cyber-attacks. The broader impacts of the project include enhanced cybersecurity
research capability and competitiveness at UNM and its collaborators,
enhancement of existing and development of new courses, research involvement of
underrepresented students, and K-12 outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern power
systems are highly exposed to cyber threats due to the deployment of
communication and control technologies for different applications like microgrid
distributed control, energy management systems, as well as wide-area protection,
control, and monitoring. To perform research on the cybersecurity of a large-
scale cyber-physical system (CPS) like a power grid, it is impossible to apply,
study, and analyze cyber-attacks on a real system. To effectively study and
analyze cyber threats in power grids, a real-time hardware-in-the-loop co-
simulation platform that can simulate both the physical (i.e., power system) and
cyber (i.e., communication network) layers is of paramount value. The requested
co-simulation tool will provide us with a scalable solution to emulate the cyber
layer of power grids in a digital twin platform and conduct a variety of
different cybersecurity studies. The co-simulation tool will set the foundation
for extending collaborative research activities with industry, national
laboratories, and other universities in the area of power grid cybersecurity.
This tool will be utilized by multiple faculties and their students and
postdoctoral fellows across different institutions for education and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.