* 2214919
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing garden paths across dialects: A study of African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Anissa Neal, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,767.00

The United States is home to a large multi-cultural and multi-lingual
population. Many speakers interact with different languages and different
varieties of English daily. A lot of research has been devoted to understanding
how speakers of multiple languages, multilinguals, use their knowledge of
multiple languages to interpret language in context. But less is known about how
speakers who know different varieties of a single language ('dialects')
accomplish this. In this dissertation project, the researchers investigate
African American Language (AAL), a variety of English spoken primarily, but not
exclusively, by African Americans. The research investigates how speakers of AAL
understand sentences that use linguistic features that are present in AAL but
not present in Mainstream American English (MAE), the 'standard' dialect spoken
across the US. AAL and MAE overlap significantly, but there are specific
grammatical constructions where the two diverge. This project investigates when
and how AAL speakers use these dialect-specific constructions in different
contexts. Research into how AAL speakers use context to do this will shed light
onto how language processing proceeds in more naturalistic contexts, and will
also shed light into the usage of a variety of English spoken by a significant
portion of the United States' population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehension
of ambiguous sentences has been a central component of psycholinguistic research
for many decades. The classic demonstration of this is the 'garden path effect',
the finding that comprehenders encounter processing difficulty when ambiguous
sentences are disambiguated towards an unlikely syntactic structure. This
happens because comprehenders make active predictions about what syntactic
continuations are likely as they process linguistic input, with difficulty
occurring when those predictions turn out to be incorrect. The predictions
comprehenders make can be influenced by a variety of factors, such as word
frequency, plausibility, grammatical knowledge, and even social features of the
speaker. The current study uses garden path effects as a window into what
syntactic expectations AAL speakers have during language processing.
Specifically, this project employs visual-world eye-tracking to investigate how
these speakers use factors such as speaker voice and the presence of other
dialect-specific grammatical features to adjust their predictions about how a
sentence is structured. The specific structure to be investigated is the
phenomenon of contact subject relative clauses. In AAL, it is possible to have
sentence such as "Sally is the one (who) sent a letter to her mom" where the
"who" is optional. In MAE, in contrast, "who" is required. By investigating
whether AAL speakers interpret Sally as the sender of the letter or receiver of
the letter in a sentence like this, the researchers will be able to measure how
much speakers anticipate this construction in different contexts. This research
will help add to growing literature on how contextual factors (e.g., speaker
voice) influence on-going linguistic processing as well as adding critical
diversity to the psycholinguistic literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.