* 2214012
* PFI-TT: Injectable Cellulose-Based Hydrogels for Soft Tissue Bulking
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Steven Nicoll, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is that it may lead to the development
of injectable, plant-based materials to replace human soft tissues lost due to
disease (i.e., cancer), trauma, or inherited birth defects. Several natural and
synthetic materials have been used clinically for long-term tissue replacement,
but all have limitations, which include cost, safety, duration of effect, and
lack of reversibility in the event of complications. Over 430,000 tissue
replacement procedures are performed in the United States annually involving
commercially available semi-permanent fillers and fat grafts at a cost of over
$395 million, often with unsatisfactory results. The present application aims to
engineer a stable, yet reversible, injectable, soft tissue filler material from
the natural sugars found in plants. Successful completion of the project will
result in valuable proof-of-concept data demonstrating the safety and efficacy
of these plant-derived biomaterials in a small animal model, in advance of human
trials. As such, the proposed studies have the potential to improve the quality
of life for individuals suffering from a variety of conditions requiring safe
and stable tissue bulking materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
focuses on translating a novel injectable biomaterial derived from the plant
polysaccharide, cellulose, for long-term soft tissue reconstruction in humans.
Aging, trauma, and disease often result in the loss of dermal collagen and fat,
producing a deficit in the soft tissue. As a result, there is the need to
develop materials that safely and effectively restore areas of depletion.
Methylcellulose (MC) is an FDA-approved, water-soluble, cellulose derivative
that is biocompatible and inexpensive. The absence of the cellulose-digesting
enzyme, cellulase, in humans affords improved retention and mechanical stability
of MC in vivo, in comparison to other natural biomaterial fillers that are
susceptible to enzymatic activity. This proposal will examine the long-term
stability of in situ gelling MC hydrogels stabilized by dual thermal gelation
and redox-initiated crosslinking mechanisms in a small animal soft tissue
deficit model. The study design will also explore the use of cellulase
administration to safely and easily degrade the MC gels to correct for adverse
outcomes. Removal of injectable long-term implants without the need for surgical
excision would be highly beneficial for clinical translation; Moreover,
demonstration of reversibility will provide a distinct advantage over
competitors in this market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.