* 2214884
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Collective Action in State and Society
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Carol Shiue, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 19,946.00

Collective action can, in some cases, foment revolutions and precipitate
institutional change and new state formations. This project will investigate two
instances of collective action. The Co-PI will first investigate whether
differences in the historical capacity for collective action helps to explain
the effectiveness of a specific land reform campaign. The second project
explores the role of labor management and labor strikes. This project looks at
the development of labor strikes during a period when firm management methods
and union membership varied widely from firm to firm. Motivating questions
concern the role of foreign management and the role of capital adoption in
organized labor strikes, as well as the roles of industrialization,
globalization, and their interaction with organized labor. The two projects will
be of interest to a wide audience, and the lessons learned could be used to
understanding how collective action and collective organizations arise and
achieve cohesion in different times and places. The projects will also create
new datasets from the historical documentation of local histories, which is a
rich source of information about cultures and belief systems, and make them
accessible to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the co-
PI will collect historical data on major episodes of collective action in recent
economic history in order to obtain a better understanding of the role of
collectivist organization and its historical determinants. The first project
will result in the digitization of millions of death records from the Chinese
Civil War (1945-1949) and statistics at the county level from local historical
gazetteers. These data will be used to assess (1) the impact of land
redistribution to farmers at a regional level (2) the influence of different
factors, such as opportunity cost, free-rider problems, and coercion on land
reform; (3) the impact of regional collective organization on the effectiveness
of land reform and war mobilization. This project contributes to the economic
literature by examining how land reform played a role in civil conflicts in
China. In the second project, the co-PI will digitize detailed records of labor
strikes in the 19th century when the historical context allows us to observe a
diversity of foreign-owned and Chinese firms, communist versus non-communist
union sponsorship, and strike outcomes. These data will be used to assess the
factors that contributed to the probability of success in a strike. Using a
simple framework that hypothesizes strikes are most likely to succeed where the
workers have the largest potential gain over collective action, the project
exploits the rich historical data to factors that may have contributed to the
explanation of employers' or employees' bargaining power at the firm or industry
level. The results will contribute to our understanding of how Chinaâ€™s early
experience with labor management fits in with the global history that has so far
tended to focus almost exclusively on Europe and the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.