* 2214017
* A new approach to computational model evaluation: Benchmarking against infant experimental data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Megha Sundara, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

This project is about determining when English- and Spanish-learning infants
become sensitive to the sequencing of consonants and vowels in their native
language. For example, English words can begin with ‘st’ (as in ‘state’ or
‘stamp’), while Spanish words cannot. The researchers will use experimental
findings from studies on infants to evaluate predictions made by computational
models that represent different hypotheses about how infants learn language.
This comparison will provide insight into the specific mechanisms used by
infants. In addition, uncovering the detailed timeline of when infants tune into
sound sequencing restrictions will enable a better understand the roots of the
difficulties some children with communication disorders have in learning sound
sequencing. A secondary outcome of this project is the greater inclusion of
Spanish-speaking populations in developmental research, which is important given
the changing demographics in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
years, many computational models have been proposed to explain how infants learn
language. Multiple model architectures typically achieve similar levels of
success when benchmarked against the performance of adult speakers. In this
project, computational models will be evaluated directly against infant behavior
in order to provide additional criteria for distinguishing between them. More
specifically, the researchers will evaluate whether infants’ knowledge of sound
sequencing restrictions in their native language can be supported by the output
of different computational models of word segmentation. In addition to providing
a detailed timeline of the acquisition of sound sequencing restrictions and a
better understanding of the developmental mechanisms used by infants, this
project will also serve as a template for future studies that aim to compare
computational models directly against infant behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.