* 2214057
* PFI-TT:  Development and Evaluation of an Absorbable Surgical Adhesive Patch to Reinforce Internal Suture Lines in the Urinary Tract
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Ali Khademhosseini, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be to create a flexible,
bioabsorbable, internal suture reinforcement device to significantly reduce
post-operative complications and readmissions, decreasing hospitalization costs,
and improving patient quality of life. The use of this device is anticipated to
decrease total complications and readmissions by 20%, resulting in an average
savings of $5,600 per procedure. This project will both evaluate the materials
on tissue and digitally model tissue and materials for rapid device prototyping.
Surgeon feedback will be used to further iterate the prototype to ensure that it
is a readily applied closure system, optimized for surgeon
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a biodegradable,
implantable, surgical closure device designed to consistently and reliably
support and secure suture lines thereby promoting wound healing, regardless of
tissue quality and/or surgeon experience. The initial development of this device
will be for urinary tract reconstructive (UTR) procedures, including complex
lower UTR (LUTR) such as bladder reconstruction, tissue closures following
prostate surgery, and upper UTR such as ureteral procedures to facilitate
drainage following kidney reconstruction. LUTRs, for example, involve long
suture lines requiring significant skill and experience to minimize the post-
operative complications. Additionally, in these cases, the tissue is often
suboptimal resulting from aging, radiation, or fibrosis. The suture
reinforcement device developed seeks to provide a technical solution designed to
reduce complications and readmissions by reinforcing tissue and removing
localized tension from the suture lines. The device will be designed to support
the established method of tissue closure by reinforcing the suture lines already
utilized by the surgeons. The proposed device would not significantly change the
closure workflow and thus, would minimize any potential learning curve
associated with the use of the device maximizing
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.