* 2214063
* STTR Phase I:  Integrated Chemical and Supercritical Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* NAVIN MANJOORAN, SOLVE TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project to address a technological innovation in energy storage.
Energy storage is a critical technology for the energy utility industries
offering more reliable and affordable energy supply, a cleaner environment, and
stronger energy infrastructure. Specific advantages of energy storage include a
robust energy supply during storms and other natural disasters, aiding response
and recovery efforts. This technology may also keep power plants and the grid
functioning in times of physical and cyber-security threats. The project enables
excellent grid stability and power plant flexibility to accommodate the growth
of various renewable energy technologies and the expansion of electrified
transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase 1 project proposes
to address a technological innovation in energy storage. The reduced Levelized
Electricity Cost due to this storage can directly benefit the end-users and
broader population in the US and across the globe. Notably, existing mechanical
storage technologies have many attractive features such as short to mid-load
response, black start, robust, long life, safety, and efficiency, but these
technologies are not good at meeting scalability, reliability, and compactness
metrics. On the other hand, chemical storage has mid-load response, long-
lifetime, and scalability, but is inadequate with regard to safety, short-load
response, black start, and efficiency. The proposed solution allows energy
companies to explore low-cost technologies that can offer better performance and
can be easily integrated with existing fossil power plants. The primary
innovation combines mechanical and chemical storage technologies so that the
resultant technology adapts the best features to provide enhanced performance at
a cheaper capital, operational, and maintenance cost. The hybrid mechanical and
chemical system proposed here uses supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) as the
mechanical storage component, while chemical storage is achieved using natural
gas or hydrogen. This proposed technology is referred to as an integrated
chemical and sCO2 energy storage (ICsCO2ES).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.