* 2214939
* Physics-informed Learning for Dynamical Systems from Scarce Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ufuk Topcu, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2025
* USD 443,285.00

This award will support research that aims to develop trustworthy artificial
intelligence functionality for systems with a physical embodiment, e.g., robots,
unmanned vehicles, and infrastructure networks. While modern learning-based
techniques offer unprecedented capabilities for nonlinear modeling and control,
they often rely on excessive amounts of data and computing power and fail to
meet safety specifications. This research will develop a new breed of learning
techniques that effectively leverage existing knowledge, such as that based on
the laws of physics. The resulting techniques have the potential to help safely
deploy learning-enabled functionality with reasonable data requirements and
calculated risks in nominal and off-nominal situations. Therefore, the research
will help create an advantage for the U.S. in developing artificial intelligence
while informing the public about the inherent risks. This research will bridge
several disciplines including dynamical systems, control theory, deep learning,
optimization, and applied mathematics. The award will support the training of
students from diverse backgrounds and equip them with a mindset of inclusion
necessary to counter the increasingly interdisciplinary challenges society is
facing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning-based techniques offer new capabilities
to model unknown dynamical systems and, in turn, facilitate predictions of
future values of interest, synthesize control strategies, and verify safety of
the closed-loop system. On the other hand, when employed for dynamical systems
with a physical embodiment, purely data-driven methods can result in poor data
efficiency, fail to generalize beyond their mere training domain, and even
violate the underlying laws of physics. These deficiencies become particularly
emphasized when the training dataset is relatively small. The central thesis of
this project is that the effective inclusion of a-priori knowledge into learning
can significantly improve data efficiency and model generalization to previously
unseen regions of the state space. It focuses on physics-informed learning in
two settings with severe data scarcity: The first is on learning after an abrupt
change in the dynamics during operation where learning is limited by data
available essentially from a single trajectory. The second is on training deep
neural networks for dynamical systems using a “handful” of system trajectories,
matching, or exceeding, the accuracy of conventional, merely data-driven deep
learning methods with multiple orders of magnitude fewer trajectories. While the
suitable learning artifacts, and the expectations from learning, are different
in these two settings, the type of, and means for incorporating physics-based
knowledge into learning are based on similar
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.