* 2214235
* Direct Thermoacoustic Cooling of Cryogenic Hydrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Konstantin Matveev, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 396,819.00

To address climate change, Humanity must reduce reliance on fossil fuels and
find alternative ways to generate energy for industry, transportation, and
consumers. Hydrogen, when produced using renewable energy sources, is considered
as one of the most promising fuels for the future, and does not emit harmful
pollutants when reacting with oxygen. However, being the lightest element,
hydrogen in the gaseous form requires large containers for storage and is
considered impractical for many applications. Liquid hydrogen is a very
attractive compact energy source, but it can exist only at very low
temperatures. Current cooling techniques for both liquefaction and storage of
hydrogen are rather inefficient. To help make the hydrogen economy viable, a
potentially efficient novel acoustic method for coupled cooling-conversion of
cryogenic hydrogen is explored of this project. The accompanying educational and
outreach activities aim at improving engineering education by developing
materials for energy-related courses, summer programs for K-12 students,
professional short courses, and a textbook on cryogenic hydrogen
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The necessary steps to prepare hydrogen for
liquefaction and subsequent storage in the low energy state include cryogenic
cooling and spin-conversion. These processes can be potentially combined by
employing thermoacoustic heat pumping in a porous matrix which will also serve
as a catalytic bed, accelerating conversion of flowing orthohydrogen into
parahydrogen. The exploration of this combined process and associated thermal
transport, fluid flow, quantum transitions, dynamic regimes, and system
engineering constitutes the intellectual significance of the proposed research.
Modeling efforts will include development of a reduced-order framework for
analysis of thermoacoustic-catalytic systems for cooling cryogenic hydrogen and
setting up high-fidelity computational simulations, while incorporating models
from different scientific and technical areas. Experimental systems will be
designed, built, and tested for analysis validation and practical demonstrations
of novel methods for cooling cryogenic hydrogen. Results and products generated
in this project will help establish methods for practical design of efficient
cryogenic hydrogen-based energy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.