* 2214999
* The Effectiveness of Drones, Air Power, and Modern Coercion
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jacob Aronson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 09/30/2025
* USD 418,437.00

Countries have a compelling interest in combatting state and nonstate opponents
who threaten them or their allies without the need to deploy significant ground
forces. Large ground commitments are slow, generate political costs, and can
limit the ability to respond flexibly to or deter near-peer competitors.
Offshore coercion—air/missile strikes (a) launched from remote bases that (b) do
not hold territory—provides a lower-cost way to advance these interests.
Unfortunately, existing work provides little reason to be optimistic about its
utility: airpower is viewed as a cheap signal that is effective only when used
to support capable ground forces. This work, however, studies old technology and
frequently relies on inferences from very few cases. The development of new
cross-country data, theory, and generalizable empirical results provide new
insights on modern means and strategies of armed coercion. New data and findings
on how combatants produce, respond to, and mitigate coercion also advance the
study of armed conflict, including its duration, severity, and outcome, and the
occurrence of harm to civilian populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies the effect of: (a) the development, threat, and/or deployment of
offshore military capabilities in interstate disputes; and (b) offshore missile
strikes on non-state armed activity during intrastate conflicts. The study
generates cross-country data of offshore coercion, theory on offshore coercion
and its impact on conflict dynamics, and new quantitative and qualitative
results. These data, covering 2001-2021, include dyad-month information on
offshore coercion used during interstate disputes by six countries, and grid-
month information on offshore strikes used during intrastate conflicts by
fifteen states. The PI uses matching, fixed effects, and placebo and sensitivity
tests to account for observed and unobserved confounding. Furthermore, the PI
uses process tracing to examine the causal mechanisms at work in offshore
coercion processes. Project outputs advance research on armed coercion (1) by
contributing to a research agenda on how changing military tactics and
technology affect the use and utility of armed coercion, (2) by advancing
understanding of counterinsurgency, and (3) by distinguishing tactical vs.
strategic effects associated with non-territorial coercive activity, rebel
territorial control, and civilian targeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.