* 2214248
* Using Administrative Data to Study U.S. Private Business Investment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ellen McGrattan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 279,847.00

This award funds research that seeks to shed light on private business
investment. Privately-owned firms account for over half of US business net
income and are central to studies of economic growth, wealth, and public
finance. Yet little is known about their activities-most importantly, the
investments these businesses make to generate significant incomes and wealth for
their owners. The primary reason is that most private-business assets are
intangibles that are self-created by the owners and do not appear on any balance
sheet until the businesses are sold. Data from sales of businesses show that
these assets account for most of the purchase price and include intangibles such
as customer lists, trade names, workforce in place, know-how, and goodwill. The
overall goal of the project is to develop new theory that can be used to measure
these latent investments and ultimately to study their role for tax
administration and policy design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project would advance
the state of our empirical knowledge in two ways: (1) by constructing
longitudinal panels of business and their owners in order to track business
activities over time and (2) by quantifying the role of business investments in
generating significant incomes and wealth for these businesses and their owners.
The current state of knowledge about private business investment is lacking
because it is based on business surveys with limited longitudinal panels and
limited information on business assets or transfers. The projects would advance
the state of our theoretical knowledge by developing theory that explicitly
incorporates self-created intangibles that are transferable upon sale, and
theoretical predictions that can be directly tested by comparing simulated tax
filings to actual ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.