* 2214747
* Sex Estimation in Forensic Anthropology: Taking a Legally-Informed Approach to Method Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Kate Lesciotto, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2025
* USD 220,679.00

The goal of forensic anthropology is to assist in medicolegal investigations,
typically involving decomposed or skeletal remains. When the remains belong to
an unidentified decedent, the first step is to construct a “biological profile,”
in which the estimation of sex is a crucial component. Accuracy in sex
estimation increases when both metric (e.g., the length of a bone) and
morphological (e.g., the shape of a bone) data are used and when multiple
skeletal elements are assessed. There are currently no methods for sex
estimation that meet both of these criteria. Forensic anthropologists are often
called upon to testify in legal proceedings and provide expert evidence;
however, the field of forensic anthropology lacks an assessment of how sex
estimation methods have been evaluated when the admissibility of such evidence
is challenged, resulting in little guidance on which methods forensic
anthropologists should use and how to develop improved methods. There are
currently 13,885 individuals listed as “unidentified” in the National Missing
and Unidentified Persons System, including 796 individuals for whom sex is
listed as “unsure.” This research will produce a new method for sex estimation
that meets legal admissibility standards and additionally can accommodate the
wide range of remains that are recovered (e.g., only a skull versus a complete
skeleton), with the ultimate goal of reducing the number of unidentified bodies
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine metric and
morphological data from multiple skeletal elements into a single prediction
model that will satisfy key legal considerations during evidentiary challenges,
while improving accuracy and reliability. A framework for method development
will be created that incorporates (1) legal perspectives on the admissibility of
expert witness evidence and (2) forensic anthropology perspectives on methods of
sex estimation to reduce barriers for adopting a new method. Using this
framework, skeletal data will be collected and integrated into a prediction
model, using the novel Mixed Cumulative Probit algorithm, and will be
disseminated as a free, open-access web-based graphical user interface available
to all forensic anthropologists. This innovative approach will result in a
single, statistically valid sex estimation method that can accommodate both
continuous and ordinal data, conditional dependence, heteroskedasticity, and
missing data and therefore be used in the vast majority of forensic anthropology
casework. By using legal admissibility criteria as guidelines, the resulting
model will also be robust to evidentiary challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.