* 2214481
* Development and Research on Engaging Smartphone Simulations in Introductory College Astronomy
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Lee, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,344.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
understanding of astronomy concepts. Each year over 300,000 students take
introductory college astronomy, many of whom are not STEM majors. It is
important for these students to understand the vital role that science plays in
society. Active learning experiences using a set of twelve new smartphone
simulations will be developed, focusing on topics commonly taught in
introductory astronomy that are well suited for visualization. The simulations
will contain embedded questions that instructors can assign to students. The
project team will observe and characterize student usage of the simulations,
solicit feedback from the students, and use the results to refine the
simulations. Extensive research will be conducted to evaluate the impact of the
simulations on students’ content knowledge and attitudes toward science. The
simulations and project results will be widely disseminated through the
astronomy education website at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, journal
articles, and workshops at professional conferences. All simulations will
include Creative Commons licenses and made publicly available via the UNL
astronomy education website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
help students learn astronomy concepts using simulations designed for their
smartphones. The topics will include seasons and daylight hours, lunar phases,
absorption spectra, blackbody spectra, sunspot rotation, star brightness,
stellar evolution, spectroscopic binary stars, galactic rotation curves, the
condensation sequence, tidal heating, and nuclear fusion in the sun. The project
will address three research questions: 1) how does the use of smartphone
simulations influence undergraduate students’ attitudes related to astronomy
(and science in general)? 2) how does the use of smartphone simulations
influence undergraduate students’ conceptual understanding related to astronomy?
and 3) what affordances and constraints of smartphone-based simulations impact
undergraduate students’ attitudes and conceptual understanding related to
astronomy? The research will use a sequential embedded mixed methods design,
where the quantitative phase will serve as the primary source of data
collection, informing the qualitative phase. In the initial quantitative phase,
surveys will be given early in the semester assessing student content knowledge
garnered from simulation use and their attitudes toward astronomy and science in
general. This data will establish baseline conceptual understanding and student
attitudes towards astronomy. Analysis of these data will guide the subsequent
qualitative data collection by informing the selection of participants for
interviews. The interview protocol will focus on student attitudes towards
astronomy and the value and relevance of using smartphone-based simulations
while learning astronomy. The project team will develop a coding scheme to
characterize the specific and general ideas contained within the data, analyze
students’ coded responses, include collected classroom observations, and create
hypothetical cases representing archetypes of various student viewpoints. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.