* 2214342
* A Biosocial Study of Client Outcomes in Probation and Parole: The Role of Officer Stress and the Officer-Client Relationship
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Frances Chen, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 09/30/2025
* USD 473,167.00

Nearly 3.9 million adults are under probation and parole (i.e., community
supervision) in the United States, more than double the incarcerated population.
About one-third of the prison population are persons on community supervision at
the time of the event leading to their reincarceration. Probation and parole
officers (PPOs) are the frontline workers in community supervision and are
important agents of change for client outcomes. This project studies PPO-related
factors, specifically PPO stress and PPO-client relationship that can inform
interventions targeted at PPOs to better prepare them to improve community
supervision outcomes. A high-quality PPO-client relationship is considered one
of the Core Correction Practices, highlighting the prominent position of the
PPO-client relationship in practice and its importance as the delivery mechanism
for interventions. PPOs assume dual roles of law enforcer and social worker to
ensure public safety and clients’ successful reentry. With such complex job
roles come with various stressors including physical threats and emotion
exhaustion. To be an effective delivery mechanism for interventions, the PPO-
client relationship requires deliberate cultivation by PPOs, and PPO stress can
impede these efforts. This project will contribute to the knowledge of how to
reduce recidivism and facilitate the reintegration of the millions of former
offenders, outcomes that, in turn, would reduce societal costs linked to
reincarceration and failure of reintegration. As criminal justice interventions
aiming to reintegrate former offenders all involve personal relationships
between an agent who delivers the intervention and a client, this project
contributes to the larger and broader issue of how the agent's stress affects
the agent-client relationship and, consequently, the intervention's success. The
project will increase partnership between academia and agency to inform practice
and promote the development of students from underrepresented groups to engage
in interdisciplinary research of high policy relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers adopt a biosocial perspective to
investigate the impact of PPO stress and PPO-client relationship on clients’
outcomes. They will use a concurrent multi-method panel design and gather data
from 150 PPOs and their 750 high-risk clients in the Georgia Department of
Community Supervision (DCS) every 6 months for 4 waves. The researchers will
collect saliva samples (for stress biomarkers) and survey data (for self-report
stressor sources and PPO-client relationships) from PPOs; construct the clients'
reintegration and recidivism outcomes from agency records. Objective measure of
PPO-client relationship will be derived by observer ratings from video
recordings of PPO-client interactions, part of DCS's routine data collection.
The researchers will also explore the utility of using novel technology that
implements a widely used facial coding system to process clients' facial
expressions of emotions during interactions as a proxy for relationship quality.
Multilevel structural equation modeling with lagged outcomes will be used to
address the research questions. Findings will fill in a significant knowledge
gap regarding the effect of PPO stress on clients’ recidivism and reintegration
outcomes and generate knowledge regarding effective delivery mechanisms for
criminal justice intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.