* 2214473
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Comparative genomics of the capitulum: deciphering the molecular basis of a key floral innovation
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* John Burke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 636,422.00

Sunflowers, daisies, and their relatives belong to a family of plants that make
up ca. 10% of flowering plant biodiversity and include numerous species of
horticultural, medicinal, and industrial value. This group of flowering plants
also contains economically important food crops including artichoke, lettuce,
safflower, and sunflower. It is considered one of the most successful plant
families due to its large size and global distribution. Key to the success of
the family is its inflorescence (a capitulum or flower head) which resembles a
single, large flower but is actually an aggregate of many small flowers. This
unique floral structure plays an important role in pollinator attraction and is
a major determinant of yield in many of the family’s crop species. Despite the
importance of the capitulum, little is known about the genes involved in its
development. Understanding how inflorescences develop has the potential to
improve food security through optimization of floral structures for yield in
crops, and by accelerating progress toward new crop development. This project
will increase available genomic resources for the family and result in the
development of novel tools for gene editing in the family. This work will shed
light on the genes involved in the development of the capitulum inflorescence in
an economically important family and provide valuable information that will
facilitate efforts for optimizing inflorescence architecture in related crops.
This project will provide educational opportunities for diverse students and
researchers at multiple training levels, through directed efforts to recruit
individuals from traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates comparative genomics, inflorescence
developmental transcriptomics, molecular evolutionary analyses, and functional
approaches to decipher the genomic basis of a key floral trait – the capitulum –
in the sunflower family (Asteraceae) and related flowering plant lineages. This
project will enable the testing of hypotheses related to the role of gene
duplication and genome evolution in driving evolutionary novelty, the
evolutionary forces involved in the origin of the capitulum, and the
repeatability of the evolutionary process across plant lineages. The integrated
approach will enable the testing of predictive hypotheses about inflorescence
development in Asteraceae and related flowering plant lineages. The primary
scientific goals are to: (1) decipher the molecular basis of the Asteraceae
capitulum using comparative transcriptomic approaches; (2) determine whether the
independent origins of capitula arose via common evolutionary processes and
genomic mechanisms; and (3) analyze the functional role of key capitulum genes,
targeting established stem cell regulatory genes and candidates identified
through comparative/evolutionary genomic analyses. This project will generate
high-quality genomes and curated inflorescence transcriptomes for multiple
species complemented by comparative genomic and evolutionary analyses. These
resources and the resulting data will be disseminated via peer-reviewed
publications and public presentations and will be made freely available via
deposition in public repositories and databases including the National Center
for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive (NCBI-SRA;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), Phytozome (https://phytozome-
next.jgi.doe.gov/), the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;
http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), FigShare (https://figshare.com/), and Dryad
(https://dryad.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.