* 2214793
* The Economic Consequences of the Rise in Capital Flows
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Loukas Karabarbounis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 441,000.00

This project will analyze the origins and consequences of capital allocation
across countries. There are four broader impacts of this work. First, the
project aims to develop new economic frameworks for the determination of
international capital flows. Second, the project aims to provide summary
statistics and other usable information from a comprehensive dataset on
international security holdings at the firm and investor level. Third, the
project will disseminate its findings to policy makers and the academic
community through papers, reports, presentations in conferences and seminars,
and writings in online blogs. Fourth, the project will train graduate students
in the field of international finance and macroeconomics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While great progress has been made in understanding capital flows
using aggregated data, our project aims to use more disaggregated data from the
Federal Reserve System in order to provide further insights on the motives,
channels, and distortions that affect the map of capital flows. We will use the
disaggregated data to inform and further develop economic theories of the joint
determination of asset prices, exchange rates, and capital flows. An innovation
of the project will be the use of the disaggregated nature of data to match
security-level information with data on investor characteristics and firm-level
balance sheet data. The dataset will paint a more comprehensive picture of the
global asset holdings of U.S. investors and foreign U.S. liabilities and analyze
more systematically the implications of increased capital flows for global
financial markets. It is important to relate asset holdings to individual
characteristics given the large heterogeneity of investors in terms of
investment strategies, business models, and asset demand elasticities and the
large heterogeneity of firms participating in international financial markets in
terms of size, exporting, tangible and intangible investment, pricing, and
production structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.