* 2214788
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter to Establish a Flow Cytometry Core Facility at Loyola University Maryland
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Christopher Thompson, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 412,470.00

An award is made to Loyola University Maryland to acquire a fluorescence-
activated cell sorter (FACS) instrument to establish a new flow cytometry core
facility and enhance the existing microscopy core facility. A FACS instrument is
capable of measuring multiple fluorescently tagged molecular and cellular
properties in cells simultaneously and separating individual cell populations
according to these properties from a mixed population. This powerful technology
will provide valuable training for undergraduate students enrolled in five
Maryland colleges and universities, as well as undergraduate students who come
to Loyola from across the US for training in research techniques each summer. In
addition, Loyola will develop a summer program for underrepresented students
from local area high schools to gain exposure to the FACS instrument and related
research. To further engage with the local community, the cell sorter will be
accessible to a business incubator for biomedical startup companies to advance
research and development of novel cell-based technologies. All these activities
will contribute to an enhanced scientific and technology-based environment and
economy in Baltimore and the surrounding region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow
cytometry core facility will serve to support and enrich existing faculty-led
research involving undergraduate research students at multiple colleges and
universities, including Loyola University Maryland, Goucher College, Notre Dame
of Maryland University, Towson University, and Washington College. The FACS
technology will enable faculty and students to engage in varied research
projects including control of DNA packaging for gene expression in determining
cell fate, the interplay between the gut microbiome and the endocrine system,
the effect of complementary and alternative medicines on immunity, the impact of
heavy metal exposure on DNA repair and toxicity, and the role of cell cycle
checkpoint factors in genome integrity and programmed cell death. The addition
of the FACS technology will serve to advance the objectives of each of these
projects by allowing for the collection of more complex and specific molecular
and cellular data, and by allowing for the creation of cell lines specifically
selected for their particular properties for future experimentation.
Furthermore, there is the potential to aid in development of novel technologies
and therapeutics from collaborations with startup and small biotechnology
companies. Results from research projects utilizing the FACS instrument will be
communicated to the scientific community through peer-reviewed publications with
undergraduate co-authors and presentations at regional and national scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.