* 2214320
* RAPID: STEM faculty support to address impacts from COVID-19 on Tribal Colleges and Universities Program institutions
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Paula Roth, Keweenaw Bay Ojibwa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 02/28/2023
* USD 169,465.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education, and sustainability of
capacity gains is significantly enhanced by retaining the talent of credentialed
STEM faculty. This project aligns directly with that
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coronavirus pandemic of 2020 caused major
disruptions to institutions of higher education. However, for tribal colleges
and universities, whose core operating funds are directly aligned with student
enrollment, drops in enrollment equate to loss of funding. To mitigate against
detrimental effects on STEM instructional capacity, this award will support the
position of one full-time STEM faculty member, as well as other resources to
maintain Keweenaw Bay Ojibway Community Collegeâ€™s STEM program as it recovers
from the impact of the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.