* 2214926
* Rapid-scan Polarimetric Radar Data Collection and Analysis of the Wind Field in Severe Convective Storms and Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2025
* USD 438,686.00

The main purpose of this project is to use an advanced, mobile, rapidly-scanning
Doppler radar to collect data in severe convective storms in the Plains region
of the U. S. during the spring, with the objective of analyzing the data to
learn more about why tornadoes form and what the detailed wind structure is of
both the tornadoes and their parent storms. The results may lead to improved
prediction of severe convective storms and the hazards they produce, thereby
promoting public safety. It may also help structural engineers to design
buildings more resilient to high winds. This project will also support graduate
student education; it is expected that the students will ultimately enter the
workforce and contribute to societal goals either through their own research
activities or through operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, a
mobile, rapid-scan, X-band (3-cm wavelength) polarimetric Doppler radar (RaXPol)
will be deployed to collect volumetric data in supercells, with the objective of
documenting tornado formation and structure, especially at low altitudes.
Comparing theoretical models of the structure of tornadoes and how they evolve
with those found in nature will enhance our understanding of tornadoes. Datasets
collected in previous years will be analyzed with the same objectives. In
particular, a dataset that documented the genesis and evolution of both a
cyclonic and anticyclonic tornado in a supercell in northwestern Kansas on 24
May 2021, including a simultaneous video of where the radar was looking, will be
studied. The detailed structure of the rare, anticyclonic tornado will be
studied to see determine the wind field in the boundary layer, since the vortex
passed almost directly over the radar. In addition, existing polarimetric
spectra collected last year in supercells will be analyzed and more datasets
collected in an attempt to determine if more information can be obtained about
the nature and distribution of hydrometeors within storms; these spectra have
the potential for increasing our understanding of the production of cold pools,
which is known to affect tornadogenesis, and also increase our understanding of
the formation of hail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.