* 2214634
* SBIR Phase II:  High Surface Area (HSA) Intraluminal Cryoablation for the Treatment of High-Risk Patients with Gallstone Disease
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Matthew Nojoomi, ICTERO MEDICAL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2024
* USD 966,649.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of the first minimally
invasive cryoablation solution to treat high-risk patients with gallbladder
disease. The current gold standard for treating gallbladder disease is surgical
removal of the gallbladder. While this procedure works well for healthy
patients, the use of general anesthesia has been shown to increase complications
in elderly patients with underlying chronic medical conditions, leading to a
$675 million cost to the US healthcare system each year. Furthermore, patients
too sick for surgery have no definitive treatment options, underscoring the need
for a safer alternative. Phase I efforts demonstrated the ability to safely
deliver cryoablation energy via a minimally invasive catheter system to
chronically defunctionalize porcine gallbladders without removal. Phase II
efforts will focus on product development of the cryoablation system and
optimization of clinical delivery parameters. The goal of the technology is to
allow clinicians to provide their patients with the benefits of surgery, without
the risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project proposes to continue the development of a minimally invasive
cryoablation system capable of safely and effectively targeting the gallbladder.
Initial testing of the cryoablation system has demonstrated the ability to
uniformly generate lethal cryoablation temperatures (&lt;-20â„ƒ) across the
gallbladder lumen, leading to durable gallbladder scarring and
defunctionalization in porcine animals up to 60 days post-procedure. Key
technical objectives of this project are to develop the industrial design of the
introducer, cryoablation catheter, and control system for improved clinical
usability and manufacturability, to further test and characterize clinical
delivery parameters to inform treatment planning, to improve sensor reliability
and control system response time to optimize safety profile, and to validate the
integrated system in vivo to demonstrate system performance with optimized
dosing parameters. The system will be evaluated in an advanced benchtop model
gallbladder under a thermal load, ex vivo gallbladder tissues, and an in vivo
chronic animal model to optimize and validate the cryoablation catheter and
integrated control system. The anticipated result of this project is a
clinically viable gallbladder cryoablation system with established clinical
delivery parameters and dosing guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.