* 2214240
* DDRIG in DRMS: Exploring the role of existential fear appeals and social attachments in natural hazard risk assessment and behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Gerard Kyle, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 17,574.00

Climate change is a worldwide threat for both the individual and humanity more
broadly. According to the most recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, we have to immediately and rapidly reach net zero carbon
emissions to avoid many of the worst effects. Determining how to motivate the
public to pursue carbon mitigation will therefore be essential for policy
makers. This project studies the value, measured by willingness to pay, placed
on climate change mitigation in an experimental setting. In particular this
project focuses on the way information about climate change is presented to
people (i.e., framing) in the context of social preferences). The research
studies how social preferences influence willingness to pay and, further, how an
individualâ€™s social preferences influence the impact of framing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framing used in this experiment mirrors one of the
real world characteristics of climate change. Developed nations pollute the most
per capita, but developing nations are the most exposed to negative effects from
climate change. Some participants receive framing emphasizing the risks from
climate change to themselves directly, whereas others receive language
emphasizing the risk to those in developing nations. The hypothesis is that the
former framing may be more motivating to self-regarding individuals, whereas
individuals who are more strongly concerned with others' welfare are more
motivated by the latter framing. Results from this experiment help to inform
policy discussions. The findings, for example, may be useful to policy makers
trying to word a referendum. Environmental activists may also find the results
helpful in tailoring their messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.