* 2214866
* RUI: A Mosaic Model of Host-Microbe Thermal Relationships
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Franziska Sandmeier, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 713,098.00

Ectothermic vertebrate animals, such as fish, amphibians, and reptiles, show
both adaptation to temperature in their environments and the ability to
acclimate to changes in those thermal conditions. Similarly, their pathogens and
parasites are also adapted, and have the ability to acclimate to changing
environmental temperatures. Reptiles are the ectothermic animals most closely
related to birds and mammals, but exactly how their immune systems react across
widely varying body temperatures is not precisely known and has impacts for
conservation as well as a general understanding of physiological reactions to
infection, such as fevers and hypothermia. This project will quantify how
temperature effects one of the most basic functions of the immune system,
phagocytosis, or the engulfment of harmful agents and pathogens by white blood
cells. The desert tortoise will be used as a study organism, because prior
research showed that phagocytosis by a wide variety of white blood cells -
including lymphocytes - is important in limiting respiratory pathogens.
Therefore, the influence of a wide range of temperatures on white blood cell
activity, bacterial growth, and their interactions will be quantified.
Phagocytic lymphocytes exist across all classes of ectothermic vertebrates, but
their role in limiting disease has not been quantified across varying body
temperatures - despite the likely importance to conservation, medicine, and food
production. This project engages a large number of undergraduate and Masters
students at a Hispanic-Serving Institute which supports a student body that is
traditionally under-represented in STEM fields and experiences financial
hardship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on quantifying seasonal
thermal performance curves of phagocytic cells (heterophils,
monocytes/macrophages, B1 lymphocytes) in tortoises, microbes (total and the
tortoise-specific bacteria Pasteurella testudinis), and their interaction
(bacteria-killing activity). These assays will be quantified in vitro, and we
will also compare them to in vivo responses, which further can be influenced by
physiological changes in the organism, such as stress responses. Because
phagocytosis by B1 lymphocytes is a process that is not well understood in
ectothermic vertebrates, mechanisms (engulfment, acidification, bacteria-
killing) across sub-populations of phagocytic leukocytes will be quantified. The
prediction is that tortoises are in fact a “mosaic” of leukocytes, with
different thermal performance abilities, to protect the animals across a wide
range of body temperatures. Viewing ectothermic animals as not just warm or
cold-adapted, but composed of cells with different thermal preferences,
represents a paradigm shift in ecological immunology and will help form a
greater understanding of animals’ responses to changing environmental
conditions. This research has wide-ranging impacts on topics as broad as the
conservation of biodiversity, management of changing host-pathogen systems, and
therapies to maintain health in animal populations. The paid opportunities
offered to both Masters and undergraduate students will increase representation
of minorities in STEM and will strengthen our departments’ goal to increase
experiential learning in our curriculum. Collaboration with the local Nature and
Discovery Center will allow research students to act as role models and mentors
to more than 1,500 grade school students enrolled in public schools in Pueblo,
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.