* 2214689
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Sound Change in an Understudied Language: A Sociophonetic Study of Age and Locality Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Charles Chang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 16,781.00

Language change is a fact of life, and among the various types of sound change,
vowel merger has featured particularly prominently in linguistic research. Most
research on vowel merger has focused on well-studied Indo-European languages
such as English, addressing questions related to the production and/or
perception of once-distinct vowels that are becoming less distinct (for example,
many speakers of US English no longer produce a distinction between the 'cot'
and 'caught' vowels, but some of these speakers can nevertheless perceive the
distinction). However, investigating the dynamics of vowel merger in less-
studied, and non-Indo-European, languages is important to understanding vowel
merger because they often contain vowel features that are absent from well-
studied languages and, thus, provide new insights into how vowels can change
over time. Using a mixed-methods approach, this project examines a case of vowel
merger observed in an under-studied language, which contains a vowel feature
absent from Indo-European languages. The findings of the project contribute to
scientific knowledge of language variation, contact, and change in a
multilingual, understudied society, of the relationship between patterns of
language variation and the social and attitudinal associations of speech, and of
the basis for identifying vowel mergers in languages with unique vowel features.
By collecting speech production and perception data across a range of speaker
ages and localities, the project also has implications for speech-language
pathology, language pedagogy, speech recognition technologies, and forensic
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores patterns of variation
that have been implicated in previous cases of vowel merger but focusing on a
rarer case of vowel merger. In particular, the project examines whether
demographic and social factors, such as age, gender, and locality, help predict
the extent of merger in this case; whether a vowel merger in production
corresponds to one in perception; and whether a vowel merger that is apparent
according to the traditional vowel height and vowel backness dimensions also
appears consistently in other, less frequently examined acoustic measures. The
project addresses these questions by collecting production and perception data
from two different communities (urban versus rural), including adolescents (ages
10-18 years), younger adults (19-39 years), and older adults (40+ years).
Production data come from conversational interviews and a picture-naming task;
perception data come from a listening task. Audio recordings from the production
tasks undergo acoustic analyses, which help determine whether there is a vowel
merger in production and support exploration of additional diagnostics for vowel
merger. Study participants also complete a detailed questionnaire that includes
questions about language/dialect contact and language attitudes. The project
results form the basis of the first open-access corpus of the language being
studied, a tool for language researchers and a source of information about
various speech norms in an under-studied language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.