* 2214013
* PFI-RP: Smart Seizure Prediction System based on AI-enabled Implantable Sensor Networks
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* David Frakes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to provide a better quality life for
patients affected by neurological disorders for whom antiepilepsy drugs are not
effective. While the technology will focus on novel treatments for drug-
resistant epilepsy, a number of additional medical applications, including the
treatment of patients with cardiac pacemakers, Parkinson disease, or post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) could be possible. According to the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC), 1.2% of the US population (about 3.4 million people) has
active epilepsy with more than 65 million people affected globally. While
epilepsy patients have benefited from Implantable Medical Devices (IMDs), none
of the current Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved neurostimulators that
are used to alleviate seizure intensity in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy
offer preventive treatment or well-in-advance, accurate, predictive alerts. This
project may enable medical professionals to accurately predict a seizure so that
patients could take precautions and avoid adverse outcomes such as serious
injuries or death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will enable in-situ
smart medical inference via embedded Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms for
patients affected by neurological disorders not treatable with antiepilepsy
madications. The treatment may eliminate the need for subcutaneous wiring and
highspeed through-body wireless links, offering a safer and more energy
efficient solution. Currently, commercial neurostimulator systems use wired
leads from a subcutaneous generator to send electrical signals to the targeted
stimulation site. This wiring is a major cause of post-operative complications.
Additionally, most of these systems are open-loop and have limited edge-
computing capabilities. They require significant manual clinician input to
adjust their response parameters and some still use continuous stimulation since
they cannot predict a seizure. This project may improve deep brain and other
neurostimulation technologies by developing intelligent and wirelessly-powered
implants with embedded, in-situ, AI processing. This development may remove the
dependency of the prediction models on external cloud computing, which requires
transmission of a steady stream of data from implantable sensors to external
devices. Wireless connectivity, re-chargeability, and re-programmability will be
added to the system through low-power ultrasonic waves. This innovation may
eliminate the needs for subcutaneous wiring between electrodes and implants and
for large, implanted batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.