* 2214203
* Affective Virality on Social Media: The Role of Culture and Ideal Affect
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Brian Knutson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 549,926.00

Social media platforms allow people around the world to express themselves and
communicate with others more quickly than ever. While this convenience and speed
has benefits, it also has psychological and societal costs. For instance,
research on social media users in the United States (US) suggests that
expressions of positive emotions (e.g., happiness) on social media can make
other users feel depressed, anxious, and that they are "missing out," while
expressions of negative emotions (e.g., disgust, fear, and anger) can increase
the spread of misinformation and intensify political polarization. Combating
these potential costs requires understanding the unique cultural and emotion-
content signatures of social media use. In the US, users post more positive
emotional content, and negative emotional content is strongly associated with
misinformation and political polarization. This research tests the hypothesis
that these emotional patterns reflect American cultural values in general and an
American emphasis on positivity in particular. To test these culturally-embedded
predictions, the research examines the prevalence and spread of emotional
content on social media in the US and Japan. Research findings can inform the
development and deployment of social media tools to combat the harmful effects
of emotional content on users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research specifically
examines the prevalence and spread of emotional content on social media and its
association with the well-being of users, susceptibility to misinformation, and
political polarization in the US and Japan. Study 1 uses computational methods
to compare the spread of emotional news posts in US and Japanese social media.
Studies 2a-b use survey and experimental methods to examine how users' cultural
values influence the prevalence and spread of emotional content. Study 3
examines a potential remedy, testing whether a tool that allows users to control
their exposure to emotion content on social media can increase their well-being,
decrease their susceptibility to misinformation, and increase their empathy with
political outgroups. These studies contribute to the development of defenses to
protect against the negative effects of social media
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.