* 2214386
* The Computational Social Science Network (CS2N)
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Christopher Bail, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 424,815.00

This project creates a research network, resources, and a series of workshops
designed to incubate research within the interdisciplinary field of
computational social science. Addressing global pandemics, rising inflation, and
other pressing challenges demands a deeper understanding of how to analyze the
massive amounts of data generated by social media sites, mobile devices, and the
large-scale digitization of administrative and historical archives.
Computational techniques are vital to derive social science insights from such
data, but interdisciplinary collaborations between social scientists and
computer scientists remain in their infancy. These collaborations are vital not
only because social scientists must learn how to use new techniques, but also
because these techniques have generated pressing new questions about ethics and
how technology can exacerbate social conflict or create barriers for economic
mobility. By developing capabilities for research in computational social
science, this project promises to have far-reaching effects furthering the
cutting edge of social science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a
pilot initiative that has trained more than one thousand junior scholars in
sociology, political science, social psychology, economics, psychology, law, and
many other fields. It does so through five activities: a) creation of eleven,
in-person events designed to seed research across disciplinary lines and expand
access to training in computational techniques—particularly to members of groups
that are under-represented in the field; b) formation of an online community
where scholars can continue such cross-disciplinary research endeavors and share
open-source materials for research and teaching; c) hosting an advisory council
of leading scholars from a range of social science fields who will guide the
evolution of the program over the next three years; d) creation of a sustainable
administrative infrastructure to support the continued evolution of this effort;
and e) implementation of a rigorous evaluation plan to assess the impact of this
effort across multiple NSF social science programs—and particularly those who
work or study at Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.