* 2214021
* Collaborative Research: Foundations of programmable living materials through synthetic biofilm engineering and quantitative computational modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Joern Dunkel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 211,846.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Why can a tree self-grow into a complex
shape and even heal if you break off a branch, while one’s furniture needs to be
crafted and be repaired when damaged? Questions like this guide the future
vision of ‘programmable biomaterials’ – moving beyond the traditional
‘nonliving’ materials humans have been utilizing for millennia. Wouldn’t it be
exciting to just grow a self-healing table? Recent discoveries in biology and
inventions in the field of bioengineering suggest that such a vision could
become a reality in the not-too-distant future. Toward this goal, this project
will modify microscopically small bacteria so that they can selectively stick
together in desired macroscopic patterns and structures – similarly to
differently colored Lego Bricks. The materials properties of macroscopic
biomaterials grown from such bacteria can then be to tuned, for example, they
could be hard like wood or more malleable like clay, and they could even be able
to rapidly change between hard and soft. And then there are the truly novel
biomaterials aspects: As these cells can still divide and grow and move – this
macroscopic material could then change its shape and/or intelligently respond to
external forces. Combining experiments and simulations, the researchers will
investigate how such biomaterials can be realized and programmed. This project
also includes outreach activities that will enable local school children to use
bacteria and light in order to grow and pattern such bacterial
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The ability
to engineer functional multicellular biomaterial is currently very limited as
suitable biomaterial components and self-assembly algorithms are lacking. In
nature, many bacterial species organize into biofilms that perform complex
cooperative functions, ranging from synthesis and transport of chemicals to
directed 3D self-assembly and self-repair. Based on previously synthetic
bacterial adhesins developed by the researchers, this project will now integrate
a synthetic cell-cell adhesin logic with self-replicating swarming bacteria and
establish the foundation for programmable biomaterials. The team combines
biophysical modeling and synthetic biology to study these multicellular
materials. The project is structured in four aims: (i) Development of
bioengineering tools to enable control over deposition and assembly of bacterial
cells to generate ‘material blocks’, (ii) patterning of such blocks into sub-
tiles with distinct tile-interfaces in between – in order to achieve future
spatial separation of different functions, (iii) develop modeling approaches
that can predict the starting conditions required for these bacteria to generate
a material that is patterned in the desired way, and (iv) take such blocks and
have them self-assemble in a rational manner into larger-scale 3D living
materials. The researchers will work also with local science teachers and
educational professionals to implement and evaluate the use of simpler versions
of such biomaterials in schools with a focus on underrepresented minorities. The
students will fabricate and pattern simple bacterial materials themselves.
Furthermore, they will model the dynamics if these systems with a web
applet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.