* 2214324
* Collaborative Research: A Geochemical Approach to Quantifying the Magnitude of Strain and Fluid Flow along the Subduction Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrew Smye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 518,605.00

Earth’s largest earthquakes occur along the megathrusts (the subduction plate
interfaces) that separate rigid tectonic plates in subduction zones. The
accumulation and release of elastic strain along these plate interfaces is
predicated on the “healing” of the interface after the large earthquakes. This
project will characterize the chemical and mechanical processes that control
this healing during the time between earthquakes. Observations of ancient
subduction interfaces, now exposed on land, will be used to inform a numerical
model for slip and fluid flow. Together, these approaches will allow the
investigators to determine how subduction zone processes impact the spatial and
temporal patterns of earthquakes—an important step in assessing the hazards
associated with active subduction zones. The study includes support for an
early-career faculty member, a Ph.D. student, and nine undergraduates. Six of
the undergraduates will be recruited from University of the Incarnate Word, an
undergraduate body that serves a local Hispanic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises a structural and
geochemical investigation of two exhumed terrains that preserve a record of the
physical and chemical conditions relevant to the plate interface of the global
array of active subduction zones. Combined, the Shimanto belt in Japan and the
Kodiak Accretionary complex in Alaska, form a composite record spanning depths
from 8 to 20 km and peak temperatures between 150 and 350˚C. Electron-
microscope-based elemental mapping of samples collected during several field
campaigns will enable quantification of mineral phases and their redistribution
with progressive strain. Combined cathodoluminescence mapping, electron
backscatter diffraction, and fluid-inclusion microthermometry will constrain
paleotemperatures and finite strain, and identify deformation mechanisms.
Quantitative estimates of strain rate will be derived by combining strain
magnitudes with field observations of shear zone thickness and present-day
estimates of plate convergence rate. These measurements and observations will be
used to inform a numerical model that parameterizes the effects of seismic slip,
fluid flow and interseismic restrengthening on the temporal and spatial
distribution of earthquakes on the plate interface. The multidisciplinary
workplan is designed to address the following fundamental questions: Q1) What
are the magnitudes of volume strain and shear strain associated with
interseismic deformation? Q2) Is there a balance between dissolution along the
scaly fabric and precipitation of minerals within cracks in blocks? Q3) What are
the relative contributions to quartz vein formation of local diffusive mass
transfer of silica versus the influx of dissolved silica by an externally
derived fluid? Q4) How does partitioning of deformation mechanisms vary from the
updip to the downdip ends of the seismogenic zone?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.