* 2214269
* MRI: Development of a Telemetered Seafloor Seismic Observatory (TeSSO)
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* John Orcutt, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,008,556.00

A traditional ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) is deployed from a ship, settles on
the seafloor, and then records signals from earthquakes and other seismic
events. The recording occurs remotely and autonomously, where the scientist has
no access to the data until the instrument is recovered during a follow-up
station visit. Often, a scientist has to wait for more than a year to analyze
the collected data. For earthquake and tsunami monitoring purposes, this is much
too long to conduct useful, and often critical, short-fuse research. This
project, will engineer an acoustic modem gateway between the OBS and a wave
glider on the sea surface to ultimately transmit data from the seafloor all the
way to the desktop of a data analyst in near-real time. The OBS will transmit
low-rate data (1 sample per second) to shore continuously. A novel engineering
aspect of this project will be the possibility of two-way traffic, i.e. a data
analyst can request a snipped of high-rate data (50 samples per second)
immediately after an interesting event. A new-generation high-quality seismic
sensor will be used on the newly developed shielded OBS package that will allow
the recording of seismic signals from the tidal band (several hours) to high
frequencies limited only by the sampling rate. The shielding of the seismic
sensor will significantly reduce ambient noise contamination caused by deep-
ocean currents. Ultimately, the new technology will provide a stepping stone to
a long-duration (several years) multi-node mini array of OBS's on the seafloor,
serviced by several concurrent wave gliders that visit stations in turn to
transmit data back to shore.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
the design, construction and testing of a Telemetered Seafloor Seismic
Observatory (TeSSO) comprising a very-broadband ocean bottom seismometer and a
differential pressure gauge. The SSO will be equipped with an acoustic
micromodem and is linked through a wave glider that facilitates a Surface
Communications Gateway (SCG) with shore-side mission control via acoustic and
satellite services. The wave glider will cruise on the surface and relay
buffered 1 sps data from the SSO via satellite to shore-side mission control. A
new two-way data traffic capability will allow shore-side researchers to order
specific higher sample-rate data snippets (50 sps) in case an interesting
earthquake or other seismogenic event occurs. This project draws on past
expertise gathered from the 2013 ADDOSS project that provided wave-glider-based
near-real time access in a one-way fashion, where the ocean bottom seismometer
sent data autonomously. Since then, significant improvements in technology (e.g.
3rd generation wave glider, low-power broadband seismometers, and ‘smart’ data
loggers) have occurred. The realization of TeSSO relies critically on
engineering design and development to assemble off-the-shelf components. Two
short sea trials will help optimize the instrument package and the SCG. On a
third trial, the wave glider will transit between two close-by SSOs and transmit
data on an alternating schedule. This will lay the ground work for a system of
multiple SSOs that are served in near-real time by a fleet of wave gliders.
TeSSO will be able to address some, but not all, items on a growing wish list
compiled by data users from both the global seismic networks but also an
increasing number of passive seismic deployments in the
oceans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.