* 2214958
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: DRMS: Social Signaling and Health Risk Mitigation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Prabhat Barnwal, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 39,095.00

Communities can mitigate the impact of environmental disasters by sharing
resources. This becomes critical in low-income settings where formal insurance
and state capacity are limited. How to encourage and sustain resource sharing
within communities after they have faced a natural disaster becomes an important
question for mitigating the disaster’s impact. Using a community-level approach
to the problem, this study evaluates whether socially rewarding the households
-- who have shared their resources with other community members -- can motivate
other households to share resources as well. This approach highlights the idea
of engineering social relationships to achieve a cost-effective solution to the
critical environmental problem.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers study this
question in the context of naturally occurring arsenic contamination in
groundwater. Arsenic's adverse impact on adults' and children's health is well
established. Yet a significant population across the world, including in the
USA, is drinking from wells with high arsenic. About a third of more than 10
million private wells have high arsenic in the country. The top-down solution –
usually deeper public wells or piped-water supply – is far from universally
available. The level of contamination often varies from household to household.
This idiosyncratic feature suggests that even in the most severely contaminated
regions, there are a decent number of safe wells that can be potentially shared.
Indeed, several studies have shown that some but not all households who own safe
wells share their wells with their neighbors. The project studies ways to extend
the sharing further by making the positive social images of the existing sharers
more salient. Specifically, this project investigates whether social-image
compensation can sustain the private provision of safe drinking water. The
treatment effect of the social reward is identified through a cluster-randomized
controlled experiment. The study explores the question of the extent social
incentives can extend cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.