* 2214955
* Commemorating 20 Years of ADVANCE: Design Thinking Sessions for a Digital Exhibit and Archive
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Michele Wheatly, Wepan Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,922.00

This award will convene members of the ADVANCE community to develop and launch
prototypes of an exhibit and archive commemorating 20 years of NSF ADVANCE. The
in-person focus groups will take place at the 2022 ARC Network Equity in STEM
Community Convening, which serves as the biennial meeting of the ADVANCE
community, with the virtual focus group immediately following the Convening. The
meetings will be conducted as collaborative brainstorming using design thinking
to seek broad input on content creation, distribution, and evaluation for the
exhibit and archive. Inputs gleaned from the 2022 Community Convening will be
refined afterward through an online focus group and participatory webinar to
reach those members of the ADVANCE community who were not in attendance. In this
way the broader ADVANCE community will co-create the framework for the archive
and thereby generate shared ownership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this conference proposal lies in its focus on rendering visible the
contributions of the diverse individuals that have designed, implemented,
evaluated, and researched ADVANCE projects over the last 20 years. This effort
is designed to capture and share the contribution of these teams and individuals
to gender equity work in STEM. This project will also share knowledge on how
organizational and institutional change occurred as a direct result of NSF
ADVANCE awards. The creation and dissemination of this digital archive is
intended to enhance the impact of all ADVANCE projects by highlighting the
diverse composition and participation of people in these activities. This
includes capturing the longitudinal career impact on people of having
participated in ADVANCE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.