* 2214631
* Frequency-Comb-Enabled Intelligent Sensing in Millimeter-Wave and Terahertz
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aydin Babakhani, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

Silicon-based integrated circuits for generating and detecting millimeter-wave
(mm-wave) and terahertz (THz) electromagnetic waves have enabled a variety of
new technologies in radars, security, imaging, and spectroscopy. The objective
of this project is to develop a novel integrated radar to perform broadband
coherent sensing over a wide range of mm-wave/THz frequencies. This research
project will result in enhanced intelligent sensors that can be trained to
recognize certain objects with specific properties. The mm-wave and THz
electromagnetic waves can penetrate through objects and provide us with depth
information as well. A real-time intelligent sensor, which is trained with mm-
wave/THz footprints of numerous objects, has a great potential to be used for
many applications such as security imaging/sensing and autonomous driving. THz
imaging and sensing systems not only can bolster homeland security with accurate
detection of hidden objects and explosives, but also can prevent tens of
thousands of lives lost in car accidents every year with increased accuracy of
collision avoidance automotive radars. In addition to pushing the boundaries of
THz technology, this project will train undergraduate and graduate students to
become experts in THz research and make impacts to the future semiconductor
industry in the United States. The principal investigator (PI) will also
organize workshops to K-12 students and provide internship opportunity to high-
school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will have two highly
integrated thrusts. In the first thrust, a novel comb-based radar device that
can perform broadband coherent detection and sensing in the THz frequency range
will be designed, fabricated, and tested. This device will be designed based on
recent transmitter and receiver chips that were developed in PI’s laboratory.
These chips offer THz frequency combs with very narrow linewidths of a few
hertz. The hertz-level accuracy of the measured comb tones indicates high
stability of the frequency comb making it suitable for spectroscopy
applications. The proposed spectroscopy system will expand the frequency range
to 600 GHz. The first thrust will result in a fully integrated radar chip. To
improve the sensitivity of the receiver, an array will be implemented. Each
array element will consist of a broadband receiver quipped with an on-chip
antenna. The radar sensor will be used to measure the frequency response of
numerous objects over a wide range of frequencies. The second thrust is to
develop an intelligent object recognition system by using the measurement data
generated in the first thrust. The project will use machine learning algorithms
to classify objects based on their interactions with broadband THz signals so
that arbitrary objects can be categorized according to their THz transmittance
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.