* 2214952
* Colleges and Upward Mobility in the US Over the Last Century
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Santiago Perez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Access to college education is widely regarded as an important path to economic
mobility. However, to the extent that children from richer families attend more
highly ranked colleges than children from poorer families, higher education
might actually amplify the persistence of economic status across generations
rather than “leveling the playing field”. This project will bring new data and a
long-term perspective to the study of higher education and inequality and
intergenerational mobility in the US. To do so, the investigators will construct
a large dataset with information on the socioeconomic backgrounds and post-
college outcomes of US college students over the last 100 years. To collect
these data, the investigators will first digitize the rosters of students
attending different US colleges from the early 1900s and until the 1950s. In a
second step, they will link these students to US population censuses, enabling
them to observe students’ childhood circumstances and their own adult outcomes
(such as income). The researchers will use this dataset to investigate important
questions related to higher education in the US, for instance: (1) To what
extent has access to “elite” colleges increased over the last century for
students from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds?, (2) Which colleges have been
the most effective at improving the labor market prospects of their students,
particularly those from poorer families? (3) What have been the effects of
changes in colleges’ admission practices (for instance, the introduction of
standardized testing) on the socioeconomic composition of the students that they
enroll? This new dataset, which the investigators will make publicly available,
will also offer many exciting research opportunities for other scholars.
Moreover, by identifying colleges in which students have better outcomes today
than in the past, this dataset will also help identify the institutional changes
associated with these improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will bring new data and a long-term perspective on the role of higher education
in inequality and intergenerational mobility in the US. To do so, the
investigators will construct a large individual-level dataset of students who
attended different US colleges over the course of the 20th century. This data
collection will proceed in two steps. In a first step, they will digitize
historical college registers for students attending different US colleges from
the early 1900s and until the 1950s. In a second step, they will link these
students to US population censuses, enabling them to observe both their
childhood circumstances and their own longer-term adult outcomes (such as
income). Linking these two sources of data is made possible by the fact that the
both the college registers and the census include identifying information such
as students’ names and hometowns. By combining these data with similarly
constructed data for students attending college in more recent years, the
investigators will be able to characterize the socioeconomic backgrounds and
post-college outcomes of US college students over the last 100 years. The
investigators will use these data to address a number of questions related to
access to higher education in the US: (1) To what extent has access to “elite”
colleges increased over the last century for students from poorer socioeconomic
backgrounds? (2) What has been the influence of changes in colleges’ admission
practices (for instance, the introduction of standardized testing) on the
socioeconomic backgrounds of the students that they enroll? (3) Which colleges
have been the most effective at improving the labor market prospects of their
students, particularly for those at the bottom of the income distribution? This
new dataset, which the investigators will make publicly available, will offer
many exciting research opportunities for scholars in fields such as economics,
history, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.