* 2214749
* The relationship between shared versus disparate notions of culture and health
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Henri Dengah, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 12/31/2025
* USD 256,049.00

How does culture shape and compel human behaviors, and what are the health
consequences of adherence or deviance with socially prescribed norms? This
research project investigates the motivations for adhering to, or deviating
from, cultural norms and the well-being outcomes of these behaviors. Research
shows that conforming to group expectations, and the norms and values of one’s
culture, facilitates the construction of social networks, acceptance, and well-
being. Conversely, being deviant from shared cultural values is often stressful
due to negative social feedback and lack of a sense of belonging. Yet,
individuals within groups are not homogenous. Rather their behaviors are shaped
by internal (e.g., personal beliefs) and external (e.g., social pressures)
motivational forces, and limited by structural constraints (e.g., socioeconomic
status). This research involves an international collaboration of
anthropologists, psychologists, and biologists, and the training of graduate
students, in ethnographic and biomarker data collection and analysis. It
disseminates its findings broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes ethnographic and
cognitive anthropological methods to evaluate ways by which culture values are
shared, internalized, and enacted into behavior. Investigators employ cultural
consensus and cultural consonance, and related approaches to identify shared
cultural norms and individuals’ adherence to versus separation from such values.
Health outcomes, particularly those associated with psychosocial stress, are
measured through mental health surveys, as well as biomarkers such as blood
pressure, and hair cortisol concentrations. This combination of health outcomes
provides both acute and chronic measurements of psychosocial stress. A
longitudinal research design evaluates changes in cultural behaviors and health
and provides insight to potential causal associations. In doing so, this study
furthers a biocultural understanding of how culture shapes
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.