* 2214039
* PFI-RP: Dynamically-Adaptive, Smart Morphing Building Facades for Wind Hazard Mitigation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 147,770.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnership (PFI-RP) project is an approach to mitigate the effects of
high-intensity, multi-directional, and turbulent wind events on building
structures. Specifically, new technology-enabled choices for the design of
building envelopes will be introduced, helping engineers, contractors, insurers,
and owners achieve safe and economic buildings. The cyber-physical package that
will form the backbone of this innovation may accelerate the transition of
research to practice. This development may also address key challenges facing
urban developments across geographic regions that are vulnerable to extreme wind
events. In particular, this innovation has a unique potential to be integrated
into the growing industry of adaptive building facades for energy generation and
cost saving purposes. The developments resulting from this PFI-RP project are
anticipated to be scalable and adoptable by other infrastructure sectors where
wind resistance is critical. Among these additional markets are industrial
facilities, bridges, wind turbines, and aerospace
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a cyber-
physical package providing an end-to-end approach for the analysis and design of
building envelopes equipped with smart morphing facades. In response to the
building industry market needs, this package includes all the modules required
for wind-structure interaction simulations including facade porosity and
roughness analyses, as well as sensing and actuation designs. To deliver a
holistic package, the main research objectives are threefold: (1) establishing
multi-fidelity surrogate models for a variety of building shapes and facade
design characteristics; (2) developing high-performance computing and machine
learning techniques to enable the intelligent sensing, computing, and actuation
of building envelope components in near real-time; and (3) transforming
performance-based wind design strategies for a suite of performance objectives,
including lowering wind-induced loads, reducing member sizes, and increasing
real-estate areas. The project’s outcome is anticipated to address fundamental
questions and practical issues regarding the scale-up of the introduced
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.