* 2214590
* Dynamic Pathways to Crystallization of DNA-Coated Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* William Rogers, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,144.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization—the spontaneous
ordering of atoms, molecules, or other small particles—has fascinated humankind
for centuries. The study of crystallization has led to fundamental developments
in our understanding of matter, for example, how water freezes to become ice.
Crystallization is also central to a wide variety of important industries,
ranging from microelectronics to pharmaceuticals. Yet, despite the ubiquity of
crystallization in both fundamental and applied science, many mysteries
regarding the dynamics of crystallization remain. The scientific objective of
this research project is to understand the dynamic pathways by which crystals
form and to use that understanding to develop new methods for making macroscopic
single crystals with exotic materials properties. The research will reveal new
fundamental knowledge about the physics of crystallization and lay the
foundation for programmable nanomaterials of the future, which could find
applications in optical communications, light-harvesting, and other next-
generation technologies. The research project also trains students in the
interdisciplinary field of soft condensed matter physics and engages the public
in conversations about science. More specifically, the research team is
developing student-led, student-focused summer programs designed to provide
undergraduate students with practical hands-on training in the laboratory, while
also promoting diversity and inclusion by creating a community of researchers
and reinforcing group cohesion. The team is also creating outreach activities
with a local science museum focused on enhancing interest and scientific
literacy in the surrounding community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to understand
the fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic driving forces that govern the dynamic
pathways to crystallization, and to develop practical strategies for controlling
those pathways to create new optical metamaterials from DNA-coated colloids. The
proposed research is organized around two specific studies. In the first study,
the research team is exploring how the kinetics of nucleation and growth emerge
from the pair-interaction potential, as well as the details of the parent fluid
phase and the child crystal phase. The research team uses an experimental
approach combining droplet-based microfluidics with optical microscopy to
systematically quantify the full dynamic evolution of hundreds of experiments
running in parallel. They are also developing a suite of theoretical tools based
on the statistical mechanics of multivalent interactions, classical nucleation
theory, and classical theories of crystal growth to uncover microscopic
information about the crystallization pathways and to create a data-driven
framework to guide the design of their experiments. In the second study, the
research team is utilizing their fundamental understanding of nucleation and
growth to create rational nonequilibrium protocols for forming single crystals
with prescribed structures, which could be used in future applications in
photonics and plasmonics. Here they draw inspiration from traditional industrial
practices, such as slow temperature ramps, temperature cycling, multistep
nucleation and growth protocols, and seeded nucleation. While existing studies
have focused primarily on expanding the diversity of static structures that form
in equilibrium, the research team is working to understand the rich dynamical
pathways by which those structures self-assemble and to develop new approaches
to control those pathways in order to assemble macroscopic programmable
materials from colloids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.