* 2214916
* SaTC: EDU: Building an Internet Emulator for Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wenliang Du, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 399,197.00

Learning by doing is very important for education. However, it is quite
challenging in cybersecurity to do hands-on activities that require Internet
infrastructure. There is a lack of safe and effective platforms for these
activities, as many cybersecurity activities cannot be carried out directly on
the Internet, or they would cause real damage. Inspired by many other fields,
the project team is developing an Internet emulator and then using the emulator
as the lab environment for hands-on activities. With this emulator, one can
create a miniature Internet inside a personal computer with all the essential
elements of the Internet. The project team aims to develop a suite of hands-on
labs which will enable students to experiment with techniques to combat attacks
inside the emulator without causing any harm to the real world. Moreover, many
notable past attacks (e.g., the Morris Worm) can be recreated inside the
emulator, so students can see study the historical events and envision how to
defend against these attacks. The Internet emulator and the associated lab
activities can help develop a much-needed workforce in cybersecurity, especially
in improving hands-on skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two primary
objectives: i) developing an Internet emulator that can serve as the basis for
conducting hands-on exercises and ii) developing hands-on lab activities based
on the emulator. This project fills a void in cybersecurity education since
while there are existing network emulators, a low-cost Internet emulator
designed explicitly for cybersecurity education does not exist. Moreover, there
are few hands-on activities based on such emulators. With the solutions expected
from this project, students can conduct lab activities, including attacks and
defenses, on the Internet level, without worrying about causing real damage.
Instructors will have a pool of lab activities they can choose from based on
their education needs. They can also use the emulator to customize the lab
environment. While this project focuses on cybersecurity education, the emulator
can also be used as the base for designing lab activities in other fields, such
as networking and other aspects of information technology applications. The
emulator has the potential to become a successful, high-impact, and self-
sustained open-source project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that
address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.