* 2214177
* Robotics: Flexible manipulation without prior shape models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tomas Lozano-Perez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Robots have the potential to improve peoples' daily lives by performing everyday
tasks in homes, hospitals, and restaurants. Unlike the carefully designed and
accurately modeled environment in a factory, a home is filled with a wide and
changing variety of objects, often in messy and unpredictable arrangements. Most
current methods for designing intelligent robots depend on having highly
accurate models of their environments, which cannot be obtained reliably for our
domains of interest. This project will develop strategies for solving robotics
problems in environments that are only partially understood in advance, through
a combination of reasoning about uncertainty (recognizing, for example, that it
doesn't know how full a particular container is), taking actions to gather
information (picking up the container to see how heavy it is, or looking inside
it), and selecting actions that will work well even in spite of some remaining
uncertainty (sweeping objects off a table and into a box can be effective, even
when their positions are not well known in advance.) Ultimately, this project
will enable robots to be deployed in much less restrictive environments and to
provide more robust and flexible assistance to people who need
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project focuses on
identifying and estimating the domain information that is crucial for performing
a task (for example, how to pick up an object stably or whether placing one
object in a certain location would cause a collision). It will design a state-
estimation system that combines pre-trained neural-network perception modules
(for segmentation, shape completion, grasp prediction, etc.) with classical
engineering techniques for multiple hypothesis tracking. This system will be the
basis for a task and motion planning system that operates in belief space,
enabling it to explicitly plan and execute information-gathering actions. The
planner will make an abstract plan that consists of lower-level closed-loop
control operations that also take uncertainty into account, by synthesizing
appropriate impedance controllers with guard conditions specified in terms of
observed torques, tactile percepts, and distance traveled. By applying closed-
loop control at both the low and high levels of abstraction, and explicitly
modeling and controlling uncertainty, the overall system will demonstrate
robust, flexible behavior in complex domains with novel combinations of
previously unseen objects. The project will use physical robots that are
reasonably priced and widely available and will make all resulting algorithms
and implementations freely available through open source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.