* 2214194
* Experimental and theoretical studies of iron pnictides through zero field nuclear magnetic resonance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Karen Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 560,673.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is the ability of
certain materials to conduct electricity without resistance, which currently is
only possible at very low temperatures. If this can be made to work at room
temperature, it would revolutionize many applications that can benefit society
in many ways, such as electrical energy transmission and quantum computation.
The creation of large magnetic fields which is vital for medical imaging,
noiseless propulsion engines etc., also rely on superconductivity. In order to
make progress to reap these benefits, it is important to gain proper
understanding of the microscopic origin of unconventional superconductivity.
This project aims to investigate magnetic fluctuations in superconducting
materials made with iron. This is because these fluctuations are believed to
pro-vide the necessary “glue” that combines electrons into pairs to enable
superconductivity in iron-based materials. The project trains graduate and
undergraduate students in both experimental and computational skills. With such
skills, these students typically find employment in various science and
technology sectors and also contribute to the much-needed quantum workforce.
Furthermore, the project provides outreach activities for underrepresented K-12
girls to attract them to STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: &lt;br/&gt;The problem studied is the role of magnetic, and
especially nematic fluctuations, in the emergence of superconductivity in iron-
based superconductors. The goal is to study the fluctuations across the
magnetic, nematic and paramagnetic phases using zero-field nuclear magnetic
resonance on arsenic-75. In the limit of zero-field, the nuclear Hamiltonian is
dominated by the hyperfine field, reflecting magnetic order, and the electric
field gradient, reflecting orbital order. Therefore, the resonance frequencies
and relaxation rates are directly tied to the fluctuations. The project
establishes the amplitude of the nematic spin-fluctuations averaged over the
characteristic resonance time by comparing the measured field gradients with ab
initio density functional calculations with fixed staggered magnetization. This
information has not been accessible so far, as existing methods probe either
instantaneous or static (averaged over physically infinite time) magnetic
moments. Understanding of the frequency spectrum of nematic spin fluctuations is
invaluable for uncovering the yet elusive mechanism of Fe-based
superconductivity. Further, students will be trained in cutting-edge research on
two fronts: ab-initio calculations executed through density function theory and
zero-field nuclear magnetic resonance of superconducting single
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.