* 2214082
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Success and Livelihood Outcomes within Migrant Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Lee Hoffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

For many agricultural households, labor migration has emerged as a popular
strategy to mitigate and overcome the stresses and threats to their livelihood.
While migration as a livelihood diversification strategy can be an effective
response to economic precarity, labor migration and remittance is usually a
temporary measure. Upon returning home, they not only have to find alternative
sources of livelihood but assimilate to new local realities and cultural
patterns. This project builds a framework to understand the types of livelihood
capital available to migrants once they return home, and how this capital
interacts with community standards of success circulating in their respective
social networks. It responds to community needs and was initiated at the local
level, by community stakeholders. However, as return migration is a global
issue, this project incorporates a research approach to make its findings
generalizable and can be expanded to examine return migration and reintegration
in other contexts for cross-cultural comparisons. Findings have the potential to
inform policy, along with the design and implementation of reintegration support
programs for returnees.

The project aims to obtain an understanding of success as defined by the local
community and assess how non-migrants and migrant returnees align with these
local definitions, through successive free-listing, semi-structured interviews,
and cultural consonance. It will then identify livelihood outcomes among non-
migrants and migrant returnees and collect information on sustainable livelihood
capitals that individuals have acquired through their respective networks using
a life history calendar and semi-structured interviews to guide network data
collection. Combining qualitative methods and data with quantitative network
measures will contribute to methodological discussions of network analysis,
specifically ego networks, within anthropology. The project brings new insights
into the discipline by adding a layered and interdisciplinary approach to
anthropological theories at the intersection of culture, migration, and network
studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.