* 2215082
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Large: 4D100: Foundations and Methods for City-scale 4D RF Imaging at 100+ GHz
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 240,000.00

Advances in low-cost low-power silicon radio frequency (RF) integrated circuits
(ICs) in the last two decades have opened up the commercial applications for
millimeter wave (mmWave) frequencies which are an order of magnitude beyond
those used in WiFi and cellular today. Large-scale deployment of mmWave
communication networks, such as NextG cellular infrastructure outdoors and NextG
WiFi infrastructure indoors, implies that these resources can be leveraged for
RF imaging at scales that are not otherwise possible. The project develops
foundational algorithms, architectures and protocols for such Joint
Communication and Imaging (JCAI) systems. Each sensor in such a system provides
4D measurements (range, Doppler, azimuth angle and elevation angle) whose
resolution improves by going to higher frequencies. The project establishes US
leadership in a critical technology by developing large-scale RF imaging using
frequencies beyond 100 GHz. Outdoor applications include pedestrian and
vehicular tracking for global situational awareness supporting vehicular
autonomy, and addressing security challenges such as timely detection of illegal
drones or unauthorized personnel. In indoor settings, the technology enables
fine-grained inference/prediction of human actions for eldercare and smart home
applications. RF imaging technologies are especially useful in low-light or
high-smoke/fog conditions when visible light or infrared technologies are not
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops and demonstrates a
framework for JCAI at mmWave frequencies. A core aspect of the technical plan is
to drastically improve resolution by synthesizing large apertures (Thrust 1).
This employs a combination of novel approaches to single sensor design which
utilize large antenna arrays developed for communication, and networked
collaboration between multiple sensors. A complementary aspect (Thrust 2) is the
strategic utilization of unmanned vehicles to image difficult-to-reach areas,
utilizing the fixed infrastructure to reduce the robot payload. In Thrust 3,
hardware at 140 GHz previously developed by the PIs for communication will be
adapted to support demonstration of networked RF imaging at 100+ GHz. Thrust 4
develops a control plane for networked imaging, including a resource management
framework based on imaging demand and imaging capacity, and protocols supporting
collaborative imaging. The concepts and methods to be developed have potential
impact in a vast array of applications, including vehicular autonomy and road
safety, manufacturing automation, indoor and outdoor security, eldercare, and
healthcare. The PIs will work closely with industry partners, building on their
strong track record in transitioning mmWave research, and plan to incorporate
this research into the undergraduate curriculum through courses, capstone
projects, and REU projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.