* 2215523
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching at California State University, Bakersfield
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Anthony Rathburn, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 520,050.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a state-
of-the-art field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) for California
State University Bakersfield (CSUB), a designated Hispanic Serving Institution
and the only comprehensive university within a radius of over 100 miles. The new
FE-SEM is an analytical system that can achieve high-resolution imaging of
samples at nanometer scale, while simultaneously performing qualitative and
quantitative chemical analysis of the surface of the sample. The remarkable
versatility of this instrument will upgrade our research capabilities across
multiple disciplines, including Geology, Biology, Environmental Studies,
Engineering, Physics, and Agriculture. This instrument will be an integral part
of CSUBâ€™s efforts to improve the enrollment and retention of minority students,
to enhance their educational achievements, to develop research skills necessary
for graduate-level study, and to increase the number of underrepresented
minority students in pursuing graduate degrees in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields. This instrument will also enhance outreach
efforts to neighboring community colleges, high schools, and science teacher
training initiatives which are partly supported by separate NSF funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument includes an FE-SEM, an energy
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) with silicon drift detector and a coldstage.
The FE-SEM provides nanometer-scale resolution for the imaging of sample
surfaces at low accelerating voltage, without the requirement of conductive
coatings, which will significantly reduce the imaging artifacts and improve the
capability of resolving fine-scale features. The EDS with silicon drift detector
provides elemental analysis of materials, and it allows fast scanning and
excellent energy resolution. The coldstage brings an entirely new SEM technology
to CSUB that is particularly valuable for examination of biological specimens.
This instrument will revolutionize the analytical capabilities of CSUB SEM
Laboratory and new research will focus on the following aspects, including 1)
nanometer-scale pore structure in mudrocks and clay microporosity in sandstones
(Geology); 2) paleoceanography, geobiology and paleoclimate (Geology); 3) wood
structure and plant hydraulic function (Biology); 4) structure of soft matter
like cellulose and the relationship to physical properties (Engineering); 5)
agricultural-waste-derived catalyst screening and characterization for enhanced
energy and resource recovery (Agriculture). It will support several current
externally funded research projects including projects funded by the NSF. It
will also enable new research directions for CSUB faculty and facilitate new
collaborative projects between CSUB faculty from different departments, as well
as collaborations with researchers from other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.