* 2215387
* NSF-BSF: Electrified Membrane System for Chemical-Free Nitrogen Recovery from Nitrate Contaminated Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Ammonia, one of the most important industrial commodities, is used for diverse
applications including pharmaceutics, plastics, paper, and fertilizer
production. Of the 176 million tons of annually produced ammonia worldwide,
about 85% is used for fertilizer production. Furthermore, ammonia has recently
received considerable attention as a promising fuel due to convenience and
safety in transportation and storage. Currently, ammonia is commercially
produced by an energy-intensive process that relies on natural gas as a
feedstock. Recently, ammonia production was interrupted due to the pandemic
impacts and other geopolitical factors, resulting in an increase in ammonia cost
and supply chain uncertainties. Meanwhile, nitrogen, the central element of
ammonia, is prevalent in municipal, agricultural, and industrial wastewaters in
various chemical forms. These sources of nitrogen-containing waste could provide
a reliable and cheap nitrogen source (around 2.4 billion kg per year) for
ammonia production. Current wastewater treatment processes consume energy to
remove waste nitrogen compounds and convert them into nitrogen gas without any
recovery mechanisms. Additionally, despite the prevalence of drinking and
wastewater treatment processes, there are still over 40 million people in the US
that do not have access to municipally treated water, instead relying mostly on
private groundwater wells that may contain nitrate and other oxyanion
pollutants. Even in public water systems, nitrate is among the most commonly
reported water quality violations in the US and could compromise the health of
millions of people. Therefore, this international collaborative project between
researchers at the New Jersey Institute of Technology and Ben-Gurion University
in Israel aims to address the knowledge gaps related to recovering nitrogen from
waste and converting it into ammonia while treating wastewater using an
innovative electrified membrane process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the
ultimate project goal is to explore a sustainable pathway to generate ammonia
from nitrate-containing wastewater and alleviate the stresses from nitrate
pollution and industrial ammonia production. To achieve this goal, this team of
international collaborators will employ multifaceted approaches including
electrochemical membrane filtration studies, computational chemistry, and
numerical simulations to unravel the molecular-level interactions of nitrate
with catalysts and ammonia with membrane interfaces and to delineate the
dynamics mapping of reaction species (e.g., nitrate or ammonia) on cathodic
membrane surfaces. The expected project outcomes include (1) examination of a
suite of novel catalyst-coated hydrophobic gas exchange membranes that enable
efficient nitrate reduction and simultaneous ammonia gas transfer; (2)
synchronization of cathodic and anodic reactions for nitrate reduction and in
situ acid production to trap ammonia; (3) clarification of mechanisms of
electrochemical catalysis and mass transfer in this three-phase membrane
interface via computational simulations and density functional theory analyses;
(4) determination of the effects of wastewater matrices such as solution pH and
co-existing substances on the stability of cathodic membrane operations; and (5)
elucidation of potential scaling mechanisms and preventive strategies on
cathodic/anodic surfaces. This project will foster a collaboration between the
US and Israeli researchers and provide excellent research and educational
training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students of the two
collaborating institutions. A fair and meaningful involvement of diverse New
Jersey communities affected by groundwater nitrate will be accomplished through
community outreach activities, and underrepresented students from the Garden
State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (GS-LSAMP) will be
involved in the green electrochemical chemistry and catalysis nanotechnology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.