* 2215388
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-based High Performance Computing Instrumentation for Smart City Research at Cleveland State University
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wenbing Zhao, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 434,431.00

This project will establish a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)-based High
Performance Computing Instrumentation (HPCI) at Cleveland State University (CSU)
to facilitate and promote Smart City research. The research goal is to transform
Cleveland to a modern smart city with shorter commute time even during rush
hours, ultra-low crime rate, a highly robust and secure electric power grid, and
successful professional sports teams contending for championships. The requested
major research instrumentation will enable research in the following five areas:
1) Smart Traffic; 2) Smart Vehicle; 3) Smart Internet of Things (IoT); 4) Smart
Microgrid; and 5) Smart Sports. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smart Traffic project
will develop novel deep learning methods to extract useful information from
remote sensing traffic images under complex urban environments. The Smart
Vehicle project will improve the state-of-the-art in reliable communications and
in data processing among 5G-enabled Connected Vehicles and the Vehicle-to-
Everything. The Smart IoT project will develop novel machine learning methods
for wireless data-driven communication and wireless intelligent sensing. The
Smart Microgrid project will develop novel hybrid learning methods to ensure
system resiliency, cost effectiveness, efficiency, and security of microgrid.
The Smart Sports project will develop new computer vision methods to recognize
and evaluate fine-grained player activities towards more efficient training and
player evaluation. The research has the potential to transform Cleveland into an
exemplary smart city, and the research outcome could be applicable to many other
urban areas in the US. The requested HPCI will make a substantial improvement to
the CSU high performance computing capabilities, which will positively attract
potential collaborative research in the Cleveland Metropolitan Area and greatly
improve the quality of research training at CSU. The requested HPCI will support
the undergraduate/graduate student research, education and training in several
computer science/engineering and civil engineering courses at CSU. The research
supports the K-12 education of Cleveland Metropolitan Area and also supports the
Hispanic-minority research and education. The website for the project is at
https://engineering.csuohio.edu/mri-hpc/ The project website is maintained by
the Computer Systems Specialist of the Washkewicz College of Engineering at
Cleveland State University. The research outcome, user guidance, news, and
project related information will be provided and updated in this website over
the expected lifetime of the requested instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.