* 2215768
* Developing Scientific Practices with Flexible and Inclusive Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences Utilizing Paper Microfluidics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kimberley Frederick, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 298,169.00

This project seeks to serve the national interest by developing, implementing,
and assessing flexible and inclusive Course-Based Undergraduate Research
Experiences (CUREs) to enhance students’ engagement with scientific practices in
analytical chemistry courses at four diverse institutions. CUREs have been shown
to positively impact college students’ persistence, scientific identity, and
learning of both course content and science skills. Analytical chemistry faculty
members from Centre College of Kentucky, Skidmore College, The College of New
Jersey, and Virginia Wesleyan University plan to develop the CUREs and
associated instructor professional development resources to support their use at
other institutions in the future. The CUREs to be developed will employ paper
microfluidic laboratory materials that are inexpensive, safe, and flexible,
which is expected to make them easier for chemistry courses at other
institutions to adopt. Additionally, the project team plans to investigate how
the CUREs support student learning and engagement in scientific
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative project intends to support
analytical chemistry faculty members in the use of backward design to develop
the CURE materials and assess student learning. The specific aims of the project
are to: 1) develop a theory-driven process for the design of flexible multi-week
CUREs; 2) develop paper microfluidic technology and support materials for CURE
implementation; and 3) assess the impact of the CURE experiences on student
learning. The analytical chemistry CUREs to be developed will translate
traditional colorimetric assays into a paper microfluidic format with cell phone
detection to measure color changes. The project team plans to design the CUREs
to support students in engaging in the scientific practices of experimental
design and execution, data analysis and interpretation, and scientific
communication. Measures of student learning will be selected as part of the
backward design process and are expected to include Enhancing Learning by
Improving Process Skills in STEM (ELIPSS) and Valid Assessment of Learning in
Undergraduate Education (VALUE) rubrics. The project deliverables are expected
to include not only course materials and results of assessments of student
learning, but also scientific results from the research conducted within the
CUREs. The NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.