* 2215247
* MRI: Acquisition of X-Ray Diffraction System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Joan Roque, University of Puerto Rico Cayey
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,098.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program grant supports the acquisition
of a state-of-the-art X-Ray Diffraction System (XRD) to advance research and
educational activities in physics, chemistry, materials science, and
engineering. Located in the southeast of the island, the Cayey campus of the
University of Puerto Rico provides access to the XRD system to faculty and
students from across the island. The XRD system enables over nine research
groups to advance their research projects using diffraction techniques which are
only available at this facility. Primary users include faculty from the
University of Puerto Rico in the Mayaguez Campus, and the Ana G. Mendez
University while researchers from UPR Ponce, Río Piedras, and Humacao campus
also benefit as secondary users. The project promotes collaboration between
different research groups, training for faculty and students, and educational
activities. Training and workshops are offered to undergraduate students
participating in research or taking courses that include the use of this
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The obtained high-resolution X-Ray
diffraction system is ideal for the characterization of crystallinity in thin
films, nanostructures, and low diffracting materials. The combination of the
parallel beam optics, a channel-cut monochromator, and the goniometer’s triple-
axis measurement capacity, allows for high-resolution measurements. The addition
of an area detector allows for the study of crystal orientations, not only
improving the information obtained for a particular crystal phase, but also
providing information on the crystalline texture, defects, and crystalline size
amongst others. This instrument enables the study of nanoparticles, multilayers,
and thin films with nanometric morphologies. Furthermore, the high-temperature
heating attachment and the texture, stress, and Rietveld plugins provide
advanced techniques such as reciprocal space mapping, rocking curve, and pole
figures measurements. Projects that benefit from this instrument include studies
of multiferroic tunnel junctions, characterization of silver nanoparticles for
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, studies of zinc oxide for sensing harmful
gases in the parts per billion range, investigations of defects in doped GaN,
and the use of the XRD system in integrated undergraduate laboratory experiments
including topics from different physics and chemistry sub-disciplines and a
variety of instrumental techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the NSF Office of Integrated Activities (OIA), and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.