* 2215877
* MRI: Acquisition of Gas fluxes and Analyzers to Strengthen Interdisciplinary Research and Education at Murray State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michael Flinn, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,890.00

An award is made to Murray State University (MSU) to study the effects of
changing climate on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in wetland and upland
ecosystems. Given the climatic importance of the production and consumption of
GHGs on land, this project will raise public awareness in protecting the local
environment through monitoring and model development. The project will improve
infrastructure at MSU for multidisciplinary research, training, and teaching of
MSU students. This infrastructure will allow MSU faculty to conduct innovative
research and increase student participation in cutting edge scientific inquiry.
The system acquired through this research will be integrated into the curriculum
for both undergraduate and graduate courses, including 6 courses being taught by
the project team across the Earth and Environmental Sciences and Biology
Departments, to provide enhanced training and teaching activities for more than
100 MSU students each year. The acquisition of the equipment will strengthen the
project team abilities to attract women, first generation, and underrepresented
students to the field and provide them with opportunities to strengthen their
research skills and foster the development of successful future scientists. The
research results will be disseminated to the public through web-based
interactive activities in local farmer’s markets and MSU national public radio
to help the public understand the carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
equipment supported by this project will allow for real-time analysis of the
soil-vegetation-atmosphere of GHGs exchanges including canopy carbon dioxide
(CO2), water (H2O), and methane (CH4), and soil CO2, H2O, CH4, and nitrogen
oxide (N2O). The soil CO2, O2, and CH4 sensors, co-located with gas analyzer
systems and installed at different depths, yields insight into below ground
reactions that produce or consume GHG. This integrated system will be used on
research projects ranging from plant physiology, ecology, climate change to
combined soil-vegetation atmosphere interactions. Specifically, the system will
be used to address questions related to climate change effects on GHG exchange
in a wetland ecosystem, soil greenhouse emissions in hydric soils, tree stem CH4
and N2O emissions, and variability of soil greenhouse gasses concentrations. The
acquisition will allow the project team to conduct cutting-edge research
projects that would be otherwise impossible at MSU. It will elevate student
active learning and research experience and faculty research
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.