* 2215760
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-performance computing resource to enhance research and undergraduate education at the College of Staten Island
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Angelo Bongiorno, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 723,547.00

This award supports the acquisition of a high-performance computing (HPC)
cluster to enhance research and undergraduate education at the College of Staten
Island (City University of New York). The HPC cluster will serve a diverse pool
of faculty to boost computational research in areas ranging from biology and
biomedicine to computer science, engineering, and materials science. By aiding
studies characterizing large biomolecules, this resource will help garner an
understanding of basic life processes relevant to human health and the
environment. Likewise, researchers working in computer science, engineering, and
materials science will benefit in their development of new algorithms for the
analysis and extraction of information from complex and large digital datasets.
Coupled with the application of modern simulation techniques to investigate
minerals of geophysical relevance, such endeavors will lead to a deeper insight
into the composition of the Earth's mantle. The acquisition will also support
and expand the educational activities leveraging high-performance computers as
tools for learning and training, including coursework in computational and STEM
disciplines by offering hands-on computing activities to high school students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational instrument will consist of
two computing ‘super’ nodes with a hybrid architecture comprising of both
central and graphics processing units (CPUs and GPUs), integrated with a large-
capacity intelligent storage system. This HPC resource is tailored to support a
range of data-heavy parallel workflows, which will enable investigators to
augment scientific knowledge in areas where experimental science is reaching its
limits, and where progress is intrinsically driven by computational studies.
This cluster will enable: (i) novel computationally-enhanced cryo-electron
microscopy techniques to unravel the structure and dynamics of biomolecules;
(ii) modern atomistic simulations to compute binding affinities of chemical
compounds to protein receptors and hence discover new drug therapies; (iii)
development of new data mining and artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms for
the analysis and predictive modeling of complex networks, high-dimensional data
and 3D objects; and (iv) exploit quantum mechanical calculations to predict the
properties of rock-forming minerals of geophysical relevance. The HPC cluster
will also enable educators to augment formal classroom education in
computational disciplines, stimulate undergraduate curriculum development, and
support graduate and undergraduate research projects. Access to this resource
will prepare students and future generation of scientists for diverse careers in
research and industry that are increasingly relying on the use of computers,
cloud technologies, and parallel computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.