* 2215447
* Improving Students’ Decision-Making Behavior in Choosing an Engineering Pathway
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Houshang Darabi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying how undergraduate
engineering students make career and degree program decisions, which will inform
the development of a decision support system. First year students can use the
system to select a degree program that is aligned with their interests and
priorities. Choosing a college major is a complex decision problem. Delaying the
decision can cause short and long-term financial burdens for students and
significantly extend their time to graduation. Some students can make premature
decisions without fully understanding a degree program or potential career
opportunities, introducing a risk of attrition. This project plans to provide
students with a structured decision making process to help them make informed
decisions. The project team will collect student survey data including
confidence in making career decisions, academic and career outcome expectations,
and career exploratory behavior. The surveys will be conducted at the University
of Illinois at Chicago and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The
results will be used to guide the design of the decision support system, which
will be based on engineering curricula descriptions and multiple public sources
of career related information. The effectiveness of the system will be assessed
in an introductory engineering course at both institutions. Project results will
be disseminated to engineering educators through workshops at regional and
national engineering education conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to: 1) advance understanding of engineering student decision
making behavior in selecting a degree program, 2) refine available decision
making theories and models for students’ decisions about majors, and 3) develop
an online decision support system grounded in knowledge and theory about
academic major selections. The hypothesis is that as individuals gain more
interest in an area, they seek to engage in the behavior more often and set
goals relating to the activity. The positive reinforcement of the desired
outcome and goal attainment makes the activity more rewarding, resulting in
increased behavioral intention or planned behavior. In this study, Social
Cognitive Career Theory will be used to determine impacts of environmental
factors related to career decision making in terms of academic major changes.
This will be done through the use of cognitive constructs on commonly used,
validated surveys of self-efficacy, outcome expectations, career related
planning and intent, and environmental exploration. In addition, the project
will study how the use of a theoretical Cognitive Information Processing
framework for the external decision making process influences academic major
decisiveness as measured by decision making confusion, commitment anxiety, and
external conflict. The decision support system will be designed and implemented
using the Communication, Analysis, Synthesis, Valuing, and Execution decision
making model. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.