* 2215592
* Expanding Activities for Outdoor, Nature Situated Making
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Robby Callahan Schreiber, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2026
* USD 947,746.00

The Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) will collaborate with four community
organizations serving Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) audiences
to research and develop a novel outdoor makerspace that engages families in STEM
learning. A makerspace is a place where people work together on creative,
interest driven projects. In working with BIPOC families, the project addresses
three forms of historical (and present day) exclusion of community participants,
including participation in the design of informal learning experiences,
participation in such activities, and overall engagement in STEM. The project
aims to develop activities that foster STEM learning using natural materials in
an outdoor makerspace, informed through robust collaboration with local
communities. This project will result in an outdoor makerspace at SMM that will
include 3-4 settings (approximately 2500 square feet total) that house and
support multiple making activities in an outdoor context. The proposed work will
contribute to advancing knowledge through exploring how BIPOC families define
learning in makerspaces and how younger children can be fully engaged in family
learning. The project will share the inclusive design and community
collaboration practices developed through this work with other museums, maker
educators, and other community organizations that can develop or expand their
own outdoor makerspaces in ways that will respect and reflect BIPOC families’
perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIPOC families will join museum staff as
contributors in the development and iteration of an outdoor makerspace and
collaborators in the development of generalized design principles and
dissemination of the research. Visitor-captured video of engagement in the
outdoor makerspace, surveys, and memos from design meetings with community
partners serve as the foundation for the process of aligning design and
development of outdoor informal science education spaces with community needs
and values. All research activities will be guided by a culturally responsive
research framework and use strategies to ensure the multicultural validity such
as video meaning-making with family research participants and member-checking
instruments, data analyses, and findings with Design Partners. Project research
will address three questions: (1) What are the characteristics of family
learning in an outdoor nature-situated makerspace, including how BIPOC families
identify and describe STEM learning and how outdoor spaces can be built to
support BIPOC families’ perspectives? (2) How can the space be built to support
multi-age families to engaged in making, including a focus on what design
elements support preschool learner’s engagement and sustained participation by
other family members? and (3) How do the design principles for making with
widely available materials translate from indoor to outdoor spaces and
materials? Research findings, design principles and community engagement guides
will be widely disseminated to researchers, designers, program developers,
informal science institutions and community organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.