* 2215789
* MRI: Development of Heterogeneous Edge Computing Platform for Real-Time Scientific Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yaling Liu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,600.00

This project aims to develop a Heterogeneous Edge Computing platform for real-
time Scientific Machine Learning (HEC-SML) at the extreme edge. Such a platform
will allow for real-time analysis and control of optical, scanning probe, and
transmission electron microscopy. Putting computation at the edge –- as close to
the data source as possible -– circumvents latency and bandwidth challenges when
sending data to high-performance computing facilities and will enable real-time
data analysis to conduct scientific experiments with creative inquiry. The
development of HEC-SML will lead to the convergence of microscopy, machine
learning (ML), and heterogeneous computing concepts. In microscopy, advanced
control systems will enable new imaging modalities; methods for personalized
medicine; and discovery and understanding of functional and quantum materials.
In ML, HEC-SML will motivate the design of strategies to impose physics
constraints and develop optimization methods for training more efficient
algorithms. Combined research in these disparate fields creates new objectives
that motivate transformative advances in each discipline. The research enabled
by HEC-SML will enable advances to and train scientists that can address edge
computing challenges for wireless communication, healthcare monitoring, advanced
manufacturing, and multi-agent autonomous systems. The instrument will also
enable several student curriculum advances along this convergence of fields.
This program will engage interdisciplinary researchers in biological sciences,
materials science, machine learning, and heterogeneous computing and lead to
novel research thrusts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-performance computing (HPC)
has made tremendous advances in scheduled, parallelized, and distributed
computing. Experimental microscopy requires that voluminous data at high
velocity is processed in timescales relevant to the experiment (nanoseconds-
minutes). HPC facilities cannot meet these needs as they are not designed for
dedicated networking and computation and typically do not have heterogeneous
compute nodes for low-latency computation. HEC-SML will be a purpose-built
instrument for real-time analysis and control of microscopy. A technical
innovation is co-locating HPC with microscopy to enable low-cost,
reconfigurable, dedicated high-speed networking. With this, we will develop a
centralized edge computing platform for signal processing, data reduction, and
ML tools for many microscopy modalities. The instrument will provide a platform
for real-time analysis and control of optical, scanning probe, and transmission
electron microscopy. HEC-SML will provide new capabilities for counting and
sorting cells as well as for the characterization and manipulation of materials
for energy conversion, sensing, and quantum materials. HEC-SML will provide a
turn-key solution for microscopy and other data-intensive scientific
experiments. Furthermore, HEC-SML will enable transformative advances in
personalized medicine; sensing, energy conversion, and quantum materials;
scientific and physics-informed ML methods using experimental data; and codesign
of heterogeneous computing and ML for low-latency data reduction, scientific
signal processing, and control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.