* 2215729
* Collaborative Research: Defining functions of an essential, conserved protein that uniquely links the mitochondrial matrix with the cytoplasm
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Paula Lemons, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 327,027.00

Complex organisms, including humans, other animals, and plants, depend on
chemical energy produced in their cells by tiny cellular substructures called
mitochondria that consume oxygen and release CO2. This project investigates a
specific component of mitochondria essential to their function. Plants depend on
photosynthesis in chloroplasts and respiration in mitochondria to convert
electron transport energy to chemical energy. While the importance of
photosynthesis is well recognized, the contribution of plant mitochondrial
respiration is underappreciated, even though 25 to &gt; 50% of CO2 converted to
sugars by photosynthesis is released as CO2. Defining mechanisms controlling
mitochondrial function are therefore critical to plant growth and productivity.
This project will uncover the mechanistic details of mitochondrial function. The
Broader Impacts of the work include the intrinsic merit of the research as
mitochondria ultimately contribute to plant productivity and CO2 release which
are issues critical to agriculture and climate change. Additional activities
include enhancing diversity in the STEM workforce through developing a "Biotech
at San Diego State University" Scholars Program (BT@SDSU) that will involve all
PIs that are part of this collaborative project. The program includes intensive
lab research experiences and summer internships in biotech companies along with
an ongoing scholars community focused on learning strategies and skills for
career preparedness. Through continuous program improvement, BT@SDSU will serve
as a model for other programs to support students who want to enter biotech
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how specific
mitochondrial components integrate mitochondrial function with the rest of the
plant cell, which has required the evolution of communication pathways across
the mitochondrial membrane. This important question will be addressed through
studies of the ATAD3 proteins (ATPase family AAA domain-containing protein 3) in
plants. These mitochondrial proteins span from the matrix to the cytosol, across
both the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, uniquely positioning them to
integrate mitochondrial function within the cell. They combine a distinct
C-terminal AAA+ domain located in the mitochondrial matrix and an N-terminal
ATAD3-N domain of unknown function that is exposed to the cytosol. Although
linked to many mitochondrial processes, their biochemical and cellular functions
remain unknown. This research seeks to understand how the AAA+ and ATAD3-N
domains contribute to the essential roles of ATAD3. The project will not only
uncover functions of these conserved proteins that are essential to life, but
also provide new insights into how ATAD3s have evolved in the plant lineage to
integrate mitochondria into the cell while training the next generation of
biotech researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.