* 2215550
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System for Quantum Engineering and Nanoscience Research, Education and Training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Scott Diddams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,379,000.00

Abstract Title&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron beam
lithography system that will enable high resolution patterning of materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The capability of high-
resolution patterning a wide range of materials into nanostructures is a
fundamental requirement for almost all solid-state materials and device
research. This has been instrumental in key technological advancements including
high-performance classical and quantum computing, photonic communications, chip-
scale optical frequency combs, integrated sensors, energy harvesting, and
flexible electronics. Future breakthroughs will lead to long-distance quantum
networks, fault-tolerant quantum computers, miniature chip-scale optical clocks,
new materials for thermal transport, personalized medicine, and nanosensors for
force, position and navigation. The proposed acquisition of a state-of-the-art
electron beam lithography (EBL) system at University of Colorado Boulder will
provide the required nanofabrication capabilities. It will greatly enhance
scientific research and education for a broad array of researchers and students,
including under-represented groups, in the Rocky Mountain Region, as well as
nationwide. This will help to address the national need for expertise in the
semiconductor and quantum industries. The EBL’s unique capabilities have
attracted over 64 research programs, with strong interest in an electron beam
lithography system at University of Colorado Boulder. The system will provide
the region’s only state-of-the-art 100 kV electron beam writer in an open access
shared user facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron beam lithography system at the
University of Colorado Boulder that will enable nanofabrication capabilities in
terms of high pattern resolution, large field of view, low stitching/overlay
errors and features with low side-wall roughness. Research on solid-state nano-
scale devices requires the ability to produce complex, high-quality patterns on
functional materials. For further progress, fabrication techniques that yield
nanometer-scale resolution, low roughness, and high quality devices are
critical. Electron beam lithography, with its wide applicability to a vast array
of materials, nanometer-scale resolution, and ability to produce high quality
devices is well-suited to the next generation of devices that will form the
backbone of nano-, photonic, quantum and electronic technology. The system will
spark a wide array of nanoscience and quantum engineering research, transforming
materials and device research in the Rocky Mountain region and on a national
scale. The proposed EBL system will greatly enhance regional and national
research and collaboration in the areas of quantum technologies, photonics,
sensing and metrology, bioengineering, and energy, providing fabrication
capabilities currently unavailable to most researchers and students in the Rocky
Mountain Region. It will be a cornerstone for the research at the University of
Colorado Boulder, as well as for the broader research community and industry in
the Rocky Mountain Region and across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.