* 2215875
* MRI: Acquisition of an Aerosol Characterization System for the Caribbean and the Americas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pratim Biswas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 924,381.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project supports the acquisition of an
Aerosol Characterization System to be operated by the University of Miami at the
Ragged Point in Barbados. The Aerosol Characterization System is expected to
open up new research avenues related to the transport of African dust to the
Americas, the impact of ocean-derived organic aerosols (OAs) in the marine
boundary layer, wildfire smoke, and cloud and radiation processes. This project
includes the engagement and training of middle and high school students,
University of Miami undergraduate and graduate students, and students from the
University of West Indies located in Barbados, as well as students from other
collaborating institutions. The new Aerosol Characterization System will enhance
the existing infrastructure in an important region of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes plans for a broad range of new
observations in the Caribbean that can provide significant insight into
interdisciplinary science involving the fields of atmospheric chemistry,
oceanography, geoscience, meteorology, and public health. The new integrated
system of coupled measurement devices will provide in situ characterization of
the size, composition, source, and radiative properties of aerosols transported
to the Caribbean and North and South America. Observations pertinent to the
atmospheric community have been collected at Ragged Point for over 50 years.
Twelve new instruments will be acquired and located at the site. A new inlet and
observation tower will be constructed. The major components of the proposed
Aerosol Characterization System include the new tower and a Quadrupole Aerosol
Chemical Speciation Monitor (Q-ACSM), and a Xact 625i ambient metals monitor. An
Advisory Committee will be created and will meet biannually to expand the user
base and develop a user fee structure for those who wish to conduct research at
the site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.