* 2215262
* MRI: Acquisition of A Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometerâ€”Synthesize, Crystallize, Virtualize
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Semin Lee, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 284,428.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Louisiana State University is
acquiring a dual-source single crystal diffractometer equipped with Cu and Ag
X-ray sources, an enhanced detector, and a cryogenic device to support the
research of Professor Semin Lee and colleagues Noemie Elgrishi, Victor Garcia
Lopez, Matthew Chambers, Fatima Rivas. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate
information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring
molecules. The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and
inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, biochemistry, and catalysis. This
instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at
this institution. Professor Lee and his collaborators are developing a program
to enhance virtual reality-based teaching, combined with synthesis and
crystallography projects at a number of HBCU/PUI institutions throughout
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. Research enabled by the instrument is focused on alkyne
metathesis catalysts, molecular metallo-cages , natural products, molecular
catalysts for energy- relevant transformations, light-activated molecular
motors, boron dipyrromethene-based fluorophores, new organic reactions for drug
discovery, protein structure: chlamydia trachomatis, quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.