* 2215960
* MRI: Acquisition of Low Velocity Impact Tester for Advanced Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Vijaya Rangari, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 177,244.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art Drop Tower Impact Tester at Tuskegee University (TU). This
instrument will enable the development of stronger and durable composite
materials derived from synthetic and bio-based materials. Particularly, the
instrument will improve TU's research support infrastructure for investigating
composite materials under low velocity impact. These low impact speeds are a
major concern in the composites field because the resulting damage often goes
undetected and can lead to catastrophic failure. It is also anticipated that the
fundamental research studies enabled by this instrument will result in advancing
the use of composite materials in automotive, aerospace, civil, defense, and
other industrial applications. The instrument will be used by faculty and
students at TU and collaborating partners, thereby encouraging synergistic
research collaborations. In addition, a collection of course related projects
and experiments will be made available to undergraduate and graduate students.
Moreover, this instrument will play a critical role for TU to continue to
produce a talented and well-qualified pool of African American STEM graduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The failure mechanism under low velocity impact (LVI) is
complex as the structure undergoes a series of failure modes: matrix cracking
due to through thickness shear stresses, delamination due to mode II
interlaminar shear stresses generated by the bending of laminate, and fiber
fracture generated by the tensile bending stresses. In addition, the exposure of
FRPCs to harsh environmental conditions will further adversely affect the LVI
properties. Therefore, for the safe operation over the designed lifetime, LVI
characterization of fiber reinforced composites (FRPCs) in regular and harsh
conditions is extremely critical. An automated state-of-the-art Instron
CEAST-9450 Drop Tower Impact Tester equipped with a thermostatic chamber is
suited for testing FRPCs at elevated and cold temperatures. The specific studies
that will be carried out using the impact tester include: damage behavior of
jute and carbon/jute hybrid nanocomposites; impact performance of biomimetic
helicoidal composite structures inspired by mantis shrimp; structural analysis
of hybrid composites under fatigue, impact and ballistic loadings; durability of
high temperature bismaleimide based carbon composites for aircraft applications;
and design, fabrication, testing and analysis of thick composite joints. This
equipment will serve as an excellent tool in developing the science and
technology of FRPCs, while enhancing the research and education capabilities at
Tuskegee University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.