* 2215245
* Broadening Participation in Introductory Computer Science: Investigating Self-Assessment Practices for Increasing Student Learning and Self-Efficacy in Two Institutional Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Gregory Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,836.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by generating new knowledge of
how to support students’ self-efficacy in computer science and provide practical
pedagogical strategies that instructors can implement to address equity in
computer science education. In computer science education, students must develop
problem-solving skills that include the ability to apply core computing concepts
alongside more general skills like problem decomposition and abstraction.
However, an often-overlooked aspect of the learning process in computer science
is the development and use of metacognitive skills, the practices of self-
monitoring and reflection that learners must use to be successful. This project
intends to study the effectiveness of an intervention designed to scaffold the
development of computer science students’ meta-cognitive skills through directed
practice with self-assessment. This approach has shown promise in prior
education research but has not been adapted to the computing context. The
significance of this project is that it has the potential to provide new robust
evidence for improved pedagogical strategies that will benefit students in
computer science concerning both their learning and motivational outcomes. This
benefits both success in the introductory classes being studied as well as
persistence in future courses. Furthermore, this has the potential to contribute
to the mission of broadening participation in computing by supporting students
from underrepresented groups in computing to have good experiences in
introductory courses and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
leverage prior research in educational psychology to develop an intervention to
support students’ development of self-assessment skills. In addition, this
project seeks to conduct an experimental evaluation of the effectiveness of the
intervention, looking at both students’ learning outcomes and motivational
outcomes in introductory computer science classes. The development and testing
of the intervention will take place with around 1,000 students at two different
types of institutions, a large public university, and a large community college.
This setting should allow the project to assess the impact of the intervention
across a variety of introductory computer science courses and student
populations to increase the generalizability of the findings. In the context of
a field experiment design, the development of the intervention seeks to involve
the collection of extensive feedback on the usability and suitability of the
intervention from both instructors and students with a specific focus on
students’ experiences from underrepresented groups in computing. By improving
students’ self-assessment skills, this project has the potential to give
computer science instructors a new set of practices that they can use to help
their students’ learning and motivation outcomes and advance the goal of
broadening participation in computing. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.