* 2215040
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gel Permeation Chromatography System with Dynamic Light Scattering Capabilities to Advance Research and Instructional Activities at Murray State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kevin Miller, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 223,633.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Murray State University is
acquiring a gel permeation chromatography system with dynamic light scattering
detection (GPC/DLS) to support the research of Professor Kevin Miller and
colleagues Gary Stinchcomb, Bikram Subedi, Christopher Lennon, and Grace Eder.
This instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, biological
sciences, and Earth and environmental sciences. GPC separates molecules as a
function of size based on their elution from a packed column. DLS is
subsequently used, in-line, to measure time-dependent fluctuations in scattered
light, which is related to molecular diffusion coefficeints and their size
distributions. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching
efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides
accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument is leveraged in
research training opportunities in polymer chemistry, molecular biology, and
environmental science. Students gain hands-on experience with the instrument
through its integration in various courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
the GPC/DLS is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as polymer chemistry, molecular biology, and
environmental science. Research focuses on molecular weight analysis of ionenes
and cellulose functionalized with ionic liquids and poly(ionic liquids). Other
investigations include the separation and analysis of drug residues and other
small molecules from biological tissue, environmental samples, and wastewater.
It also assists in analyzing molecular weight distributions of copolymers for
organic photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.