* 2215480
* From Rights to Votes: Understanding Political Knowledge and Mobilization Via Text Messaging Among System-Impacted Groups
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Naomi Sugie, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 380,010.00

Recent efforts to dismantle disenfranchisement regimes have the potential to
substantially expand electoral eligibility. Yet, even in states that allow
individuals with criminal records to vote, voting rates are very low, often in
the single digits. Misinformation about eligibility, lack of knowledge, and lack
of interest are all thought to prevent individuals with records from voting,
resulting in a more unequal political system. These barriers are well
documented; however, it is unclear how they influence motivations and challenges
to vote in the weeks leading up to an election, and it is unclear whether
scalable and adaptive interventions can address barriers to voting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses text messaging to survey system-
impacted individuals about their perspectives, experiences, and beliefs about
voting in the weeks leading up to the November 2022 election. In addition, using
a randomized controlled trial (RCT), the project tests whether text messaging
interventions can address misinformation and issue salience to increase
electoral participation among system-impacted individuals. Within the RCT, a
secondary randomization utilizing an “adaptive” intervention framework aims to
identify the most effective design of interventions for addressing heterogeneity
in voting behavior in the weeks leading up to the election. Across these aims,
the project examines how demographics (age, race/ethnicity, gender), the extent
of criminal justice contact, and strength of self-identification as a system-
impacted constituent moderate motivations, challenges, and the effectiveness of
interventions. Findings from this research will provide knowledge about the
factors that encourage and inhibit electoral participation. Findings will also
provide concrete, actionable insights about large-scale mobilization
interventions to increase registration and voting rates among system-impacted
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.