* 2215776
* MRI: Acquisition of Biomechanical Movement Baselining Technology Suite for Wearable Technology and Stretch Sensor-based Validation of Lower Body Characteristics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Lesley Strawderman, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 539,000.00

Human performance engineering at Mississippi State University, conducted by a
large, interdisciplinary team, representing diverse researchers and
practitioners in academics, athletics, &amp; industry, develops and validates
wearable technologies that can be used to capture human movement in realistic
environments. Testing in labs is critical for knowledge advancement. The
instrument suite consists of state-of-the-art Gait Real-time Analysis
Interactive Lab (GRAIL) system and surface electromyography (sEMG) sensors for
human performance assessment. The broader impacts of the projects arising with
use of the proposed technology suite will increase research capacity and permit
the crossing of scalability barriers for current wearable technology prototypes
developed through the human performance engineering research and development
program. This human performance laboratory suite will empower interdisciplinary
researchers to advance the health and welfare of the American public through new
types of wearable technology solutions and technology validation. The success of
such research will enhance existing partnerships between MSU and athletic,
industrial, military, and medical partners while further growing the
infrastructure for research and education with an interdisciplinary
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired system build supports research of the
human performance engineering team, including a project entitled “From the
Ground Up – Using Soft Robotic Sensors (SRS) to Create a Foot and Ankle Wearable
that Accurately Captures Real-time, Kinematic and Kinetic Data During Athletic
Training” by extending the capability of current instrumentation. The combined
GRAIL and sEMG system provides a more accurate, convenient, and safe platform
for the generation of large data sets, especially with clinically at-risk
populations. Activities enabled by the instrument suite advance transformative
research within the field of human factors engineering by validating Soft
Robotic Sensors (SRS) as a motion capture tool for all lower limb segments in
the human body. The instrument suite will allow for more control and
repeatability during participant testing of complex, dynamic movements (gait,
slip/trip perturbations), and will enable a much faster data collection process,
allowing the research team to properly utilize state-of-the-art deep learning
approaches requiring large amounts of data. Secondary transformative research
areas include: (1) Gait-based disabilities in pediatrics, (2) Chronic ankle
instability, (3) fall prevention, (4) fatigue and unsafe behavior identification
systems, and (5) autonomous vehicles including pedestrians and their behaviors
around autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.