* 2215849
* An Online Tool to Support Productive Struggles and Improve the Self-Efficacy of Undergraduate Students in Introductory Computer Science Courses.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Mahmud Hossain, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,950.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing an online
platform that will help to improve retention in introductory computing courses.
The US Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that the demand for computing jobs
will continue to grow in the coming years. However, the projected number of
computer science graduates does not meet the predicted demand. One of the
reasons for this is the high dropout rates of computing majors. A computer
science degree is tied to developing technical skills, which may be taught while
students solve problems involving challenging tasks. Solving such challenging
tasks helps students to learn but often results in struggles with the material.
While such struggles are usually linked with diminishing self-efficacy, these
struggles can become instruments to promote learning and self-efficacy, thus
becoming productive struggles. Converting classroom challenges to productive
struggles as a means for learning may help to improve retention in introductory
computer science classes. The online platform, called PULSE (Productive strUggle
for deveLoping Self Efficacy), is intended to foster productive struggles,
improve self-efficacy, and enhance skill development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PULSE will make use of long-form computer programming
assignments outside the classroom. The platform will use machine learning-driven
approaches to identify the obstacles students face while solving a programming
assignment. This will enable instructors to intervene when students struggle,
allowing students to learn from the struggles and improve their work before the
submission deadline. The project should advance computer science education by
generating new knowledge about student struggles and programming activity
patterns in solving coding problems outside the classroom. The insights of the
proposed research may provide ways to reduce student dropout rates in
introductory computing classes in college. PULSE will be released as open-source
software allowing other institutions to deploy it in their programming courses.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. This project is also supported
by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of
undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of students pursuing associateâ€™s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.