* 2215709
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Bayesian Thinking in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Amy Herring, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 11/30/2024
* USD 55,101.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving statistics
instruction through a focus on increasing access to Bayesian methods. Dealing
with the complexity of uncertainty is an important part of the scientific
process. Like scientists, STEM students need to derive rigorous conclusions from
data in their science practice. This project is based upon the premise that
wider inclusion of Bayesian methods in STEM curricula can help students
understand scientific uncertainty. To support the wider use of these methods,
the project plans to build a community of STEM educators who can transform their
courses by introducing new instructional materials for Bayesian methods. The
project team intends to develop and offer a professional development program for
STEM instructors from other institutions that focuses on the use and teaching of
Bayesian methods. In addition, teams of instructors will be mentored by the
project team in the development of instructional materials. The project will
disseminate the instructional materials and project results to the science
education community through social media, journal publications, and conference
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to make
Bayesian methods as accessible as possible at the undergraduate level through a
cross-disciplinary curricular instructor capacity-building program for different
STEM fields. Through recruitment of a diverse body of STEM instructors, the
project will: 1) Increase the number of undergraduate students who understand
Bayesian methods; 2) Enhance the capacity of STEM instructors in Bayesian
methods through training and community building; 3) Develop and enrich teaching
and learning materials that showcase the use of Bayesian methods in STEM fields.
To achieve these objectives, the three collaborating institutions, University of
California Irvine, Vassar College, and Duke University, will offer a week-long
instructor summer training boot camp. By the end of the boot camp, it is
expected that instructor participants will be comfortable using Bayesian methods
in answering scientific questions, using appropriate software for teaching
Bayesian methods, and designing classroom activities and assessments that
support the learning of Bayesian methods. Selected instructors from the boot
camp will be mentored by the project team in the development of Bayesian
teaching and learning materials, specifically using scientific data from their
fields. Using surveys and learning assessments, the project will assess the
effectiveness of the summer boot camp. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has
the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education, and
increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing
associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.