* 2215332
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Worth the Effort: Measuring and Predicting Investment in a Costly Application Process
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Lucas Coffman, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 23,475.00

Before firms can hire workers from a pool of applicants, they must attract the
right candidates to apply for the job in the first place. On the worker’s side,
applying for a job takes time and effort, and (in states where this is legal)
sometimes even costs money. While these costs are guaranteed, the desired
outcome of an application (a job offer) is usually not; so workers must weigh
the real, present cost against the expected future benefit of applying. This
project frames applying for a job as a type of investment, and studies how the
factors that influence a person’s investment decisions -- such as their
willingness to take risks, or how optimistic they are about future returns --
might also affect the decision to apply for a job. Firms might think they are
attracting all the best candidates for the job when they are actually
discouraging suitable candidates who think applying is too risky or not worth
their time (for reasons that have nothing to do with the candidate’s talents and
skills). For example, research shows that women on average are less willing to
take risks than men are. This implies that, when the outcome of a job
application is uncertain or the likelihood of being selected is low, women would
be less likely than men to “invest” in the application process, especially if
that process is very costly. This project experimentally tests whether changing
the cost of applying for a job affects who decides to apply, and whether factors
such as gender, willingness to take risks, and the nature of the job affect the
degree to which someone gets discouraged by a high application cost. The data
gathered from this project should help firms improve their hiring processes to
attract the best candidates and reduce unintentional discrimination. This
evidence could also be used in other contexts where applications (and
application costs) are common, such as higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to study how
characteristics ostensibly unrelated to on-the-job productivity affect an
individual’s willingness to pay an application cost. The project is designed
around an experiment in which participants will face random variation in the
cost of applying to complete a task for payment. Multiple types of tasks will be
offered to subjects. Some subjects will face only a minimal effort cost to
apply, while others will face either a higher effort cost or a monetary cost.
Any subjects who apply for a task will be asked to bet on their own likelihood
of receiving an offer, in order to elicit their expectations. All subjects,
regardless of application decisions, will be surveyed on their skills, their
beliefs and tastes, and identity characteristics such as gender. The researchers
will use the data gathered on which participants applied for which tasks to
estimate a probability model of the decision to apply for a job. This model will
incorporate the type of task, the nature and magnitude of the application cost,
and observable individual characteristics. A separate group of participants will
be asked to review applications and select individuals they see as most likely
to succeed in the task(s) they applied for, and then the selected applicants
will be contacted to complete the task. This second part of the project is
designed to test whether changing the nature of an application cost affects the
distribution of applicants or a recruiter’s ability to identify the best
candidates for a job. Overall, the project aims to contribute to the job search
literature by experimentally testing several explanations for why equally
qualified candidates may not sort identically across job
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.