* 2215606
* Using Publication, Patent, and NSF Grant Data Linked to the Survey of Doctorate Recipients to Understand Science Career Trajectories
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Scientists receiving research funding from the federal government use it to
produce scientific discoveries that are disseminated as research papers and
inventions that become patented. Few data sources link scientists to their
scholarly output as measured by federal research grants, publications, and
patents. As a result, there is a limited understanding of the impact of
publications, patents, and NSF grants on career outcomes such as pay and
promotion. The National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES)
conducts the Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR), a biennial, longitudinal
survey of doctorate recipients in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines (STEM) which allows policymakers and researchers to
track the career outcomes of STEM doctorates. NCSES linked the SDR with
publications data from two sources, as well as data on patents and NSF grants
providing a rich dataset with which to understand how the scholarly output of
scientists and engineers correlates with career
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first examine the quality
of the data linkages by comparing the algorithm-matched publication data to Gold
Standard, hand-curated data. The second phase of this project will evaluate the
effect of measurement error in publications data on the longitudinal SDR data.
Results from this work will inform the research community about the error in the
linked data and potential solutions for addressing it. Finally, time varying and
non-time varying variables will be used to model promotion to tenure, providing
insight into whether the academic folk wisdom of “publish or perish” has
meaningful impact on scientists’ career trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.