* 2215120
* Collaborative Research: The Past, Present, and Future of Boreal Fire Feedbacks
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2027
* Philip Higuera, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 01/31/2027
* USD 665,555.00

Boreal forests circle the globe and contain some of the largest carbon stocks on
the planet. Locked in the trees and soil, this carbon is sequestered from the
atmosphere. But as the climate warms, fires are becoming more and more common â€“
and while wildfire is not unusual in the boreal, the increasing frequency of
burning is surpassing what the forests have evolved to tolerate, leading to
forest loss and permafrost thaw. We do not know what comes next. It is possible
that if the forest fails to recover from high frequency fires, grasses and
shrubs may take over, further increasing flammability. Or they may dampen future
fire activity. This project takes a unique look at fires in the boreal, by
investigating the deep history of fire through lake sediment cores where you can
see the history of fire over thousands of years, through fieldwork to determine
how resilient the landscape is now, and through high-performance computer models
to estimate how fires will behave in the future. The project spans many
timescales and pushes computing powers to the limit and will inform expectations
of the future for this biome and the planet. The project will train graduate
students, undergraduate students, and postdoctoral scholars, organize a two-day
science communication workshop, and refine a fire teaching model used to teach
high schoolers about carbon-vegetation-fire interactions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Using an integrative and dynamic approach, this project will combine
existing and newly collected sediment data to explore the paleohistory of short
interval fires in the boreal with co-located fieldwork in short-interval fire
areas. Although it is known that modern fire frequency is passing historical
norms, this project will go further, to determine if current short interval
fires are creating novel structures. Those structures are the basis for fire
behavior in the future, so the researchers will then combine those measurements
with modern, physics-based fluid dynamics modeling of fire behavior that can
simulate wind in close canopies and in novel forest structures Further, this
model will be extended to incorporate soil effects, critical in the boreal. This
is the only available way to explore the fire implications of truly novel
species assemblages and structures that seem to be emerging. Together, this work
will explore fire likelihood feedbacks and structural thresholds associated with
fire behavior in the boreal forest and inform expectations about how the region
will respond, in terms of wildfire and energy balance, to climate warming. The
project will work with the non-profit COMPASS to organize a two-day science
communication workshop for graduate students and scientists in the larger
academic community. They will also work with Concord Consortium to develop a
module tool for teaching highschoolers, working with teachers to solicit
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.