* 2215074
* When Place Matters: A Comparative Study of Access and Justice across Tribal and State Courts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michele Statz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 201,100.00

This project will advance a theory of “place-based judicial intimacy” to offer a
timely intervention in access to justice scholarship and policy. Recognizing
that attorney shortages, economic marginalization, and insufficient access to
justice supports put rural individuals at disproportionately high risk for legal
need, this study will evaluate the active judging efforts of rural tribal and
state courts judges as a meaningful response to this inequitable access to
justice context. The anticipated intellectual merit of this project includes a
timely rural intervention in diverse literatures on judging and judicial
empathy, active judging and access to justice, and place attachment. This study
will further augment scholarship on judicial stress and well-being, procedural
fairness, and confidence in the courts. The anticipated broader impacts of this
project include: 1) the provision of empirical data to state and federal access
to justice initiatives, which tend to overlook rural individuals as among those
with the highest number of legal needs while also likeliest to be “digitally
excluded”; 2) increased knowledge about the role of rural place in justice
delivery via policy briefs, a research website, academic articles, and speaking
engagements; 3) scalable insights for cross-disciplinary collaborations aimed at
addressing rural professional shortages more generally; and 4) the training and
advancement of rural and/or Indigenous law, tribal lay advocacy, and medical
students in data collection and analysis, which will give voice to student
populations that while “elite” in their training remain largely overlooked in
the legal and medical professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage
tribal courts, state courts, and concurrent jurisdictions—each a relatively
understudied topic—by expressly attending to the role of rural place in and
across each setting. It will advance a new theory on place as a dimension of
rural justice, and specifically as a form of intimacy between judges and
litigants that may facilitate a meaningful experience of “access” where other
access to justice initiatives fail. This project seeks to answer four primary
questions: 1) What motivates place-based judicial intimacy, and how is the
practice of it shaped by judges’ individual identities, backgrounds, and
positionalities? 2) In what ways does place-based judicial intimacy reflect and
satisfy the more general goals or assumptions about “active judging?” How does
it complicate or exceed these expectations? 3) How do litigants regard place-
based judicial intimacy? When and why is it interpreted as “access,” and how do
litigants’ own identities, backgrounds, and positionalities inform this
interpretation? 4) When does place—and specifically, rural place—figure in non-
rural courtrooms and in broader statewide and cross-jurisdictional forums? What
opportunities exist for meaningfully incorporating and addressing the unique
experiences of rural litigants and judges? A comparative mixed-methodological
approach that includes courtroom observations; in-depth interviews and daily
debriefs with rural judges; document collection; litigant surveys; and
observations at formal and informal meetings of tribal and state court judges
will be utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.