* 2215080
* Liquidity, Intangibles and Stagnation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 189,000.00

The project will investigate the interaction between financial frictions, growth
and fluctuations. The particular focus is on intangible capital. The objective
of the current award is to investigate the causes and consequences of financial
crises. Through this project, we try to understand better the interaction
between financial intermediation, balance sheet adjustment and aggregate
production before, during and after financial crises, in order to improve public
policies. By developing a macroeconomic model with financial intermediaries that
incorporates anticipated and realized bank runs, our framework would improve our
understanding of crisis events as well as point out the limitations of
predicting crises. Our analysis of balance sheet adjustment includes both
financial and real assets (such as tangible and intangible capital), providing
insight into how a financial crisis may lead to slower growth and a rise in
inequality. The project develops frameworks which would be useful for public
policy making as well as teaching. The results of the project would emphasize
the importance of intangible capital accumulation, the complementary role of
financial and macroeconomic stability, and recommend that policy makers take an
eclectic approach to the issue of financial stability and stagnation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work will be carried out jointly with John Moore,
Shengxing Zhang, Mark Gertler, Andrea Prestipino, Kosuke Aoki, and Gianluca
Benigno. The project with John Moore and Shengxing Zhang investigates the
implications of the limited commitment of entrepreneurs for the horizons of
external financiers, intangible capital accumulation, growth and business
cycles. The project with Shengxing Zhang examines the long-run effects of
financial friction on the accumulation of skills on the job, inequality and
stagnation. The project with Mark Gertler and Andrea Prestipino builds a
macroeconomic model of banking that incorporates financial accelerators and
rollover risk to examine financial crises, while the project with Kosuke Aoki
and Gianluca Benigno modifies such framework to examine financial and macro
stability of emerging market economies. The proposed project addresses questions
such as: (1) Why do certain countries experience a long stagnation after a
financial crisis? (2) What are the sources of financial instability? Do they
have to do with contractual incompleteness, or to do with the limited number and
net worth of participants in the asset markets? (3) How should government
conduct monetary, financial, and fiscal policies to ameliorate financial crises
and improve welfare?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.