* 2215167
* A media project engaging girls in astrophysics during the 2024 total solar eclipse
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Taran Davies, COSMIC PICTURE DISTRIBUTION LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,965,053.00

The state of Americans’ STEM knowledge and competency is disappointingly low.
“The Nation’s Report Card” reveals that the average scores of all tested
students, in all science content areas, fall below proficiency levels (NAEP
2016). Countless programs aim to redress these deficiencies and prepare
Americans, especially youth, for global competitiveness. However, few
intentionally call out the importance of creativity in scientific investigation.
Scientific creativity is a non-linear, divergent thinking process that explores
many possible solutions to a problem or issue, as opposed to a convergent
thinking process that follows a particular set of logical steps to arrive at one
solution or one correct answer. Creativity is characterized by the ability to
question phenomena and to imagine solutions, often by thinking outside the box.
Scientific creativity is especially important in astrophysics, where it’s
frequently impractical or even impossible to test one’s theories in the real
world. In these cases, scientists rely on thought experiments, which allow them
to hypothesize and visualize the logical progressions and ultimate outcomes of
various scenarios, using only the “lab” in their head. This Project addresses
the need to provide models of scientific creativity by highlighting the work of
Einstein and contemporary astrophysicists using thought experiments to test
ideas and imagine outcomes in their minds. It will leverage the large public
interest in the back to back annular (2023) and total solar (2024 eclipse) with
learning opportunities and resources that include 1) a 3D giant screen, dome,
and planetarium film featuring the groundbreaking discoveries of Albert Einstein
and contemporary astrophysicists Drs. Andrea Ghez and Nergis Mavalvala; 2) a
collection of learning activities that connect to the themes of the film and
prepare learners for the solar events; 3) a strategic engagement program for
girls that will build the capacity of informal educators to lead young women in
exploration of space science; 4) a citizen science capstone project which will
engage young women in collecting data and contributing to our understanding of
the workings of the universe, in collaboration with the Dynamic Eclipse
Broadcast (DEB) Initiative. Project partners include Cosmic Pictures, the St.
Louis Science Center, the University of Southern Illinois-Carbondale STEM and
Education Research Center, and the National Girls Collaborative Project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An evaluative-research agenda conducted by Rockman et al,
will inform development of the project’s components, measure outcomes and
impacts, and further knowledge for the informal science education field to
advance gender equity in informal STEM learning. Formative studies will assess
appeal of the film and engagement activities during development phases to
provide feedback and make improvements. The studies will include measures
related to increased comprehension of specific science concepts such as gravity,
black holes, and gravitational waves. Studies will also measure impacts of the
activities, such as recognizing of the contribution women have made to STEM
pursuits. A comprehensive summative evaluation will study the impacts of project
deliverables on giant screen film viewers, girl-group leaders, and engagement
program participants, building knowledge for the informal STEM field about best
practices for learning about space science and encouraging scientific pursuits.
A connected research study utilizing novel data collection techniques will yield
new information about how to encourage gender equity. Research questions
include: 1) How does participation in the engagement program that emphasizes
scientific curiosity, exposure to matched-gender role models, and participation
in a citizen science project influence middle school girls’ empowerment to
investigate space science and sense of belonging in a scientific community? 2)
How do interactions with matched-gender adult scientists, near peers, and girl
group leaders mediate girls’ experiences? Researchers will use a mix of
quantitative and qualitative analysis techniques appropriate for the data
collected to document how, for whom, and under what conditions the project
facilitates curiosity, empowerment, and a sense of belonging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.
&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding was provided by the LIGO Research Support program that
funds the detection of gravitational waves in the U.
S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.