* 2215219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Extracurricular Activities, Information Asymmetry, and Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sandra Black, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Studies find that elite firms—top consulting, finance, and law firms—heavily
rely on extracurricular activities in hiring decisions, activities that favor
upper-class people. This practice may worsen demographic gaps in labor market
outcomes because access to, and persistence in, extracurricular activities is
highly correlated with socioeconomic background. In addition, people from low-
income backgrounds may not be aware that these extracurricular activities are
important in firms’ hiring decisions. This lack of awareness may further
exacerbate disparities across socioeconomic groups: if disadvantaged students
misunderstand the importance of extracurricular activities, then this may keep
them from high paying jobs and higher salaries to which advantaged students have
access. This project will use economic theory and experiments to study employer
hiring preferences as well as students’ (mis)understanding of employer
preferences by conducting surveys and experiments on employers and college
students participating in on-campus recruiting. The results of the study can
enrich the growing academic, legal, and public discourse in the US about
meritocracy in higher education (and beyond), structural discrimination, and the
future of work. The results of this research will provide inputs into policies
to improve the functioning of labor markets, and thus foster economic growth and
reduce earnings inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to answer
two research questions: How and why do employers use extracurricular activities
in hiring? What are the mechanisms and impacts of information asymmetry among
job seekers about employers’ reliance on extracurriculars? The project will
conduct surveys and experiments on both the demand and supply sides of on-campus
recruiting labor markets, including employers and junior/senior college
students. To address the first question, the project will elicit employer
preferences using a detailed Incentivized Resume Rating exercise to study what
employers value, particularly, preferences over extracurricular activities with
varying costs, time investment, and personality traits. This project will also
conduct an information intervention experiment to examine whether employers use
extracurriculars to extract information about the unobserved productivity of
applicants. The second question will be addressed by conducting a hypothetical
Incentivized Resume Rating exercise on students and compare the results with the
stated preferences of employers to test whether employers’ and students’ beliefs
are aligned, and if not, whether this varies by students’ socioeconomic
characteristics, time-use, and peer group networks. The project will gather data
on job offers and salaries that students obtained to examine whether demographic
differences in the degree to which information asymmetry can explain group-level
disparities in labor market outcomes. The results of this research will provide
inputs into policies to improve policies to improve the functioning of labor
markets, and thus foster economic growth and reduce earnings
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.