* 2215998
* Quantum Machine Learning Online Materials and Software Modules for Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wendy Barnard, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by introducing undergraduate
students to Quantum Computing (QC), establishing foundations and software tools
for workforce development in QC, and implementing these tools in Electrical
Engineering and other STEM courses at the undergraduate level. The project plans
to develop online content, modules and interactive software to introduce
undergraduate students to Quantum computing with emphasis on quantum machine
learning (QML). The project team will engage undergraduate students in
Electrical and Computer Engineering as well as students from other STEM areas.
The project will also include workforce-focused research experiences for
undergraduate (REU) students during the summers. The team will also include a
research experience for STEM teachers during the summer. The content developed
for quantum information systems will be adapted for different groups, including
undergraduate students, REU students, and for high school outreach. Grant
activities and objectives also include developing a diverse community of users,
innovative video-streamed content, interactive software for skill building, and
summer training workshops. The materials created will: a) impact several STEM
disciplines, b) engage and energize undergraduate students, c) create impactful
quantum information science awareness and introductory skills, and d) establish
modules and tools for workforce development in quantum information systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the national need to develop
a workforce in quantum computing with emphasis on QML. The project team will
develop and thoroughly assess several QML products for undergraduate courses and
training, including widely accessible online materials and interactive software.
Materials and modules developed will support senior level elective courses in
signal processing and machine learning. The project will introduce undergraduate
students to Quantum computing and QML, using application-driven materials and
interactive software. Assessment will be handled by the College Research and
Evaluation Services Team (CREST). Finally, the project seeks to broaden
participation through several strategies including collaborations with minority
student chapters and minority serving institutions, and the leveraging of
international university collaborations for global dissemination. Specific
products include interactive analysis and visualization software tools for
quantum machine learning and quantum Fourier transforms. These tools will enable
students to understand and experiment with quantum parameters and assess their
effect in compelling applications such as voice recognition. The assessment team
will evaluate all the modules, their ability to engage students, capabilities in
broadening participation, and the overall effectiveness of QML materials and
interactive software in workforce development. The project will use a mixed-
method assessment process (qualitative and quantitative data collection) to
build an understanding of the impact of the use of the quantum computing tools
on student learning gains. Assessments will be done through electronic web
tools, pre- and post-quizzes, presentations, one-to-one interviews, and ordinary
in-class testing. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.