* 2215554
* Investigating the impact of youth's inductive exploration of local technologies featured in Indigenous stories on their engagement, self-efficacy, and persistence in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Emerson Odango, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,243,600.00

This project provides opportunities for Indigenous youth to transform and be
transformed by opportunities for STEAM innovation and knowledge building. This
project will create opportunities outside of the classroom to invest in youths’
engagement, and interest, and self-efficacy in STEAM by supporting explorations
in community settings that value multiple languages and ways of knowing. Through
this project, youth can engage in pressing community needs—such as climate
change impacts, food and water security, chronic health crises, and out-
migration— with community experts, elders, and knowledge holders. The project
will expand the picture of what Informal STEAM learning and meaningful
engagement in STEAM looks like in Pacific Island contexts. It will employ a
collaborative research framework to investigate how Informal STEAM learning
activities that foster intergenerational learning—particularly the exploration
of traditional stories and the creation of prototypes, storytelling packages,
and hands-on models that illustrate Indigenous STEAM practices—impact youths’
engagement and interest in STEAM and self-efficacy over time. By building the
capacity of participants—particularly Pacific Islander youth—to become co-
researchers, -evaluators and -designers, the project will cultivate spaces for
participants to advocate for their interests, perspectives, and needs. This
research within the Pacific region is important for fostering science literacy
and broadening participation in STEAM fields since early interest in science is
a potential indicator of future STEAM interest and career choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to investigate how youth’s
inductive exploration of local technologies featured in Indigenous stories
impact their engagement and interest in STEAM, Informal STEAM learning, and
future decision making that affect youth participation in STEAM pathways. The
project will be implemented in Guam, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and
the Federated States of Micronesia (comprising the four states of Chuuk, Kosrae,
Pohnpei, and Yap) and will address the core research question: To what extent
does youths’ participation in STEAM-based storytelling and story exploration
lead to increases in youths’ engagement and interest in STEAM and self-efficacy
over time? The project approaches story exploration as a cultural and
metalinguistic process to investigate a story not solely as an artifact or a
process, but as a doorway to investigations of history, Indigenous STEAM, and
local innovation. Two cohorts of youth participants will engage in summer and
spring out-of-school programs led by elders, partner organizations, and project
staff through which youth investigate storytelling, design, research practice,
and service learning. Each cohort will also create digital storytelling packages
and/or model kits to share with audiences through participant-designed
community-level and cross-region sharing events. The project is expected to
reach 140 youth and 30 elders. To measure learning outcomes, the project builds
upon extant tools to gauge Informal STEAM learning engagement. Lessons about the
application of these tools will contribute to the Informal STEAM learning
knowledge base—especially regarding underrepresented communities in STEAM.
Community-based participatory research (CBPR) is the overarching theoretical and
methodological framework for the project and will engage participants as co-
researchers through multiple methods of observation, data gathering, and
analysis. The project will also create community-driven research opportunities
that advances the generation of knowledge on topics that are often left
unexplored because: (1) Micronesians as underrepresented minorities are not
usually at the table during research design; (2) non-Micronesian/Indigenous
epistemologies are usually privileged throughout the research; and (3) there is
a lack of trust when any outsider asks to look in, especially when racialized
colonial histories still leave daily impacts. This project encourages all
participants to consider and develop answers to this question: Stewards of whose
knowledge? Research findings and educational materials and resources will be
disseminated to researchers, program developers, informal science institutions,
partner organizations, formal and informal educators, and communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.