* 2215396
* CAS- Climate: SRS-- U.S.-China: A Comparative Analysis of the Regional Dynamics Influencing Decarbonization Pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Andres Clarens, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2026
* USD 130,594.00

A growing number of cities, states, and regions are setting net-zero emissions
targets to motivate and guide the transition to a low-carbon economy. The
pathways these regions follow to achieve these goals will be unique and
influenced both by positive emissions operations, such as from local
manufacturing capacity, and the potential to offset emissions with newer
technologies, such as bioenergy with carbon capture. The goal of this project is
to create the modeling tools needed to understand how net-zero plans will be
influenced by regional conditions and how these factors will affect global
outcomes. Currently used global-scale models do not have the ability to capture
many of the regional scale characteristics that will influence net-zero
pathways. By focusing on three representative regions in the US, while Chinese
partners at Tsinghua University and the China University of Petroleum-Beijing
study three representative regions in China using the same techniques, this
project will build an improved understanding of how regional economic and
environmental characteristics will help accelerate, or in some cases, impede,
efforts to decarbonize the global economy. The tools developed in this project
can be used by decision-makers when choosing different net-zero pathways.
Additionally, these tools, along with research results, will be used to develop
a U.S.-Chinese collaborative course on climate leadership skills. This
international collaboration between the two greatest greenhouse gas emitting
countries will lead to better strategies for lowering emissions in the United
States that are complementary to those in China, avoiding pathways that could
inadvertently create greater greenhouse gas emissions
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to develop fundamental
engineering, economic, and policy understanding of the dynamics of net-zero
plans at the state or provincial level. This project will extend the suite of
tools that decision makers have to understand how regions might work together or
against each other and how regional-scale implementation of net-zero policies,
land use scenarios, or infrastructures will ultimately drive global-scale
targets. Conducting this research as a collaboration between the United State
and China, the top two greenhouse gas emitting countries in the world, is
critical to create frameworks that can lead the rest of the world to a low
carbon future. Integrated assessment models for the United States and China will
be extended using the tools of industrial ecology to include consideration of
regional-scale resource availability, technological infrastructure, and
preferences. The team will work with the global change assessment model (GCAM),
its two country-specific models, GCAM-USA and GCAM-China, and computable general
equilibrium models of regional economic dynamics. Three states and three
provinces will be selected to understand a range of impacts associated with net-
zero plans and characterize topologies of decarbonization in regions that are
dominated by either agriculture, manufacturing, or services. The resulting
regional models will then be used to inform technology preference and policy
pathways in GCAM-USA and GCAM-China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.