* 2215495
* MRI: Acquisition of a field emission scanning electron microscope to expand characterization capabilities at the University of Iowa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* David Peate, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 461,650.00

A Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) with added diverse
imaging and detection capabilities will be acquired by the University of Iowa
(UI). This FE-SEM system will 1) improve the quality and range of data that will
be collected and analyzed, 2) increase the speed of data collection and thereby
enable more efficient and effective use of research and educational funds, 3)
facilitate quantitative evaluation of robust datasets, 4) provide additional
opportunities for training STEM students for the 21st Century on a robust, user-
friendly analytical tool that can be easily learned with comparatively low
training time, 5) provide key support for undergraduate and graduate student
research and teaching across a wide spectrum of disciplines, 6) be used
regularly by faculty in the Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences Department, as
well as researchers in the Chemistry and Anthropology Departments and staff in
the Iowa Geological Survey, 7) deliver a new level of micro and nano imaging
capability for users from the College of Engineering and Department of Physics
and Astronomy, and 8) greatly enhance electron microscopy competencies at UI
thereby opening new avenues of research to a wider user base within the
university itself and surrounding region. Placement of the instrument into the
new Iowa Materials Analysis, Testing, and Fabrication (MATFab) facility will
provide critical staff and infrastructure support for the instrument,
researchers at UI, easy access for researchers at UI and from neighboring
institutions (Iowa State University, Cornell College) who identified as major
users, as well as others who would be occasional users (University of Northern
Iowa, Kansas State University, Purdue University). We envisage that this
instrument will become a regional facility, attracting users from elsewhere in
the Midwest, given its unique capabilities that are not available elsewhere in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron
Microscope (FE-SEM) with automated mineralogy capabilities will expand the scope
of Earth Science research and education and transform the materials
characterization capabilities of existing facilities available at the University
of Iowa. Detailed chemical and textural sample characterization are increasingly
critical components of many in-situ microanalytical applications in the Earth
and material sciences. Correct interpretation ultimately rests on understanding
the primary context of the material or grains of interest. Establishing this
context involves documenting the distribution and spatial relationships of
minerals or phases within a sample. Secondary electron (SE) and backscattered
electron (BSE) imaging will be combined with automated energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDS) analysis for rapid mineral identification and quantitative
characterization of mineral abundance, elemental distributions, and textural
properties across a broad range of materials. Cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging
capabilities will greatly enhance current research efforts in trace element
zoning characterization for petrologic and geochronologic studies. Simultaneous
automated collection of all signals will provide cutting edge correlation of
mineral distribution and textures and major, minor and trace element
distributions. A field emission source will enable maximum signal generation and
source longevity for mapping applications while also enabling nanometer scale
imaging resolution for characterization of synthetic and natural nanomaterials.
The instrument will be primarily used for applications related to geochronology
and petrochronology, structural and metamorphic fabric analysis, igneous
petrology, and characterization of sedimentary strata, but other applications
will include economic geology, archeology and anthropology, and characterization
of environmental surface films, synthesized catalytic materials and
optoelectronic semi-conductor devices, as well as engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.