* 2215324
* State Building via Punitive and Restorative Justice: Evidence from a Field Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* James Robinson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 714,600.00

This project seeks to address a fundamental question of state formation: How can
weak and fragile states become strong in the absence of the capacity to tax? We
test one possible answer: providing justice and resolving disputes. While
policymakers and economists have often focused on the power to tax, the
historical record suggests that dispute resolution may provide a useful first
step in building strong states that are able to deliver goods and services for
their citizens. We will provide experimental evidence about how to build state
capacity and legitimacy in fragile post-conflict settings as well as how
different types of approaches to dispute resolution contribute to this goal. In
particular, we examine the effectiveness of state and non-state approaches to
justice provision. Examining these issues will advance knowledge in the fields
of political economy and development economics, with key implications for
welfare. Our collaboration with local government and an NGO strengthen the
partnership between academia, civil society, and government and is itself a
direct example of evidence-based policymaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end,
we examine the randomized rollout of a legal capacity building program
implemented at scale in the target city by the Ministry of Justice and a local
NGO. This program has (1) a “punitive” legal capacity building arm in which
state lawyers serve as neighborhood legal representatives with subsidized
services, and (2) a “restorative” legal capacity building arm in which a
neighborhood leader performs these same functions. Our goal is to empirically
examine the effects of this program on property rights security, crime,
violence, and citizens’ willingness to pay taxes for the formal state. Doing so
will enhance our understanding of how strong states can emerge when the capacity
to tax their citizens is low to begin with: by taking the legal – not fiscal –
path to state capacity, i.e., providing greater access to justice and resolving
disputes effectively and fairly. Furthermore, the experimental treatment arms
are grounded in different notions of justice which, in the context of many
developing countries around the world, often exist side by side: punitive
justice involving the coercive power of the state and restorative justice
involving traditional authorities and deep-seated community norms around mending
the community. This allows us to examine potential complementarities between
formal and informal institutions of justice in building strong
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.