* 2215982
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Multi-Disciplinary Research in the State of New Mexico
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tanner Schaub, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 606,132.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
modern, ultrahigh resolution field-emission electron microscope (FE-SEM) at New
Mexico State University (NMSU). The FE-SEM captures images from six detectors,
simultaneously, with state-of-the-art resolution. The images from this
instrument help researchers develop new materials that are crucial for next-
generation designs of batteries, fuel cells and water purification membranes.
The instrument will also allow researchers to look at components of cells,
tissues, and soils to better understand the natural world and find new ways to
improve our national health. This award supports high-level research and student
training at three Hispanic-serving institutions in the southern borderland
region. The presence of this instrument at NMSU will be a valuable tool for
improving the education and academic success of students and faculty in this
region of the United States. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to acquire an ultrahigh resolution field-emission scanning electron
microscope (FE-SEM) for research and education. Modern, ultrahigh resolution
electron microscopy images provide critical information for researchers in both
engineering and science fields and the acquisition of this equipment will
accelerate current efforts. The initial user base includes faculty and projects
that require FE-SEM for characterization of novel materials in fuel cell design,
additive manufacturing systems, batteries, and membrane technology for clean
water applications. Furthermore, application of modern FE-SEM instrument
technology, sample preparation, and operation modes will enable profound,
electron microscopy-based inquiry and scientific discovery in the biosciences.
The acquisition of this equipment will facilitate discoveries that ultimately
contribute to other fields, such as energy production, agriculture, aerospace,
conservation, and medicine. The equipment offers important opportunities for the
enhancement of university curriculum at three Hispanic-serving institutions,
outreach to underserved communities in the region, and support of a diverse
faculty research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.