* 2215605
* Active Adaptive Materials Design Inspired by Cell Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Zev Bryant, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2025
* USD 515,506.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to control shape and
motion is a key feature of life, from soft jellyfish navigating small crevices
to our own development and the ability of many of our tissues to regenerate and
heal after being damaged. These capabilities of whole tissue and animals are
encoded at the scale of individual cells in our body, at scales similar to that
of a width of a human hair. Within each cell, biological materials construct the
machines and materials that enable individual cells to crawl, change in response
to cues and build multi-cellular tissue. Many of the biological molecules are
molecular motors that convert chemical energy into mechanical work, just like a
car converts gasoline to motion. Other molecules respond to these forces to
control material assembly and rigidity. In this proposal, the investigators will
use molecular engineering to create synthetic molecules with the goal to
discover the properties of materials found within cells, especially those that
allow them to change over time. This work will enable new classes of materials
that can recapitulate behaviors of living cells, including directed motion and
division. This interdisciplinary materials science research will develop tools
and knowledge that will also impact fields of condensed matter physics,
biochemistry and cell biology. The project will also continue efforts to improve
the diversity of STEM trainees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A frontier in materials science is to construct
autonomous, force-sensitive materials that allow for the same types of
complicated mechanochemical machines that enable living organism locomotion,
growth and division. Such materials harness enzymatic activities of biomolecules
to enable force-generation (actuation) and mechanical response that is
spatiotemporally regulated. The scientific goal of this proposal is to elucidate
design principles of soft biopolymer materials whose actuation and shape are
reprogrammable. The shape and locomotion of living cells is controlled by the
actin cytoskeleton, composite biopolymer networks that generate variable forces
and whose viscoelasticity is dynamically regulated. This work will reconstitute
these materials in vitro, developing both molecular engineering approaches to
optimize molecular control and methodologies to control and study their
rheological response. With these novel tools, the PIs will focus on three
objectives: (1) To demonstrate control over training rules in active materials,
(2) To realize a material with feedback between actuation and material response,
(3) To generate programmable morphogenetic materials. The findings will enable
soft materials with new functionalities in sensing, actuation and shapeshifting
which can be broadly applied, including for the realization of micrometer-scale
soft robotics, sensors and materials. While the research is focused on
fundamental materials science, it will have potential for advancing the
understanding of mechanical regulation of physiological processes in living
cells. This interdisciplinary materials science research will develop tools and
knowledge that will also impact fields of condensed matter physics, biochemistry
and cell biology. The project will also continue efforts to improve the
diversity of STEM trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.