* 2215973
* MRI: Acquisition of a CryoProbe 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Shauna Paradine, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 605,314.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Rochester is
acquiring a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer with a liquid
nitrogen cooled probe to support the research of Professor Alison Frontier and
colleagues Rudi Fasan, Caitlyn R. Kennedy, and Shauna M. Paradine. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of synthesis, peptide chemistry,
catalysis, and materials chemistry. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The nitrogen-cooled probe
provides a significant increase in sensitivity relative to standard NMR probes.
This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of
students at all levels in the department. Accessibility of the instrument to
science and engineering students promotes their training for future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the 500 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as
synthetic organic and inorganic chemistry, polymer science, biochemistry, and
biophysics. This instrument enables research focused on the synthesis of complex
natural products and other biologically relevant polycycles, catalytic methods
for asymmetric synthesis, C-H functionalization of bioactive molecules, and
transition metal catalyzed C-C bond formation. It also assists in the
preparation of molecular mimics of inorganic and hybrid porous materials and in
the dehydrogenation and dehydration of alcohols and amines. Other investigations
include the synthesis, characterization, and reactivity of polyoxovanadate-
alkoxide clusters and using iron-catalyzed transformations in organic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.