* 2215859
* Developing Foundations for Nanopore DNA Sequencing Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences at Minority-Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Jeremy Seto, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2024
* USD 19,883.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by making it easier for
educators to integrate advanced DNA sequencing technologies and related
laboratory and data science skills into their teaching. DNA sequencing allows us
to read the instructions contained in DNA — the so-called “molecule of life”.
DNA sequencing has impacted every area of biology, enabling researchers to
understand more about how life works. This technology is used for research that
boosts agriculture, monitors biodiversity, creates energy solutions, and
improves human health. Previously, DNA sequencing was expensive and time
consuming, but technological improvements have lowered the cost and the time
involved. Preparing the next generation of researchers to use this advanced
technology is essential, but few undergraduate biology educators are equipped to
do this. Reasons for this include complex protocols, lack of lesson materials,
insufficient computer skills, and educator perceptions of earlier, less accurate
versions of this technology. In this project, the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
DNA Learning Center will work with three partner institutions to reduce these
barriers to using advanced DNA sequencing technology in the classroom. Together
with New York City College of Technology, Spelman College, and University of
Puerto Rico, Río Piedras, the project team will co-develop protocols and
teaching tools that integrate advanced DNA sequencing into hands-on training for
biology undergraduates. Faculty from these institutions and other partners
include 2- and 4-year, Hispanic-serving, and Historically Black institutions,
maximizing the potential that the solutions developed can be successfully
implemented in a variety of college settings. Independent evaluation of the
project will lay a foundation for future dissemination at a national level and
will support efforts to create a highly skilled and diverse US STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project objective intends to develop a
biochemistry and bioinformatics workflow to design a kit of reagents and
classroom-friendly protocols that minimize cost, are easy-to-use, and are
customized to support course-based student research projects. Existing NSF-
funded computing solutions (e.g., CyVerse, JetStream, XSEDE) will support
prototype bioinformatics workflows, and sample datasets. The project team will
develop demonstration DNA sequencing projects (e.g., genome assembly,
biodiversity studies, and metagenomics) that explore compelling research
questions and that can be integrated into undergraduate coursework. Each project
will organize faculty from partner institutions into mentoring networks to
promote the development of a “community of practice.” This approach will support
the application of evidence-based curriculum guidelines as faculty iteratively
develop lessons, devise solutions to implementation challenges, and pilot
materials with students. Expert researchers and educators will provide advice on
achieving both the scientific and pedagogical goals of the project. Project
evaluation will advance our understanding of the barriers to faculty adoption of
DNA sequencing technology in course-based research experiences using published
assessment tools. The data collected will be applied to fill gaps in knowledge
about barriers to student research at minority-serving institutions. Lessons
learned will be shared at the institutional level, through virtual networks for
genomics and computational biology education, and at national conferences. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Level 1
Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts
to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education
and disciplinary communities. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI
program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM
education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of
students pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.