* 2215409
* Hydrosocial dynamics and environmental justice in water-energy transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Blair, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,876.00

Energy and water systems are currently undergoing significant changes in
response to climate change. New infrastructure proposals frequently seek to
improve resilience and sustainability of energy and water supplies. Yet, these
projects are often met with public controversy, including accusations of
localized environmental injustice. This research examines the different ways in
which communities, policymakers, and developers think about environmental
justice in relation to infrastructure at the intersection of water and energy.
The research focuses on an issue of increasing importance given ongoing efforts
to mitigate climate change through transforming the water and energy sectors.
The project will investigate how water-energy transitions and governance can be
more attentive to environmental justice and community concerns. The research
will engage communities directly, including Indigenous communities, and will
result in a policy-facing report with community-generated recommendations in
addition to academic publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to advance understanding of the multiple perspectives on proposed
water-energy nexus infrastructure and resource extraction projects, focusing on
issues of environmental justice and perceptions of hydrosocial changes. The
research uses qualitative methods to understand: (1) How are neighboring
communities reacting to water-energy projects intended to mitigate or adapt to
climate change, and the associated changes to hydrosocial dynamics? (2) What are
the overlaps and differences between the ways that neighboring communities,
policymakers, and developers imagine hydrosocial change and environmental
justice in relation to water-energy infrastructures? (3) How are claims of
environmental (in)justice framed and operationalized by public agencies, courts,
environmental groups, community organizations, Tribal governments, and others
involved in water-energy governance? The research contributes a stronger
understanding of how different actors imagine the reshaping of hydrosocial flows
and spaces through activities often considered “green” that, in practice,
involve critical environmental justice issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.