* 2215398
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Institutions Through STEM Equity Learning Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ryan Sweeder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 202,580.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving STEM education
outcomes using a department-level approach to address systemic inequities that
create barriers to student success. Introductory STEM courses consistently
reproduce inequities for historically marginalized students. However, it is
common among those involved in STEM education, including faculty,
administrators, and even students themselves, to view these inequities as
resulting from student deficits. This “blame-the-victim” mindset creates a
significant barrier for STEM education reform as attempts to address inequities
often focus on “fixing” the students, rather than on creating systemic change in
courses and departments. This project will test a department-oriented approach
for changing the student-deficit mindsets present in faculty, administrators,
and undergraduate students. By guiding participants in recognizing the
structural role that courses and departments play in student success, and
documenting the process in the form of a guide, this project will allow new and
different institutions to adapt this field-tested approach for their local
contexts, driving dialogue in STEM departments on approaches for examining
student academic outcomes through an equity lens. Leveraging the existing
relationships and past work of the multi-institutional Sloan Equity and
Inclusion in STEM Introductory Courses (SEISMIC) collaboration, this project
plans to develop and share a standard menu of equity measures that should
provide a benchmark for universities seeking to measure equity in their courses
and departments. Use of this standard menu of measurements should allow
community colleges, public research universities, tribal colleges, private
universities, and more to learn from each other on institutional policies that
promote equity in STEM classrooms, promoting greater partnerships between these
traditionally siloed types of institutions. Development of a public monthly talk
series on this project hopes to make STEM reform efforts more accessible and
inspire more people in higher education to consider their own mindsets on
student success, to learn how to talk about and represent course inequities in
equity-minded ways, and to recognize these deficit mindsets as part of the
greater structural problems in the U.S. stemming from institutional racism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is to establish
STEM Equity Learning Communities (SELCs) in universities across the U.S. that
will foster impactful approaches for engaging faculty, department leaders, and
undergraduate students in equity-minded discussions of their STEM courses. There
are four expected outcomes for this two-year project: (1) A guide for the
creation and effective operation of data-centric SELCs that can be adapted for
different institutional contexts; (2) Development and implementation of an array
of intersectional course equity measures that can be used by many institutions
to place their own equity challenges in a national context; (3) Equity-minded
action plans for peer universities across the U.S. to address systemic
inequities in introductory STEM courses; and (4) Field-tested instruments for
measuring mindsets on student success. Major project activities include creating
a SELC on each participating SEISMIC campus, developing and using survey and
interview protocols to study the experiences of SELC members, establishing
shared classroom equity measures using institutional data, engaging participants
with equity data through a Summer Institute, local SELC meetings, cross-campus
inter-SELC meetings, and a public talk series. Finally, each SELC will be guided
to develop an action plan and presentation for their local campus leadership to
initiate reform in their introductory STEM courses. The project hopes to
generate knowledge on how well and in what context SELCs can develop equity-
mindedness in faculty, department leaders, and undergraduate students across ten
large, public, R1 universities and can empower them to promote this mindset in
their departments. The project should also enable future research on the nuances
of equity measures most effective for motivating structural change and
generating positive impact on introductory STEM courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.