* 2215227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Children’s Experiences and Perceptions of Water Insecurity
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Barbara Piperata, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 30,870.00

As a biological necessity and resource essential to the most basic cultural
activities that promote child development, water’s absence or poor quality
fundamentally shapes child routines and has profound consequences on their
health and well-being. In response, households adopt water related activities
and coping strategies aimed at maintaining the health of children and others in
home. While children are often integral to these activities and strategies,
current research focuses on an adult’s ability to maintain their own well-being.
This leaves us with an incomplete and adult biased understanding of water
insecurity. The purpose of this doctoral dissertation is to examine how children
experience and perceive their daily routines and well-being to be impacted by
household water insecurity. In addition to training a graduate student in
anthropological science, the project has implications for public health (local
and global), as policy and intervention are poorly informed by a lack of child
centered research on water insecurity.

Ecocultural Theory argues that children’s participation in daily structured
routines is the single most important influence on their development. This
project advances Ecocultural Theory by considering how severe resource
limitations, such as water insecurity, shape child routines and impact child
well being. Working with a group of 30 children, ages 6-11, and their parents,
the research uses conversational semi-structured interviews, direct
observations, and drawings to understand children’s roles and responsibilities
related to the use, consumption, and management of water; what activities
children engage in to address situations of insufficient or unsafe water; and
how children perceive their well-being to be impacted by their water related
roles, responsibilities, and coping strategies. By capturing both caregiver and
child perspectives, this study further examines how children realize the
expectations and responsibilities placed on them to support the water insecure
home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.