* 2215269
* Developing and Studying a Three hour Documentary Series and Live Game Streaming Showing the Relationship of Engineering to the Everyday Built World
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chris Schmidt, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,453,236.00

Engineering is arguably one of the most critical skills in any society, from
building bridges and homes, to designing cell phones and life-saving medical
devices. Yet many Americans do not consider engineering to be essential or
relevant to their everyday lives, and may even question its positive impact on
society. While there have been gains in the number of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM professions over the past few decades, their numbers in the
field remain disproportionately low. The Built World integrated multimedia and
research project therefore aims to expand access to engineering content through
the lens of “inclusive engineering,” which highlights how problem-solvers of all
ages, genders, backgrounds, and perspectives approach and overcome challenges to
innovate. The project applies this concept through the creation of Built World,
a three-hour documentary series for broadcast on PBS stations nationwide, and a
complementary interactive escape game streamed live on Twitch, where individuals
of all ages and backgrounds can play and solve engineering challenges together.
There is a need for effective remote and virtual interaction to support informal
STEM learning, and live streaming game platforms present a promising approach to
filling this need. Built World is poised to advance the field through: (1)
content - creating high-quality inclusive engineering content across multiple
platforms to reach a wide audience (Built World documentary, digital reporting
and short form videos, community outreach campaign); (2) applied research -
designing and studying how live-streaming, collaborative platforms can serve as
safe and inclusive spaces for engineering learning; and (3) best practices -
exploring how audiences engage with inclusive engineering on different
platforms—a traditional documentary format (Built World) versus an interactive,
collaborative space (Twitch game)—and identifying what learning outcomes might
be expected on each. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-phase research design aims to
understand what motivates users to engage with STEM content on Twitch; how to
define and measure learning outcomes associated with the platform; and how to
mitigate the risk of toxic environments in online communities by fostering safe
spaces for a diversity of gamers. Phase 1 informs the initial design of the
Twitch game and audience interaction strategies and seeks to answer: What is the
best way to measure informal learning on Twitch? What is the best way to design
a Twitch channel to create an inclusive space while optimizing learner
engagement? Phase 2 is the core focus of the research and uses a semi-
experimental design to answer questions such as: Is there evidence of learning
on Twitch, and what type of learning is happening? What is the digital culture
that emerges? Phase 3 assesses the pairing of the documentary series with the
Twitch game to maximize informal STEM learning and is guided by questions such
as: How does inclusive engineering content presented on two platforms (Twitch
game and Built World series) mediate learning outcomes? How does inclusive
engineering content presented on two platforms shape learners’ experiences of
inclusivity and belonging? Knowledge generated through the Built World project
will offer tools and best practices to other STEM media producers so that they
may also leverage live streaming platforms for
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.