* 2215900
* MRI: Development of a Mass Spectrometer for Isomer-selective Thermochemical, Structural, and Spectroscopic Characterization of Bimolecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christopher Johnson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,102,755.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, Chemical
Measurement and Imaging, and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs.
The State University of New York at Stony Brook is developing an electrospray
tandem mass spectrometer with variable temperature and ion trap capabilities for
investigations of isomer-selective thermochemical, structural, and spectroscopic
characterization of bimolecular interactions to support the research of
Professor Christopher Johnson and colleagues Eszter Boros, Karena Chapman, and
Michael White. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of
biochemistry, medicinal chemistry, inorganic chemistry, organometallic
catalysis, and physical chemistry. Tandem mass spectrometry facilitates the
separation of ionized molecules as a function of space or time. The instrument
being developed isolates analytes using mass spectrometry and generates weakly-
bound or transient biomolecular complexes using variable temperature traps.
Electron scattering and vibrational spectroscopy are directly integrated to
determine structure and intermolecular interactions in samples. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all
levels in many departments as well as provides accessibility for use at nearby
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award for the development of a variable
temperature ion trap mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as biochemistry, medicinal
chemistry, inorganic chemistry, organometallic catalysis, and physical
chemistry. Research focuses on the development of an instrument that generates
isomer-specific thermochemical and structural analysis of bi- and polymolecular
complexes. Instrument advances include operation in an environment ranging from
cryogenic to elevated temperatures, conditions that are necessary for the
generation or isolation of weakly-bound or transient bimolecular complexes and
their thermochemical analysis. This platform facilitates the direct quantitative
structural analysis of complexes via electron scattering measurements, and the
vibrational spectroscopic analysis of structure and intermolecular interactions
binding the complexes. The integration of these techniques into a single
instrument platform enables the tracking of binding equilibria as a function of
ion trap temperature to determine gas-phase binding enthalpies and entropies. In
addition, electron scattering experiments and pair distribution function
analysis will reveal the structures of these complexes by quantifying atom-atom
distances in the bare analytes and their complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.