* 2215989
* Advancing Student-Centered Teaching for Disciplinary Knowledge Building in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Knight, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,959.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
outcomes in engineering using student-centered teaching practices. This research
and development investigation directly addresses two unresolved challenges in
undergraduate STEM education: the slow adoption of effective instructional
practices and the assumption that effective teaching is of a generalized form.
The mixed methods participatory action research (PAR) study will examine the
uptake of student-centered teaching in middle and upper level courses.
Furthermore, the investigators seek to understand institutional change in
engineering through guided reflection of an effort to integrate research and
practice. The PAR approach entails scholarly reflection on knowledge and
learning with a small team of exemplary faculty to accomplish a complex change
agenda. These faculty are acknowledged for utilizing student-centered teaching
practices within their courses and will be drawn from several engineering
departments. In addition, faculty will engage in research that seeks to foster
the development and continued support of a community of practice (CoP). This CoP
intends to build on and contribute to an understanding of how disciplinary
knowledge can transform undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to (1) advance the understanding of the types of
effective instructional practices used in middle and upper-level engineering
classes to promote student learning of disciplinary knowledge and (2) support
sustainable transformation of engineering education. The research is guided by
the following questions: (1) What student-centered teaching approaches are used
by exemplary engineering faculty to promote knowledge building in their courses?
(2) How do these relate relate to faculty beliefs about teaching? (3) How can a
sustainable community of practice translate these practices broadly across
entire departments for improved student learning? The project team will examine
the adoption and implementation of effective instructional practices to
understand the types of such practices found in middle and upper level
engineering classes, with an eye towards instantiating sustainable
transformation of undergraduate STEM education. The investigation is based on
the theoretical assumption that faculty’s philosophical beliefs concerning
knowledge and learning are: enacted in practice; lead to expectations about
student learning and achievement; and are grounded in disciplinary context. This
project aims to foster broader uptake of these practices within and beyond the
institution and will ultimately launch Virginia Tech’s Center for Teaching &amp;
Learning in Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.