* 2215258
* MRI: Acquisition of the First 800 MHz NMR with Cryoprobe in the State of Mississippi for Biological and Chemical Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Joseph Emerson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,203,088.00

An award is made to Mississippi State University (MSU) to support the
acquisition of an 800 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This
instrument will support researchers throughout Mississippi and the southeast,
enabling new research avenues in biomolecular interactions, organometallic
chemistry, and polymeric materials. This project will support a diverse
community of researchers at all levels, from undergraduate students to faculty
at nearby PUIs and HBCUs. Students can access the new instrument firsthand
through course offerings at MSU, including “Theory of Solution NMR
Spectroscopy.” Moreover, MSU’s “Environmental Chemistry” course will feature
instrument installation and helium use. A total of 19 investigators, 64 graduate
students, 72 undergraduate students, and 7 postdoctoral trainees will be
directly and immediately impacted by this project, in addition to other users
who benefit through classes and workshops offered at MSU. Many of these trainees
will represent ethnic minorities or first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument will enable biomolecular and
chemical research not currently possible in Mississippi. This is because the new
instrument has significantly increased sensitivity and resolution over the
current instrumentation available in the region. Biological researchers will use
this new NMR spectrometer (1) to explore how microorganisms attach to surfaces,
(2) to understand how ion channels are regulated in the heart, (3) to
characterize the mechanism of metal-ion-based gene regulation, and (4) to
monitor how small molecules respond to changes in metabolism. Chemical
researchers will use the instrument to develop new methods for synthesizing
polymeric and organometallic materials, and the instrument includes a broadband
probe for detecting nonstandard nuclei such as 27Al, 29Si, and 195Pt. Data
collected on the new 800 MHz NMR will be shared broadly at scientific meetings
and in peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.