* 2215420
* Youth Engaging in the Science of Resilience: Sensing the Environment and Envisioning Solutions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Kathleen Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,358,945.00

This Innovations in Development project supports racially and ethnically diverse
youth in learning about climate resilience in informal settings, including
community centers, afterschool programs, and museums. The project aims to: (1)
build the capacity of community organizations to implement youth programming on
climate resilience; (2) increase youth knowledge, skills, and self-efficacy
associated with climate resilience (also referred to as environmental health
literacy for climate resilience); and (3) explore how collaborating research
universities and community organizations engage diverse youth in informal STEM
learning. Project partners include the UNC Institute for the Environment, the
University of Washington-Interdisciplinary Center for Exposures, Diseases,
Genomics and Environment, the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, Juntos
NC, and the Duwamish River Community Coalition (DRCC). Juntos NC and DRCC
actively engage Latino and Indigenous youth in their programming and seek to
implement resilience-focused programming that supports youth science learning
and leadership development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, informal
educators and participating youth will develop locally relevant solutions to
climate impacts in their communities. Youth will interact with university-based
climate scientists and educators to collect and analyze data and will
participate in resilience-focused dialogue, planning, and actions in their
communities. Youth will share what they learn with their families and peers
through family events and teen summits. The project will engage dozens of
educators in community organizations and at least 250 youth, who will share what
they learn with their families and communities, reaching hundreds more people
through communications and local action projects. Mixed-methods assessment will
provide insight into the extent participating youth (a) develop environmental
health literacy for climate resilience, and (b) take action to address
resilience in their home communities. The team will assess how these outcomes
vary by location, and the implications of any variation on potential for project
replication. A participatory evaluation, led by an external evaluator, will
provide insight into empowerment outcomes. Findings will be disseminated to
professional audiences at local and national conferences; and curricular
materials from this project will be disseminated through the project website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to an evidence-
based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. These approaches include providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.