* 2215114
* Residential Mobility: Implications for the Accuracy of Disease Cluster Detection
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Eric Delmelle, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2025
* USD 393,930.00

Public health organizations are increasingly relying on space-time clustering
techniques to target place-based health initiatives such as prevention. However,
the methodological techniques benefit from refinement. In this proposal, the
researchers examine the impact of commonly cited concerns about the validity of
space-time cluster detection while developing methods and practices to resolve
or reduce their effects on cluster analytics. Specifically, the researchers
first study the impact of residential mobility on the validity of space-time
clustering. Second, the researchers estimate the level of granularity at which
residential histories should be studied before clusters become unnoticed. A
third goal of the project is an evaluation of how space-time relationships
constructed from patient mobility can affect the relative risk of existing
space-time clusters. The interdisciplinary project contributes to research in
health geography and space-time analytics. The study integrates new sources of
individual movement data while creating methodological tools to incorporate
those data into existing workflows. These methods and tools contribute to public
health efforts to respond to disease outbreaks in the future. Key findings and
recommendations are shared with local, regional, and federal stakeholders.
Multiple students are involved in the project, contributing to the education and
training of early-career social scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity
of human mobility, disease dynamics, and privacy concerns are persistent
challenges to the validity of cluster detection methods. The opportunity to test
the consequences of these assumptions is now possible through improved access to
electronic health records, individual residential histories, accurate linkage
algorithms, and advanced geospatial technologies. In this project, the
researchers examine how heterogeneous spatial and temporal resolution affects
space-time cluster detection accuracy. The project also examines how the
integration of residential mobility may mitigate space-time uncertainty, with
the aim of discerning the level of detail needed to maximize the detection of
spatiotemporal clustering in the data. Methodologically, the project uses
simulated space-time trajectories to test clustering algorithms, simultaneously
evaluating how scaling issues and other perturbations affect the validity of
clustering tests. The generalizability of the approach is examined via an
analysis of two large empirical datasets that include detailed detail on the
mobility of patients after diagnosis. The project informs research design
considerations by highlighting the extent to which residential mobility should
be monitored for accurate inferences. In addition to applications to disease
detection, the methods extend to other areas of research that use clustering
methods, such as spatial ecology and animal movement, transportation and urban
dynamics, and criminology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.