* 2215807
* Further Development of an Open Educational Resource to Improve Architectural Engineering Students’ Conceptual Knowledge When Writing to Learn
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Roy Clariana, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 274,637.00

Conceptual understanding of core engineering fundamentals enables engineers to
predict how a system will behave, to determine appropriate solutions to
problems, to choose relevant design processes, and to explain how the world
around them works. Conceptual understanding refers to rich cognitive
representations of concepts, both concrete and abstract, such as how a masonry
veneer wall composite aligns with heat energy principles. Such conceptual
understanding is essential, yet newly entering college students and even recent
graduates commonly misperceive the engineering concepts needed to solve even
simple problems in real-world practice. Addressing this gap early in
undergraduate training will lay a stronger foundation for building the next
generation of engineers who are vital for our nation’s economic resilience and
future competitiveness on the international stage. The software and approach
developed by this project provides summary writing exercises with immediate
feedback to support classroom lecture and discussion in real time. The broader
benefits of this project include that the research findings and the software can
complement and extend other STEM writing pedagogies. The software will be
designed to be quick and simple to set up by a course instructor and can be used
in any content area, thus it has potentially wide application in any STEM course
at the undergraduate and even high school levels. The software and approach
automatically scale to courses with large enrollments, for example massive open
online engineering courses that serve tens of thousands of students, thus adding
deeper conceptual engagement to these courses at little extra
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary writing with feedback, also called writing-
to-learn, is an effective way to build conceptual understanding, but grading
essays is time consuming especially in large enrollment courses. A second
evidence-based way to improve students’ conceptual understanding is to
intentionally and explicitly include domain knowledge conceptual representations
in courses, for example, using network graphs as individual feedback and for
classroom discussions. When students use network graphs, the form of their
conceptual model becomes more like an expert’s model. Combining these findings,
this 2-year interdisciplinary research and software development project will
investigate the influence of knowledge structure feedback as network graphs of
lesson concepts when writing to learn in the engineering domain studied through
an educational lens. The four investigations, in order, will compare (1) writing
with network feedback to no writing, (2) writing with network feedback to
writing without feedback, (3) writing with network feedback with or without
delayed instructor explanations of the lesson conceptual structure as podcasts,
and (4) writing with network feedback with or without immediate instructor
explanations of the lesson conceptual structure during lectures. The four
investigations in this project have potential to add to the known theory and
practice regarding knowledge structure networks as feedback mechanisms when
writing to learn in STEM courses. Results of these four investigations could
inform the potential of explicitly teaching domain knowledge conceptual
structure to augment traditional teaching approaches, and extend the writing to
learn STEM content research to include feedback as conceptual network structure.
The research findings will be disseminated through webinars, social media, a
persistent project website, journals, workshops, and conference presentations.
The software developed will be available to the public as an open education
resource through the project website. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.