* 2215032
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Doctor/Patient Relationship: Theory and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Catherine Eckel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 24,999.00

The patient-physician relationship plays an important role in the health
outcomes of patients. However, this relationship is poorly understood and
constitutes a major concern in healthcare services. While a positive
relationship can enhance the effectiveness of medical treatment, a negative one
can lead to mistrust, lower quality care, and worse health outcomes. One common
problem is that patients may not fully trust their doctors’ advice, and so may
fail to comply with treatment recommendations. If a doctor anticipates that a
patient will be noncompliant, then the doctor has little incentive to work hard
to develop a careful diagnosis and effective treatment regime. Thus a failure of
trust on both sides of the relationship can lead to worse health outcomes. This
grant funds a project that uses economic theory and decision-making experiments
to better understand this relationship, and to develop and test interventions
with the potential to improve trust in patient/physician relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes contributions in three areas. 1) The
model is adapted from the “credence good” literature and hypothesizes that the
inability of patients to observe the doctor’s diagnostic precision is the main
reason behind their distrust. It further predicts that patients’ distrust will
discourage doctors from incurring the cost of better diagnosis and treatment.
Thus the model expands the standard interaction between consumers and expert
sellers in a credence good market to include the consumer’s active participation
in product/service choices – i.e. patients can participate in choosing their own
medical treatments even if they are not experts in diagnosis. 2) This project
designs a patient-doctor ‘experimental model’ that enables the characterization
and isolation of key elements in the doctor/patient relationship, and then
conducts lab and online experiments to verify the model predictions. These
experiments are the first to incorporate active decision making by patients,
highlighting the importance of diagnostic uncertainty in shaping the patient’s
compliance and thus changing the market equilibrium. 3) This study tests a
commonly-proposed intervention: ‘a public rating system’ for patients to rate
doctors, which can enhance reputation and positively impact physician’s quality
of care. This component complements prior empirical study in health economics by
providing causal evidence on how reputation can strengthen the patient-physician
relationship and improve health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.