* 2215207
* Women in Natural Sciences: A Longitudinal Comparative Case Study of Black Women in STEMM (1995-2015)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jacqueline Genovesi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 765,118.00

Stark inequities evident in the low representation of Black women in Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics, and Medicine (STEMM) careers persist
despite considerable investment in the diversification of the education-to-
workplace STEMM pipeline. College participation rates of Black women measure
4-5% of all degrees in biological and physical sciences, 2-3% of degrees in
computer science and math, and roughly 1% in engineering. Ultimately, Black
women make up only 2.5% of the workforce in STEMM-related fields, indicating
that they chronically experience stalled professional advancement. Because there
are so few longitudinal studies in either formal or informal settings, educators
and researchers lack critical insights into why BA/BS credentialed Black women
drop out of STEMM careers at high rates upon entering the workforce. This
Research in Service to Practice project will conduct a longitudinal examination
of key professional outcomes and life trajectories among adult Black women who
enrolled Women in Natural Sciences (WINS), a 40-year-old out-of-school time
(OST) high school STEM enrichment program. Prior research on WINS documents that
alumnae outperform national averages on all metrics related to STEMM advancement
up through college graduation. This study will test the hypothesis that such
success continues for these cohorts as they pursue life goals and navigate the
workforce. Findings from this study will promote the progress of science,
pivotal to NSF’s mission as the project builds knowledge about supportive and
frustrating factors for Black women in STEMM careers. Strategic impact lies in
the novel participant-centered research methods that amplify Black women’s
voices and increase both accuracy and equity in informal STEM learning
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research probes the experiences of Black
women at a critical phase of their workforce participation when BS/BA
credentialed WINS alumnae establish their careers (ages 26-46). The team will
conduct a longitudinal comparative case study of outcomes and life trajectories
among 20 years of WINS cohorts (1995-2015). Research questions include (1) What
do the life-journey narratives of WINS alumnae in adulthood reveal about
influential factors in the socio-cultural ecological systems of Black women in
STEMM? (2) What are the long-term outcomes among WINS women regarding education,
STEMM and other careers, socio-economic status, and STEMM self-efficacy and
interest? How do these vary? (3) What salient program elements in WINS are
highlighted in alumnae narratives as relevant to Black women’s experiences in
adulthood? How do these associations vary? (4) How do selected outcomes (stated
in RQ2) and life story narratives among non-enrolled applicants compare to
program alumnae? and (5) How do salient components in the WINS program associate
with socio-cultural factors in regard to Black women’s careers and other life
goals? Participants include 100 Black WINS alumnae as an intervention group and
a matched comparison group of 100 Black women who successfully applied to the
WINS program but did not or could not enroll. Measurable life outcomes and life
trajectory narratives with maps of experiences from both groups will be studied
via a convergent mixed methods design inclusive of quantitative and qualitative
analyses. Comparisons of outcomes and trajectories will be made between the
study groups. Further, associations between alumnae’s long-term outcomes and how
they correlate their WINS experiences with other socio-cultural factors in their
lives will be identified. It is anticipated that findings will challenge extant
knowledge and pinpoint the most effective characteristics of and appropriate
measures for studying lasting impacts of OST STEMM programs for Black women and
girls. The project is positioned to contribute substantially to national efforts
to increase participation of Black women in STEMM. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.