* 2215854
* MRI: Acquisition of Crystallographic Equipment and Excellence in Crystallographic Science and Education at Temple University and the Surrounding Community
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Zdilla, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 290,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Temple University is acquiring a
dual-source single crystal diffractometer to support the research of Professor
Michael Zdilla, colleague Richard H Baxter, as well as eight senior personnel,
and sixteen collaborators. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate
and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas such as, synthetic organic and inorganic
chemistry, catalysis, materials, physics, nanoscience, engineering, energy
science, biochemistry, chemical biology, and structural biology. This instrument
is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in multiple disciplines including chemistry,
biochemistry, pharmacy and engineering. The facility serves as a regional XRD
resource benefitting students and faculty from Temple and in the surrounding
community. For example, there are numerous users located at Drexel University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. Research enabled by the instrument is focused on research in
inorganic chemistry, materials, and crystallography, including the synthesis of
transition metal clusters with implications for energy science. The role of
innate immunity in insect hosts for vector- borne diseases will be enabled with
the crystal structures of thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1), a key factor in
the response of the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae to Plasmodium, and the
mosquito-specific leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins, Leucine-rich repeat immune
proteins (LRIMs). Research on the development of solid or gel electrolytes for
lithium or sodium ion/metal batteries will rely on SCXRD of important compounds.
Researcher will be able to assess structural properties of potential catalysts
and refine methods for production of organic molecules more rapidly and
accurately. XRD will be used to investigate the self-assembly and colloidal
stability of different supramolecular systems (supramolecular dendrimers,
supported lipid bilayers and liposomes), in the design, synthesis, purification,
characterization and biological testing of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs)
and activators (CAAs), synthesis and self-assembling study of amphiphiles of
different molecular weights (simple and gemini surfactants, lipids, dendrons and
dendrimers and polymers) and their use as delivery systems in cancer treatment.
Work on spiroligomers requires both small molecule and macromolecular XRD to
characterize these ever-larger structures. XRD will assist in the generation of
probes that can unravel molecular mechanisms underlying post-translational
modifications (PTMs) or target newly revealed protein-protein interactions
(PPIs) key to PTMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.