* 2215430
* Collaborative Research:  Reducing Prejudice Toward Refugees:  How Social Networks Reinforce and Unravel Attitude Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Janet Lewis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 412,271.00

Most of the world’s political refugees live in developing countries. Maintaining
positive host-refugee relations is important for maintaining security in these
countries. This study investigates whether face-to-face conversations aimed at
taking the perspective of refugees can reduce an individual’s prejudice towards
refugees in a resource-poor context, and whether changes in beliefs about and
attitudes towards outgroups spread socially, via social networks after the
intervention. The study results will show how social networks reinforce or
undermine changes in beliefs and attitudes in the longer-term, thereby advancing
knowledge on the most difficult part of this process: countering prejudice
towards refugees in ways that are cost-effective and durable. Additionally, the
network data collected during the study will be used to build a pedagogical
resource to aid social network analysis instruction. The study will culminate in
both scholarly publications and a public-facing set of briefs for refugee
organizations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this study
are fourfold: 1. Assemble a new dataset from households with information on
individual attributes, attitudes towards refugees, beliefs about community views
on refugees, and rich social network information. 2. Assess the effectiveness of
a light-touch intervention aimed at reducing prejudice towards refugees. 3.
Compare the effectiveness of two possible prejudice-reduction interventions and
determine how social processing reinforces or unravels attitude change in the
longer-term. 4. Examine which network structures correlate with other social
identity markers, such as ethnic demography. Randomly selected households will
receive a perspective-taking treatment. In half of the households, the
perspective-taking intervention will occur via a one-on-one, individual
interaction, and in the others, it will occur via a social process at a
community meeting. Data from baseline and subsequent surveys will be analyzed to
meet the study objectives. The study will be among the first to examine directly
the social processing of an individual-level treatment aimed at prejudice
reduction. The findings will significantly advance basic research in areas
related to the study of refugee populations, prejudice regulation, and the
influence of social networks on individual attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.