* 2215169
* Collaborative Research: Randomization Based Machine Learning Methods in a Bayesian Model Setting for Data From a Complex Survey or Census
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Parker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 337,271.00

Official federal statistical system data often have complex sampling and design
features that limit advanced statistical analyses. Examples of such surveys and
census data are the Survey of Graduate Students and Postdoctorates in Science
and Engineering (GSS), the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), the National
Survey of Recent College Graduates (NSRCG), and the National Survey of College
Graduates (NSCG). This project will develop Bayesian statistical and machine
learning methods that are tailored to these types of federal data to improve
computational efficiency and advance these methods to allow for data
integration, multiple imputation, and data privacy. Importantly, the results of
this research will be of value to the work of government agencies as well as
within many subject-matter disciplines that deal with complex data, including
demography, econometrics, and political science, among others. Software packages
will be developed and made publicly available, and the investigators will
educate and train both graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a randomization-based approach, this
research project will develop Bayesian statistical and machine learning
methodologies for unit- and area-level data from a complex survey or census.
This project has three aims. In Aim 1 the investigators will focus on several
extensions to existing models using data reduction methods. Specifically, this
aim will leverage random projection techniques, within a Bayesian hierarchical
modeling framework, to provide useful tools for analyzing federal data.
Subsequently, in Aim 2, the investigators will take advantage of the wide-
applicability of random weight feed-forward neural networks as a Bayesian
nonlinear regression tool for complex survey data. This approach will include
mechanisms for data integration using social media, administrative data, and
other structured data sources. Finally, in Aim 3, the investigators will use
recurrent neural networks and their random weight variants as a tool to model
temporally correlated complex survey or census data within a Bayesian
hierarchical model. Ultimately, this project will develop principled
methodologies that are useful for both the scientific and federal statistical
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.