* 2215165
* RCN: Coordinating Global Coal Transitions Research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Max Woodworth, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 07/31/2026
* USD 350,550.00

The retirement of coal facilities around the world has noteworthy impacts on
communities, landscapes, and regional economies. The Global Coal Transitions
Research Coordination Network (RCN) assembles a global cadre of social science
scholars dedicated to supporting new research into the problems arising from
coal transitions in geographic settings. Reflecting the diverse intellectual
backgrounds and locations of the coordination network’s members, the proposed
activities draws upon and helps to refine scholarship in the areas of equitable
transitions, environmental justice, energy justice, community resilience,
comparative transitions, and social-technical studies of energy. This RCN
positively influences the nature and magnitude of coal transition impacts in the
United States and internationally by providing policymakers, community
officials, and scholars with coordinated and useful social science to understand
and mitigate adverse effects. The involvement of multiple graduate students
contributes to the education and training of early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its global nature, research into coal
transitions has remained limited, has not spanned international boundaries, and
has not been well-integrated into policy discussions. The network will address
these problems through activities focused on answering three central questions.
First, what are the various impacts incurred by retirements of coal facilities
in different national and regional settings? Second, what human-environmental
and geographical concepts and methodologies are best suited for studying global
coal transitions? Third, how can scholars and stakeholders develop useful
research tools and educational resources to enhance the positive impacts of coal
transitions research? Supported by a nine-person international steering
committee, the RCN collaboratively organizes two workshops and a larger
conference open to all interested attendees that leads to the publication of a
collection of recommendations and perspectives. These efforts are complemented
by a website, research library, listserv, and curriculum modules that broaden
the public accessibility of the findings. This RCN brings ethnographically
informed global perspectives to address real-world policy debates around energy
transitions and aids communities and societies amid a diminished reliance on
fossil energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.