* 2215322
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman Microscope to Enhance Research and Teaching at Valparaiso University and Northwest Indiana Partners
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Julie Peller, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 202,151.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Valparaiso University is acquiring
a Raman microscope to support the research of Professor Paul Smith and
colleagues Jon-Paul McCool and Julie Peller. This instrument facilitates
research in the areas of chemistry, engineering, and geography. Raman microscopy
integrates a standard optical microscope with a laser that is used to scan the
surface of a sample to generate a chemical image over the field of view. The
laser wavelength is used to probe the vibrational properties of sample and
produce a spectrum that identifies chemical components in the material. This is
a powerful analytical tool for identifying chemical composition qualitatively
and semi-quantitatively of various materials. This instrument enhances the
educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all levels in many
departments as well as provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions.
Research and research training advances science and benefits society in timely
topical areas such as sustainability, water control and management, and solar
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the Raman microscope is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in those focused on
chemistry, energy, and sustainability. Research focuses on the analysis and
quantification of microplastics in water as well as of mineralogical variations
in natural waters. In addition, other investigations focus on mapping how
electrons permeate battery cathodes. It also assists in determining how atom
vacancies influence solar-to-fuel reactions in fixed-bed
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.