* 2215201
* A Participatory Design Investigation of the Relationship between Program Setting and Science Identity Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jasmine Ma, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,977,195.00

Science identity has been shown to be a necessary precondition to academic
success and persistence in science trajectories. Further, science identities are
formed, in large part, due to the kinds of access, real or perceived, that
(racialized) learners have to science spaces. For Black and Latinx youth, in
particular, mainstream ideas of science as a discipline and as a culture in the
US recognize and support certain learners and marginalize others. Without
developing identities as learners who can do science, or can become future
scientists, these young people are not likely to pursue careers in any
scientific field. There are demonstrable links between positive science
identities and the material and social resources provided by particular places.
Thus, whether young people can see themselves as scientists, or even feel that
they have access to science practices, also depends on where they are learning
it. The overarching goal of this project is to broaden participation of Black
and Latinx youth in science by deepening our understanding of both science
identities and how science learning spaces may be better designed to support the
development of positive science identities of these learners. By deepening the
field’s knowledge of how science learning spaces shape science identities,
science educators can design more equitable learning spaces that leverage the
spatial aspects of program location, culturally relevant curriculum, and
participants’ lived experiences. A more expansive understanding of positive
science identities allows educators to recognize these in Black and Latinx
learners, and direct their continued science engagements accordingly, as
positive identities lead to greater persistence in science. This project is a
collaboration between researchers at New York University and those at a New York
City informal science organization, BioBus. It is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Program which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participatory design
research project will compare three different formats, in different settings, of
afterschool science programming for middle schoolers: one located in a lab space
on the campus of a nearby university, one located in the public middle school
building of participating students, and one aboard a mobile science lab. For
purposes of this study, the construct of “setting” refers to the dimensions of
geographic location, built physical environment, and material resources. Setting
is not static, but instead social and relational: it is dynamically
(co)constructed and experienced in activity by individuals and in interaction by
groups of individuals. Therefore, the three BioBus programming types allow for
productive comparison not only because of their different geographic locations,
built environments, and material resources (e.g., scientific tools), but also
the existing relationships learners may have with these places, as well as the
instructional designs and pedagogical practices that BioBus teaching scientists
use in each. This project uses a design-based research approach to answer the
following research questions: (1) How do the settings of science learning shape
science identity development? What are different positive science identities
that may emerge from these relationships? And (2) What are ways to leverage
different spatial aspects of informal science programming and instruction to
support positive science identities? The study uses ethnographic and micro-
analytic methods to develop better understandings of the relationships between
setting and science identity development, uncover a broad range of types of
positive science identities taken up by our Black and Latinx students, and
inform informal science education to design for and leverage spatial aspects of
programming and instruction. Findings will contribute to a systematic knowledge
base bringing together spatial aspects of informal science education and science
identity and identity development, and provide new tools for informal science
educators, including design principles for incorporating spatial factors into
program and lesson planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.