* 2215975
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Research in Chemical Synthesis, Materials, and Biological Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Michal Szostak, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Rutgers University – Newark is
acquiring a high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with electrospray
Ionization (ESI), atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI), and Direct
Analysis in Real Time (DART) to support the research of Professor Frieder Jaekle
and colleagues Elena Galoppini, Haesun Kim, Michal Szostak, and Colin Kinz-
Thompson. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of organic
chemistry, catalysis, semiconductors, inorganic chemistry, biochemistry, and
biological sciences. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex samples. In a typical experiment, the
components are heated and flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized.
The ions' masses are measured very accurately. The capabilities of the mass
spectrometer instrument are augmented by complementary ESI and ambient pressure
APCI and DART sources and will serve a wide host of research needs. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching
efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides
accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument gives students
experience using vital instrumentation that they carry with them into their
careers. The research groups using the instrument are also actively participate
in multiple successful programs to aid recruiting from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. The new instrument will serve as an
important characterization tool for research that spans areas ranging from
synthetic chemistry, catalysis, materials science to biophysical and biological
sciences. research will be enabled in amide bond activation, cross-coupling and
catalysis, organocatalysis and green synthesis, molecular electrocatalysts for
energy conversion, chromophore-semiconductor interfaces, organoboranes in
materials science and catalysis, bacterial chemosensing, choline transport in
myelin-forming glial cells, lipid metabolism in brain health and disease,
lysozyme-mediated bacterial cell-wall-processing, and biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.