* 2215338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intonational Cues in Emotional Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jennifer Cole, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 10,091.00

The meaning conveyed through language depends not only on what is said--sounds,
words, phrases--but also on how it is said--pitch, loudness, tempo, and other
dimensions of intonation. In American English, distinct intonation patterns are
used to convey meaning related to the discourse context of an utterance,
distinguishing questions from assertions, the continuation of a speaker's turn
in a dialogue, or marking emphasis on words that contribute new information.
Decoding linguistic meaning from phonetic cues related to intonation is
complicated by the fact that the same phonetic parameters are also integral to
the speaker’s expression of emotion. How do these two factors—discourse meaning
and speaker emotion—interact in determining the intonational form of an
utterance, and how do listeners disentangle intonational cues to linguistic
meaning from cues to the speaker's emotional state? To answer this question,
this project investigates variation in the phonetic encoding of discourse
meaning based on speaker emotion, and how listeners use information about a
speaker’s emotional state to guide their interpretation of discourse meaning.
Phase I of this project examines evidence from speech production experiments
that elicit specific intonation patterns in sentences produced under different
conditions of enacted emotion. Phase II tests how listeners' perception of
speaker emotion affects how they process linguistic intonational categories and
the interpretation of discourse meaning. The findings from this study will shed
light on the interaction between linguistic context and speaker emotion in the
production and perception of intonation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work adopts
the Autosegmental-Metrical model of American English intonation, in which the
phonetic implementation of intonation derives from phonological structures that
group words into prosodic phrases, and tone features that mark prosodic phrase
edges (boundary tones) and phrasal prominence (pitch accents). The investigation
focuses on how enacted emotion affects the production of eight phrase-final
intonation “tunes” (e.g., falling pitch or rising pitch) that have distinct
pragmatic meaning. Tunes are elicited using an imitation paradigm. Participants
hear a tune on a model sentence, and then produce the same tune on a new
sentence presented in a discourse context congruent with the tune meaning, under
four conditions of enacted emotion. The effect of emotion on acoustic correlates
of intonation is modeled using Bayesian mixed-effects regression. A subset of
recorded utterances from the production experiment are used as stimuli in a
series of perception and comprehension experiments. Perceptual discrimination
among tunes is tested as a function of enacted emotion using AXB discrimination,
and a free classification task where listeners group utterances according to the
speaker's inferred communicative goal (e.g., to express surprise, make an
assertion). Comprehension of tune meaning is tested through a structured set of
questions probing listeners’ pragmatic judgments for each tune as a function of
the enacted emotion. This project contributes to linguistic theories of
intonational form and meaning, with new insights into speaker emotion as a
source of variation in intonation production and perception, and contributes a
new corpus of speech recordings, the English IntEX Corpus, for future research
on intonation and emotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.