* 2215672
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: A New Architecture for Petabyte-scale File Transfer Evaluated in FABRIC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Abraham Matta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 323,965.00

File transfer is a fundamental operation of the Internet. Important scientific
instruments, such as the James Webb Space Telescope and the Large Hadron
Collider, generate massive files daily. As files increase in size, it is more
likely errors are introduced during their transfer, such as the ones not caught
by the checksum process. Reliability is especially important when the files
store data that capture a rare event, such as rare gravitational waves whose
loss could significantly impact scientific conclusions if they go undetected.
This collaborative project brings together investigators from Arizona State
University and Boston University to develop a multi-layer error detection (MLED)
architecture. MLED will not only eliminate detectable errors, it also provably
reduces the probability of undetected errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each layer in
the MLED architecture is parameterized by a policy that includes the scope of
the error detection method among other requirements. When aggregated, the layers
improve error detection capabilities and significantly reduce the probability of
undetected errors. This project has three research directions: (1) to develop
the theory of MLED to study trade-offs among policy parameters to optimize the
probability of undetected errors and file transfer delay; (2) to design a
software-defined implementation of MLED exploiting features in FABRIC, a new
testbed of networked computing systems; (3) to evaluate MLED to investigate and
understand the design trade-offs that must be navigated to harness FABRIC, to
validate the theory, and to compare to other tools across the spectrum of file
transfer solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project impacts the science of
understanding networked computing systems through the design and implementation
of the MLED architecture using features of FABRIC that are unavailable in other
network testbeds. Reliable file transfer is especially important when the
conclusions drawn from the data critically depend on their correctness, with
potential consequences to scientific knowledge. In addition, MLED advances data
science to better understand undetected errors, their propagation through file
transfer, and management of massive data sets. FABRIC Across Borders offers the
opportunity to use MLED for petabyte-scale file transfer across the oceans.
Outreach activities will share experience using FABRIC with the testbed
community and promote the adoption of MLED for file transfer. By the end of this
project, it will have contributed towards NSF and national research priorities
on networked computing systems, and helped educate graduate and undergraduate
students, while broadening participation of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project website:
https://www.public.asu.edu/~syrotiuk/mled.html. Jupyter Notebooks will be used
throughout the project to prototype, explore, and document the experimental
process. To enable reproducibility the notebooks and code repositories will be
shared on the project website, in addition to resulting publications. This
website will be maintained for at least three years following the project end
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.