* 2215839
* MRI: Acquisition of a novel multi sensor-equipped unmanned aerial system (UAS) observatory for coastal mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joanne Halls, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 850,863.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Grant award supports the acquisition of a
novel multi sensor-equipped Uncrewed/Unoccupied Aerial System (UAS) observatory
for coastal mapping and data collection from both the air and the ground in an
integrative manner. The observatory will consist of three off-the-shelf,
commercial UAS platforms equipped with four complementary remote sensors:
10-band multispectral, hyperspectral, topographic and topo-bathymetric Light
Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) along with required in situ reference
instrumentation to form a consolidated system to monitor and map coastal
ecosystems. This coastal UAS observatory, the first of its kind at a Southeast
United States regional university, builds on university expertise and on-going
research. By bolstering infrastructure in a rapidly urbanizing coastal region,
this acquisition will enable continuation and development of new and diverse
interdisciplinary applications of UAS-derived data and, importantly, provide
unparalleled opportunities for student training, professional development and
community partnerships. The state-of-the art instrumentation also will provide
students, especially women and participants from underrepresented groups, with
hands-on training in the operation, collection, and analysis of remotely-sensed
datasets. Empowering students with these high-demand skills will not only
increase their competitiveness in coastal engineering, geography, and
environmental science job markets but also expand representation in the rapidly
growing UAS and geospatial employment fields. These assets also will increase
academic recruitment to the southeastern U.S. where poverty is prevalent, and
underrepresented minorities comprise a large percentage of the region’s
population. The instrumentation and datasets will be readily available to a
growing community of researchers, institutions, and local and regional
stakeholders given the new and innovative collaborations between academia,
government and growing geospatial industry sectors supported by this
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research will focus on quantifying,
mapping, monitoring and modeling coastal ecosystem and human-environmental
dynamics in under-studied and critical coastal ecosystems of coastal regions,
currently home to more than half of the world’s population. The strongest impact
will occur across those fields where accounting for spatially- and temporally-
explicit dynamic processes is critical. Continuous, integrated (e.g., nearshore,
estuarine, and riverine) and synoptic measurements will identify areas that are
most vulnerable to the combined impacts of sea-level rise and extreme weather
events, guide land management decisions and inform strategies and tools that
enable both ecosystems and humans to adapt to changing environmental conditions.
Therefore, the observatory will provide critical infrastructure to observe and
quantify human-environment, biogeographic, geomorphic, biogeochemical and
surface processes and establish a novel framework for detecting, modeling and
predicting future impacts to complex and anthropogenically-impacted coastal
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.