* 2215369
* Panel Data for the Study of Network Economics and Risk Sharing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tyler McCormick, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 775,089.00

How individuals cope with adversity or find jobs, among other things, depends on
the strength of their relationships within communities and across geographic
areas. Research in many disciplines such as economics, sociology, computer
science, and statistics therefore rely heavily on social network data.
Collecting detailed network data on populations is very costly and,
consequently, research often includes only a small part of populations in their
analysis. This research project will develop innovative methods to inexpensively
collect network data, use the method to create two large datasets on the socio-
economic relationships among vulnerable populations. The researchers will match
these network data with information on economic and labor market outcomes as
well as physical and mental health status. In addition, the researchers will
build statistical tools to facilitate the use of these data sets and make these
datasets and the toolkit freely available to other researchers. The results of
this research project will improve research on several topics such as social
learning, risk sharing, and therefore improve policy making. The results will
also increase the effectiveness of government and business policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new methods to create
network data, use the methods to build two large data sets on vulnerable people,
and merge these data sets with data on several economic and social outcomes and
make the data sets available to researchers. To study a large sample of
vulnerable populations, the network relationships among them both within the
local community and across large geographic regions, one needs a tool to make
the data collection scalable. This project will use Aggregate Relational Data
(ARD) to make this feasible. By asking individuals the number of people with a
particular trait they are linked to (for various sets of traits), the PIs can
estimate a network formation model that gives a picture of how community-to-
community relationships vary across regions. ARD is very cheap to collect, in
contrast with detailed, complete network data. Equipped with ARD and appropriate
statistical and econometric techniques, researchers can sample numerous more
respondents and create more network data. This research product will benefit
theorists, econometricians, statisticians, and sociologists. The results of this
research will allow researchers to study topics such as diffusion, social
learning, multiplexing in networks, risk sharing, and social isolation, among
others. It will allow researchers and policymakers to access a granular dataset
that can better inform policies generally and particularly on vulnerable
populations. The results are likely to improve the quality and targeting of
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.