* 2215653
* The Expansion of a Mobile Making Project That Engages Underserved Youth Across California in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Frank Gomez, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2027
* USD 589,615.00

This project is expanding an effective mobile making program to achieve
sustainable, widespread impact among underserved youth. Making is a design-
based, participant-driven endeavor that is based on a learning by doing
pedagogy. For nearly a decade, California State University San Marcos has
operated out-of-school making programs for bringing both equipment and
university student facilitators to the sites in under-served communities. In
collaboration with four other CSU campuses, this project will expand along four
dimensions: (a) adding community sites in addition to school sites (b) adding
rural contexts in addition to urban/suburban, (c) adding hybrid and online
options in addition to in-person), and (d) including future teachers as
facilitators in addition to STEM undergraduates. The program uses design
thinking as a framework to engage participants in addressing real-world problems
that are personally and socially meaningful. Participants will use low- and
high-tech tools, such as circuity, coding, and robotics to engage in activities
that respond to design challenges. A diverse group of university students will
lead weekly, 90-minute activities and serve as near-peer mentors, providing a
connection to the university for the youth participants, many of whom will be
first-generation college students. The project will significantly expand the
Mobile Making program from 12 sites in North San Diego County to 48 sites across
California, with nearly 2,000 university facilitators providing 12 hours of
programming each year to over 10,000 underserved youth (grades 4th through 8th)
during the five-year timeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research will
examine whether the additional sites and program variations result in positive
youth and university student outcomes. For youth in grades 4 through 8, the
project will evaluate impacts including sustained interest in making and STEM,
increased self-efficacy in making and STEM, and a greater sense that making and
STEM are relevant to their lives. For university student facilitators, the
project will investigate impacts including broadened technical skills, increased
leadership and 21st century skills, and increased lifelong interest in STEM
outreach/informal science education. Multiple sources of data will be used to
research the expanded Mobile Making program's impact on youth and undergraduate
participants, compare implementation sites, and understand the program's
efficacy when across different communities with diverse learner populations. A
mixed methods approach that leverages extant data (attendance numbers, student
artifacts), surveys, focus groups, making session feedback forms, observations,
and field notes will together be used to assess youth and university student
participant outcomes. The project will disaggregate data based on gender,
race/ethnicity, grade level, and site to understand the Mobile Making program's
impact on youth participants at multiple levels across contexts. The project
will further compare findings from different types of implementation sites
(e.g., school vs. library), learner groups, (e.g., middle vs. upper elementary
students), and facilitator groups (e.g., STEM majors vs. future teachers). This
will enable the project to conduct cross-case comparisons between CSU campuses.
Project research will also compare findings from urban and rural school sites as
well as based on the modality of teaching and learning (e.g., in-person vs.
online). The mobile making program activities, project research, and a toolkit
for implementing a Mobile maker program will be widely disseminated to
researchers, educators, and out-of-school programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the public
of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.