* 2215987
* MRI: Acquisition of a computer system for Research and Education â€“ Seawulf
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 485,000.00

This project by Stony Brook University, with broad benefit to other research
institutions across the region, will purchase and operate for at least five
years an advanced high-performance computer system. Focused upon enabling new
frontiers in science and engineering, this will be the first deployment in an
academic setting of multiple new high-performance computing technologies that
directly address the major bottlenecks in high-performance computing and data-
centric computing. A huge number of projects from various disciplines will
benefit from this computational resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new computer
will transform scientific and engineering computing with speedups per node
approaching 4 to 8-fold for bandwidth-intensive applications. Many scientific
and engineering applications important to the National Science Foundation and
the campus are bandwidth limited, and with conventional memory technology simply
cannot scale to use even a fraction of the cores within modern servers. After
demonstrating need and benefit, access will be free to all Stony Brook faculty,
students, and their external collaborators. The project will partner with Stony
Brooks Women in Science and Engineering Program and Center for Inclusive
Education to enable undergraduate women and minority graduate students to work
with peers and faculty in computational science, and to receive training and
access to advanced computational resources. Regionally, we will collaborate with
minority-serving institutions and schools to motivate careers in science and
engineering and provide access and training in research and classroom settings.
Nationally, the project will leverage existing organizations and activities
including National Science Foundation sponsored cyberinfrastructure activities,
including the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services
&amp; Support Broadening Participation program. All information like
documentation, frequently asked questions, login instructions, data, code
examples and much more will be gathered online at
https://it.stonybrook.edu/services/high-performance-computing. The project
website will be maintained during the whole project duration, enabling users to
get fast and easy support for the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.