* 2215184
* MRI: Acquisition of a µCT Scanner for Research, Digitization and Education at the NHMLA
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Joel Martin, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 258,537.00

An award is made to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (NHMLA) for
the purpose of acquiring a micro computed tomography (µCT) scanner. The NHMLA is
the largest natural history museum on the west coast of the United States with
more than 35 million specimens and artifacts, and receives roughly a million
visitors annually. The µCT scanner acquired for this project will be used for
research, exhibition, and educational programs, and will benefit society in
numerous ways. Scans will be uploaded to freely accessible websites, increasing
equity and access to the museum's collection objects to researchers and students
worldwide. Specimens scanned at the NHMLA will create stunning visual and 3D
printed displays that will be featured in educational programs and exhibit
design. Importantly, use of the µCT scanner will also train students in critical
3D skills that will transfer over to a wide variety of career applications,
including medical, engineering and scientific fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
µCT scanner acquired in this project has applications and will directly impact
all 22 scientific departments at the NHMLA, as well as outside researchers and
professionals throughout the LA metro region. The µCT scanner will increase our
understanding of anatomy and physiology, evolutionary biology, morphology,
biomechanics, and mineral sciences, among other fields. All discoveries will be
shared in peer-reviewed scientific journals, on websites, and presented at
regional and international scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.