* 2215936
* MRI: Acquisition of Artificial Resynthesis Technology for Research, Training, and Experiential Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Sanger, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 168,000.00

This Major Instrumentation Grant supports the acquisition of Artificial
Resynthesis Technology (ART, Lynton CNC) to establish the Chicago Experimental
Wear (ChEW) laboratory. ART is an innovative chewing simulator that accurately
replicates the many components of the oral environment, including temperature,
jaw movement, bite force, and the action of the cheeks, tongue, and saliva.
Although originally developed for human dentistry, this ART will be customized
to include parameters for humans, non-human primates, other mammals, and
reptiles, allowing for an unparalleled understanding of the formation and
ramifications of dental wear and maximizing the scope of interdisciplinary
research and education across Chicago, the Midwest, and beyond. ART’s unique
technology will bring together a network of oral biology specialists at an
institution where 40% of students identify as being from historically
underrepresented groups and 66% of undergraduates are female identifying. It
will provide crucial research experiences to undergraduates where demand for
experiential learning is high, but the supply of such opportunities is low. ART
will also be used to engage K-12 students and their teachers in active learning
demonstrations through various virtual and in-person
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ART will significantly expand the ability of
clinical and basic science researchers to address questions related to oral
biology. These questions are multi-disciplinary in nature, bringing together
dentists, anthropologists, biologists, and engineers to cross-pollinate ideas
and enrich teaching and learning opportunities. Specifically, ART will help
unravel the contributions of exogenous and dietary abrasives to dental macro-
and microwear, fundamental to our understanding of biological and cultural
adaptations through time. Another focus will include how primate oral processing
behaviors change in relation to food geometry (e.g., size) and food material
properties (e.g., toughness or hardness). It will also provide insight into the
relationships between dental design and motor control during the evolution of
vertebrate feeding systems. Clinically, ART will be used to unravel the
biological and/or mechanical factors responsible for dental implant failures in
human patients, and the wear of existing and experimental dental materials, such
as dental zirconia, dental ceramics, and polymer-based restorative materials. It
will be used to investigate the impact of nighttime grinding (sleep bruxism) on
tooth wear and dental appliance longevity. Beyond this, ART will provide insight
into the role of oral microbiomes, pH, and enzyme activity in the saliva during
digestion, and how changes in the microbiota impact nutrition and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.