* 2215488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inferring the linguistic past of an indigenous language family of North America
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Edwin Ko, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,206.00

Languages evolve in similar ways to biological species. Recent linguistic work
has used computational phylogenetic methods from the biological sciences to
address questions about the linguistic past: Is French more closely related to
Italian or to Spanish? When did the Germanic languages, such as German and
English, begin to diverge from their common ancestor? The former is an example
of inferring genetic relationships within a language family tree and the latter
is an example of estimating the dates when genetically related groups diverged.
There is still much to learn about the use of these methods in linguistics and
how much confidence can be placed on the results they produce. To this end, this
study employs computational phylogenetic methods to infer the genetic
relationships and divergence dates of an Indigenous language family in North
America and examines how the results differ from those of previous studies. This
work also attempts to understand why these differences occur and what new light
the results shed on the linguistic history of the language
family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data used in linguistic phylogenetic studies to
address similar research questions have varied to a considerable degree.
Therefore, it is often unclear which data type to use or how the data should be
coded, and how these decisions affect the results. Additionally, different types
of linguistic data may exhibit different evolutionary dynamics and using the
same evolutionary model may not be appropriate for all kinds of data. Therefore,
this study examines how different choices of (a) data type, such as lexical and
grammatical data, (b) coding scheme, and (c) evolutionary model influence the
results. To ensure that the data is coded accurately and consistently, this
study involves philological, archival, and field research. As some languages are
no longer spoken and contain ‘missing’ data, this study also employs the same
methods for inferring the linguistic past to predict and fill in missing values
in the data which can then be helpful for language revitalization
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.