* 2215138
* BRITE Girls Online STEM Practices: Building Relevance and Identity to Transform Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Karen Peterson, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,902,274.00

Despite decades of policies and programs meant to increase the representation of
girls and women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM),
girls and women of color still represent a much smaller percent of the STEM
workforce than they do in the US population. This lack of representation is
preventing the US STEM workforce from reaching its true potential. Intersecting
inequalities of gender, race, ethnicity, and class, along with stereotypes
associated with who is successful in STEM (i.e., White men), lead to perceptions
that they do not belong and may not succeed in STEM. Ultimately, these issues
hinder girls’ STEM identity development (i.e., sense of belonging and future
success), lead to a crisis of representation for women of color and have
compounding impacts on the STEM workforce. Research suggests there are positive
impacts of in-person STEM learning after-school and out-of-school time programs
on girls’ sense of belonging. The increasing need for online learning initiated
by the COVID-19 pandemic means it is vital to investigate girls’ STEM identity
development within an online community. Thus, the project will refine and test
approaches in online learning communities to make a valuable impact on the STEM
identity development of girls of color by 1) training educators and role models
on exemplary approaches for STEM identity development; 2) implementing a
collaborative, girl-focused Brite Online Learning Community that brings together
400 girls ages 13-16 from a minimum of 10 sites across the United States; and 3)
researching the impact of the three core approaches -- community building,
authentic and competence-demonstrating hands-on activities, and interactive
learning with women role models -- on participating girls’ STEM identities in
online settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed methods study is guided by
guided by Carlone &amp; Johnson’s model of STEM identity involving four
constructs: competence, performance, recognition, and sense of belonging. Data
collection sources for the quantitative portion of the project include pre- and
post-surveys, while qualitative data sources will be collected from six case
study sites and will include observations, focus group interviews with girls,
artifacts created by girls and educators, educator interviews, and open-ended
survey responses. This approach will enable the research team to determine how
and the extent to which the Brite Online Learning Community influences STEM
identity constructs, interpreting which practices lead to meaningful outcomes
that can be linked to the development of STEM identity for participating girls
in an online environment. The products of this work will include research-based,
tested Brite Practices and a toolkit for fostering girls’ interest,
identification, and long-term participation in STEM. The resulting products will
increase the reach of informal STEM education programming to girls of color
across the nation as online spaces can reach more girls, potentially increasing
the representation of women of color in the STEM workforce. This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.