* 2215042
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Software Hardware Architecture Co-Design for Enabling True Virtual Reality on Mobile Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wei Gao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Virtual Reality (VR) provides users with immersive senses of physical presence
in the virtual world. Emerging VR applications such as Metaverse aim to realize
a virtual counterpart of the real human world, which is truly indistinguishable
from the physical world and allows complete simulation of real human life.
Providing such true VR experiences results in an unprecedented amount of
computation demand, and creates tremendous challenges on resource-constrained
mobile VR devices. Since the computation demand cannot be met by only
redesigning either the mobile software or hardware systems. This project
addresses these challenges via software-hardware architecture co-design. As VR
is considered as one emerging technique that can fundamentally transform the way
people interact with the environment and each other, this project has great
potential to benefit society by facilitating large-scale adoption of VR systems
into every aspect of people’s daily lives. This project is also contributing to
society through developing new curricula, disseminating research for education
and training, engaging under-represented students in research, and outreaching
to high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project
is to provide true VR experiences on mobile devices by fully understanding and
utilizing the close correlation between different VR software systems and
hardware components. The project consists of three research tasks: (1)
developing new VR computing techniques and GPU hardware designs to minimize the
amount of VR computation, by adaptively identifying the redundancy among the
rendered VR frames of different users and reusing these frames whenever
possible; (2) investigating VR frame tiling techniques based on different VR
users’ commonality in Field of Views, to minimize the mobile device’s energy
consumption on receiving and processing VR frames according to the mobile
hardware characteristics; (3) exploring the potential of heterogeneous mobile
hardware, especially AI accelerators, to enable AI-based image upscaling on
mobile devices that compensates the possible VR quality degradation due to
communication link variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.