* 2215472
* CBET-EPSRC: Deep Learning Closure Models for Large-Eddy Simulation of Unsteady Aerodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jonathan MacArt, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 362,956.00

Computational simulations increasingly enable the design of lighter, more
efficient, and higher-performance flight vehicles. Current computational
capabilities have successfully aided many advances in aerospace design, but
challenges remain in the selection of the models used to represent turbulence.
Due to practical limits on computing resources, computational simulations for
engineering design typically neglect the intricate features of turbulence. The
models used to approximate the missing physics contain parameters that must be
calibrated to data, which is challenging for unknown flows. Simple mathematical
forms in these models limit their accuracy. Recently, efficient numerical
methods to calibrate the parameters of complex models during flow simulations
have been developed using techniques from machine learning and constrained
optimization. These methods have been successful for simple turbulent flows but
have not been applied to the complex flows encountered in aerodynamics. The
principal objective of this project is to develop methods by which to calibrate
turbulence models for simulations of practical aerodynamic flows, which will
enhance their predictive accuracy for challenging configurations. The
optimization methods to be developed will be broadly applicable across
engineering fields, not limited to aerodynamics, and will be made publicly
available in an open-source, high-performance software
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the need for accurate,
efficient computational fluid dynamics models by developing deep learning
closures and optimization methods for large-eddy simulations of turbulent
separated and recirculating flows. The models will be optimized over the
compressible Navierâ€“Stokes equations using an adjoint-based approach, which will
enable efficient data assimilation by avoiding the need to construct high-
dimensional gradients. The resulting models will enable significant accuracy
improvements compared to state-of-the-art models for comparable cost, or
equivalently, significantly reduced computational cost for comparable accuracy.
High-fidelity numerical datasets for several wake geometries and separated
airfoil flows will be generated as target data for the optimization procedure.
Additionally, a new class of online optimization methods will be developed to
enable dynamic, data-free closure models that will learn directly from the
governing equations, and a hybrid, multiscale deep learning formulation will be
developed to model near-wall turbulent flows. The scientific community more
broadly is interested in leveraging large datasets and machine learning
techniques; this project therefore has potential to develop methods to be widely
adopted across disciplines. The resulting algorithms, methods, datasets, and
codes will be disseminated to foster adoption within the aerodynamics community
and across scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.