* 2215500
* The Empirical Study of Gender (EGEN) Research Network: Small Research Prizes to Graduate Students and Early Career Faculty
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tiffany Barnes, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2025
* USD 49,633.00

Over the past several years, the Empirical Study of Gender Research Network
(EGEN) has hosted nine workshops in the US and abroad, providing feedback on
research papers presented by junior scholars in addition to forming new research
collaborations and providing professional mentorship. This award provides
funding to EGEN for six research prizes to be awarded over the next three years.
These prizes encourage participation in the network activities and contribute to
broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the critical role
gender plays in shaping every aspect of politics--and a long history of
insightful gender and politics research--research on gender and politics has
historically been under-valued. By mentoring junior scholars and intensively
workshopping research in progress, the EGEN network capitalizes on the growth in
scholarly and public interest in gender and politics topics. The prize program
funded by NSF is intended to enhance the intellectual contribution of prize
winners. In consultation with the applicants’ designations, each winner is
assigned a senior mentor who commits to read the work of, and meet with, the
prize winner at several points throughout the prize year. This type of external
feedback and vertical mentorship is one way that the program differs from other
research networks. Additionally, during the prize year or shortly thereafter,
the winners are invited to present their work in progress during one of the
workshops, which guarantees more extensive feedback and discussion by some of
the field’s most committed and respected members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.