* 2215004
* Mathematizing, Visualizing, and Power (MVP): Appalachian Youth Becoming Data Artists for Community Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lynn Hodge, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 07/31/2025
* USD 898,680.00

Mathematizing, Visualizing, and Power (MVP): Appalachian Youth Becoming Data
Artists for Community Learning is a three-year Advancing Informal STEM Learning,
Innovations and Development, project that focuses on community-centered data
exploration catalyzed by youth. The project develops statistical artistry among
young people in East Tennessee Appalachian communities and enables these youth
to share their data visualizations with their communities to foster collective
reflection and understanding. The creative work generated by the MVP project
will be compelling in two ways, both as statistical art and as powerful
statements giving voice to the experience of communities. Critical aspects of
the MVP model include (1) youth learning sessions that position youth as owners
of data and producers of knowledge and (2) Community Learning Events that
support community learning as youth learning occurs. The MVP project has a
primary focus on broadening the STEM participation of underrepresented
communities of Appalachia. The project’s mission is to increase the learning and
life outcomes of young people and communities of Appalachia by creating a
meaningful foundation of data science and collective data exploration. The
University of Tennessee partners with Pellissippi State Community College,
Drexel University, and the Boys &amp; Girls Club of the Tennessee Valley to
bring together a convergent team of community members, practitioners, and
professionals, with the expertise to carry out the project. The project will
impact approximately 120 youth and 3800 of their East Tennessee community
members. The research generated will inform how to engage community members in
learning about community issues through the exploration of datasets relevant to
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of STEM education is in urgent
need of knowledge about effective models to inspire community-based data
exploration with young people as leaders in these efforts. The MVP project
includes engaging youth with meaningful problems, building a discourse community
with possibilities for action, re-positioning youth as knowledge producers
within their own communities, leveraging linguistic and cultural resources of
the youth participants and their communities, and implementing critical events
that support substantial interaction between youth, community members, and the
data visualizations. MVP builds on the idea that the design of data
visualizations requires an understanding of both data science and artistic
design. Research will inform the model of community engagement, examine data
artists’ identities, and document community learning. The MVP model will be
designed, developed, tested, and refined through three cycles of design-based
research. The overarching research question guiding these cycles is: What
affordances (and delimitations) related to identity and learning does the model
provide for MVP Youth and community members? Data sources for the project
include: fieldnotes, portfolios created by MVP Youth, youth pre/post interviews,
observations of the learning sessions, a project documentary, surveys for youth
and community members, interviews with community members, and audience feedback.
The National Institute for STEM Evaluation and Research (NISER) will provide
formative and summative evaluation about project activities. Formative feedback
will be integrated into the ongoing research cycles. The research conducted will
inform (1) the community learning model; (2) the integrated pedagogy and
curriculum of the MVP Youth learning sessions that emphasize data science
through design arts; and, (3) research on community learning and youth identity.
Findings will be shared through conferences, academic and practitioner-focused
journals, a video documentary, a Summit on Engaging Youth and Communities in
Data, and a project website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.