* 2215421
* CAS-Climate: An Integrated Framework to Investigate Thermal Resilience of Sustainable Buildings and Living Environments for Greater Preparedness to Extreme Temperature Events
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 113,024.00

Compounding the effects of building and built environment characteristics, the
social and behavioral characteristics of households and urban-rural inequality
can result in differing levels of vulnerability to extreme temperature events.
To most fairly and effectively allocate limited resources, decision-makers need
a framework for planning and prioritizing preparedness and intervention before
extreme temperature events occur, as well as to identify effective response and
management strategies during and after such events. In particular, there is a
need to estimate and project extreme temperature- induced impacts on an
individual resident level, information highly correlated to community, urban,
and regional factors. The overarching goal of this interdisciplinary US-China
research is to build an urban-rural regional assessment, preparedness, and
response system for extreme temperature events for use during the transition to
global sustainability. In particular, the project's three specific research
goals are to: 1) build a new multi-criteria and multiscale assessment of
building and living environments’ resilience to extreme temperature events in
the context of the trend of sustainable building development, 2) empower this
new multiscale dynamic preparedness system to be deployed during extreme
temperature events in urban-rural regions, and 3) develop efficient, effective,
and just strategies and management practices for responding to extreme
temperature events. Special focus will be on the characteristics of sustainable
buildings and the potential impacts on physical, social, and human-related
aspects, taking the transition to global sustainability and development into
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together US academic
expertise in architectural engineering, construction, and sociology and Chinese
research strengths in urban planning, information systems, civil engineering,
and management to develop a multiscale thermal resilience assessment framework
for heat and cold waves that can further be utilized to empower preparedness and
ensure appropriate response strategies for extreme temperature events. The
thermal resilience assessment framework will integrate both physical and social
context variables and cover multiple scales, ranging from individual occupants
to households, buildings, communities, and regions. More importantly, by
employing simulations and survey-based methods, this research will provide
fundamental understandings about how thermal resilience at different scales is
affected by specific physical and social contexts during the transition to
sustainability. The resultant response and management framework based on these
understandings (collaboratively conducted by the US-China research team) will
provide a quantitative platform to balance the regional and building’s
sustainability transition and resilience to weather-associated disasters along
the urban and rural continuum. From the societal impact perspective, the
research will support multi-scale vulnerability and resilience assessments for
use in preparing for extreme temperature events and decision-making related to
preparedness, response, and management. This work will bring sustainability-
related target-induced effects into urban-rural regional preparedness for
extreme temperature events, achieving a balance between net-zero carbon
emissions and resilience. The methodology to be created in this work can be
expanded to other weather-related events and disasters, promoting greater
preparedness and responses to those events. Also, the project team will engage
in the a series of educational and outreach activities, transferring research
outcomes to existing courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
broadening participation by under-represented groups by leveraging current
university and college programs that focus on minorities and underrepresented
students, disseminating research results and findings through seminars,
conference presentations, and journal publications. In addition to disseminating
the findings through traditional means, all of the project data and educational
and outreach activities will be posted on a dedicated project website, as well
as through PSU’s online educational resources, which are open to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.