* 2215270
* MRI: Acquisition of a low vacuum scanning electron microscope (SEM) with EDS detector and STEM capability to advance research and undergraduate research training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Derek Wright, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 197,808.00

An award is made to Lake Superior State University to support the acquisition of
a Scanning Electron Microscope equipped with an Energy Dispersive x-ray
Spectrometer (SEM-EDS) and Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy capability
with remote operation capabilities. The SEM-EDS enables high resolution imaging
and elemental analysis, supports the research of 12 LSSU faculty members and
their collaborators, and facilitates external use for research, education, and
engineering/industrial applications. These capabilities enhance undergraduate
education and training across several scientific disciplines, create new
opportunities for undergraduate research, and enable the development of new
coursework in microscopy and microanalysis. A K-12 outreach program offered in
collaboration with the MiSTEM Network provides hands-on education opportunities
and enhances recruitment of underrepresented students promoting the development
of a diverse regional STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research facilitated
by this award will advance the understanding of freshwater ecology, the
ecological impacts of atmospheric pollution, forensic science, phytoremediation
of contaminated soils, organismal biology, and geoscience. The key capabilities
of this instrument include topographic imaging at low nanometer resolution under
either high vacuum or reduced vacuum conditions, compositional imaging using
backscattered electrons, transmitted electron imaging, elemental analysis and
mapping, and automated particle analysis. The superior resolution and depth of
field of electron microscopy compared to light microscopy will enhance
characterization of morphological features, and will enable taxonomic
identification of challenging organisms such as freshwater sponges and various
pathogens that affect fish and migratory waterfowl. Imaging of histological
(tissue) specimens utilizing transmitted electrons will enable the detailed
investigation of cell ultrastructure enhancing research in the developmental
biology of fish retinas, and the investigation of fish disease. Compositional
and elemental imaging capabilities will enable the forensic characterization of
bullet wipe, investigation of particulate matter deposition in urban impacted
Sault Sainte Marie airsheds, examination of the effect of surface particulate
matter on phytoremediation studies, the compositional variation of freshwater
sponge spicules, geochemical analysis of the Jacobsville Sandstone and the
Ishpeming Greenstone Belt, and the paleomagnetic investigation of tectonic
processes of the early earth recorded in rocks in the Pilbara region of
Northwest Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.