* 2215017
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Large: Systems and Verifiable Metrics for Sustainable Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Syed Rafiul Hussain, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 118,777.00

Data centers already contribute significantly to the global carbon footprint.
However, the rise in popularity of resource-intensive Big Data and Machine
Learning workloads is poised to make data center operations unsustainable. This
project designs a suite of Sustainability Aware Software SYstems (SASSY) to
enable "sustainable-by-design" data centers. SASSY focuses on sustainability
holistically, considering the lifecycle carbon footprint of computing equipment,
cleanliness of energy source, and device reliability. To measure per-job end-to-
end sustainability costs, a full-stack measurement framework is developed. To
involve end-users in sustainability efforts, new programming models and tools
are designed to enable users to specify their sustainability and performance
objectives. The metrics and models together guide SASSY to make wise data-
center-wide sustainable management choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adoption of
SASSY solutions leads to sustainability savings that benefit the society at
large. Further, the SASSY programming models and tools allow developers to build
more sustainable applications, enabling "sustainable-by-design" software
development. Data center operators and industry partners can directly benefit
from SASSY's open-source software and models, which are made public through the
project Website: https://www.pace.cs.stonybrook.edu/sassy.html. The next
generation of practitioners and researchers are taught to consider
sustainability as a first-class metric via educational and mentoring
opportunities that the project generates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
in response to and partially funded by Design for Sustainability in Computing
(NSF-22-060)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.