* 2215359
* An Educational Tool for Teaching and Learning Concurrent Computer Programming Techniques
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wei Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 120,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
and instructor productivity in computing courses that teach concurrent
programming. Modern computer applications require considerable computing power
to produce results in a reasonable amount of time. Most programs can be broken
up into constituent parts that can be executed at the same time or concurrently.
Running program components concurrently can significantly reduce the running
time of a program. Modern computer applications rely on concurrent execution to
provide users with the level of performance they expect. Concurrent programming
is challenging to teach effectively and is notoriously difficult to learn. There
is a lack of effective debugging tools that allow students to analyze their code
and to learn from their mistakes. The goal of this project is the development of
an educational tool, called Evident, that will make it easier for instructors to
teach concurrent programming and for students to develop the skills required to
utilize concurrency in the programs that they develop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three phases: (1) Developing a
tool that supports backward/reverse debugging; (2) Developing visualizations for
the execution order of concurrent programs; and (3) Studying the effectiveness
of the resulting tool in a classroom setting. Research questions include: (1)
Can replay-based debugging facilitate active learning? (2) Does visualization
improve a student’s intuitive understanding of concurrency? (3) How do different
visualization strategies affect a student’s ability to effectively utilize
concurrency? and (4) Can visualization help teachers play a more active role in
helping students understand concurrency? A three-phase evaluation will be
conducted during the development process to ensure the useability of the tool.
Qualitative feedback collected from students and instructors will be used to
improve the design of tool. Formative assessments will be used to identify the
most effective visualization practices. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.