* 2215652
* DDRIG in DRMS: Social preference and voluntary donation to climate mitigation.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Alix-Garcia, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,325.00

Climate change is a worldwide threat, importantly this means it threatens both
the individual and humanity more broadly. According to the most recent IPCC
report, we have to immediately and rapidly reach net zero carbon emissions to
avoid many of the worst effects. Determining how to motivate the public to
pursue carbon mitigation will therefore be essential for policy makers. This
project studies the value, known as willingness to pay (WTP), placed on climate
change mitigation in an experimental setting. In particular this project is
interested if the way information about climate change is presented to people
(framing), and people’s preferences on the distribution of income (social
preferences), impact their WTP. Further, this project also studies if an
individual’s social preferences changes the impact of framing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framing used in this experiment mirrors one of the
real world characteristics of climate change. Developed nations pollute the most
per capita, but developing nations are the most exposed to climate change. Thus,
some participants will receive framing emphasizing the risks from climate change
to themselves directly, whereas others will receive language emphasizing the
risk to those in developing nations. It is hypothesized that the former framing
may be more motivating to self-regarding individuals, whereas individuals who
are more strongly concerned with other’s welfare will be more motivated by the
latter framing. Results from this experiment will become part of the literature
seeking to inform active and ongoing policy discussions. For example, this
project’s findings are be of use to policy makers trying to word a referendum.
Environmental activists engaged in outreach such as deep conversation may also
find the results helpful in tailoring their messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.