* 2215097
* DDRIG in DRMS: Multi-target Technology Deployment and Information Disclosure in Attacker-defender Settings: Analyzing Game-theoretic Prescriptions and Human Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Jun Zhuang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,325.00

Defending against adversarial threats has been a central and longstanding focus
for governments throughout the world. One prominent approach to improve
defensive capabilities is to deploy new technologies among venues of interest
(e.g., metal detectors at airports). When it comes to deploying new security and
defense technologies, agencies must decide how the related information should be
released to the public. Given that adversaries, such as terrorist organizations,
can access information that is publicly disseminated, it is critical to
understand the implications of releasing different types of information. For
instance, security agencies may choose to release information on only a subset
of venues where new technology is deployed, creating an uncertainty for an
adversary regarding the deployment of the technology at other venues (e.g.,
airports). This research addresses this difficult information disclosure problem
by building on previous work in game theory and adversarial decision making to
develop models and experiments that provide insights into defensive information
disclosure, adversarial beliefs, and adversarial target selection
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this proposed effort
are to mathematically model, experimentally test, and robustly analyze
technology deployment and information disclosure strategies in the context of
security and defense. To meet these objectives, this project develops and
analyzes a novel game-theoretic signaling model, which provides insightful
analyses into optimal information disclosure strategies. Further, human
experiments –designed to mimic the game model – are conducted to (i) study human
beliefs and decision making in this context, and (ii) compare the game-theoretic
prescriptions with actual human decisions. Successful completion of this project
helps to inform the long-term effectiveness of technology deployments within the
security and defense sectors. Although this research is motivated by problems in
security and defense, the mathematical model and experimental framework is
generalizable to any application in which the strategic release of information
across multiple venues is of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.