* 2215642
* MRI: Acquisition of a Biolayer Interferometry Spectrometer to Measure Macromolecule Binding Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Angela Poole, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 108,500.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Berry College is acquiring a bio-
layer interferometry (BLI) spectrometer to support the research of Professor
Dominic Qualley and colleagues Angela Poole, Alice Suroviec, and Mark
Turlington. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of macromolecular
binding kinetics and real-time biomolecular interactions. BLI is an optical
method that measures interference patterns of white light that are reflected
from a surface coated in biomolecules to reveal real-time binding interactions.
As a result, macromolecular interactions, affinity, and kinetics can be
quantified. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching
efforts of students in many departments as well as provides accessibility for
local middle and high school students. Research and research training in the
areas of biotechnology and sustainability are targeted. The instrument is also
leveraged in upper division laboratory undergraduate courses and in outreach
activities for middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
of the BLI spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as protein structure and function,
bioanalytical and medicinal chemistry, and functional biology. Research focuses
on understanding the structure and function of proteins involved in viral
assembly. In addition, kinetics studies are performed for characterizing the
bovine leukemia virus RNA packaging processes and the assembly mechanics of the
West Nile virus as well as for elucidating parameters that are effective
proteolysis targeting chimeras. It also assists with exploring protein-protein
interactions for biosensor development and for investigating interactions
associated with reproductive technologies in animal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.