* 2215946
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zeiss LSM900 Confocal Microscope with Airyscan 2 to Accelerate Multidisciplinary Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Cathy Savage-Dunn, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 573,147.00

An award is made to Queens College of The City University of New York for the
purchase of a Zeiss LSM 900 Confocal Microscope with Airyscan for the Core
Facility for Imaging, Cell, and Molecular Biology. There is a critical need to
support faculty and student research productivity at institutions that educate
undergraduate students who will become the next generation of scientists and
science-literate citizens. Enabling faculty at these institutions to remain
engaged in their scientific fields of expertise ensures that student education
and training is vibrant, welcoming, and relevant. Small laboratory groups
facilitate mentoring relationships and contribute to scientific knowledge in
ways that are complementary to those achieved in larger groups. This project
will support activities that will positively impact the student and trainee
populations at Queens College and enhance the scientific infrastructure for
neighboring institutions. Queens College students, faculty, and administrators
are ethnically diverse. They have a long-standing commitment to providing access
to underserved populations. The acquisition of a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal
microscope will enhance the faculty’s expertise. Research results will be
disseminated in seminars and peer-reviewed publications. The state-of-the-art
microscope will enable the design and execution of a new microscopy course for
upper-level undergraduates, master’s and doctoral students. This project will
strengthen STEM outreach activities of underrepresented groups through
collaboration with existing college programs that aim to promote access to and
interest in STEM for underrepresented students. Images from the microscope will
be used in the public outreach activities of the faculty, which include Twitter
outreach, and mentoring high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zeiss LSM
900 Confocal Microscope with Airyscan was selected for its specific features
that meet the challenges of cellular imaging required by the faculty’s research
programs, for the similarity of its user interface and software with other
equipment at the institution, and for its flexibility to meet anticipated future
needs as research programs grow, new faculty are hired, and collaborations are
formed. The instrument will be housed in the multi-user Core Facility for
Imaging, Cell and Molecular Biology and will enhance the growing
multidisciplinary scientific research on campus and enrich undergraduate and
graduate student training at this minority-serving institution. The Core
Facility serves users that include laboratories in the Biology, Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Physics, and Psychology
Departments at Queens College. Research activities will include investigations
on cell signaling in normal development and physiology, cell defense mechanisms
against aging and cancer, regulation of gene expression, neural mechanisms of
learning, and the effects of chronic pain on the brain. The instrument will
enable Queens College’s faculty to conduct cutting edge research and train
undergraduates and graduate students in qualitative and quantitative fluorescent
imaging, which will enhance their education and preparation for future careers
in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.