* 2215734
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-accelerated cluster for research, training and outreach
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Dukka KC, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 432,111.00

This project will enable ground-breaking research at Michigan Technological
University (Michigan Tech) by acquiring a high-performance computing cluster to
be named DeepBlizzard. DeepBlizzard will accelerate scientific discoveries in
basic research and technological innovations by addressing emergent and longer-
term needs with broad societal impacts in multiple disciplines: chemistry,
forestry, mathematics, physics, engineering (biomedical, mechanical, materials
science), and computer science. DeepBlizzard will be utilized by over 125 users
across 20 departments and 5 Colleges at Michigan Tech and by partners at North
Carolina A&amp;T University. DeepBlizzard will catalyze and accelerate research,
enable dissemination of results, and expand opportunities for collaboration,
thereby promoting the advancement of these diverse scientific domains. The
project will also provide various training, teaching, and outreach activities to
produce a highly trained and diverse technical workforce, including the next
generation of scientists. Throughout its life, DeepBlizzard will serve as the
epicenter of innovative research by enabling and supporting cross-disciplinary
and collaborative research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DeepBlizzard
high-performance computing cluster is designed by a team of experts from
Computer Science, Physics, Chemistry, and Biomedical Engineering in coordination
with Information Technology (IT) professionals. The instrument architecture is
based on graphical processing unit (GPU) based accelerators. DeepBlizzard is
configured to meet three major requirements: high-performance deep learning and
inference; high-performance single, double, and mixed-precision calculations;
and the ability to execute codes using high levels of parallelism. These
requirements map to the needs of ongoing and proposed computational research
endeavors at Michigan Tech. In addition, several outreach and training
activities – developed in partnership with Michigan Tech’s existing NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site, NSF/NSA GenCyber Camp, and other
programs involving K-12, undergraduate, and graduate student, and historically
marginalized groups in STEM – will provide seamless integration of research
activities with outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.