* 2215023
* Collaborative Research: Cooperation in Multi-Dyadic Civil Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Menninga, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2025
* USD 246,752.00

Civil conflicts impose significant human, economic, and political costs on the
countries involved and the broader regions affected. This is particularly true
when conflicts involve multiple rebel groups (i.e., multi-dyadic conflicts).
This project advances knowledge of multi-dyadic civil conflict dynamics and
resolution by evaluating how government-rebel cooperation shapes opportunities
for conflict resolution and violence reduction. It contributes to ongoing
debates among policymakers and scholars about the dynamics of war and the nature
and sustainability of post-conflict peace, speaking to fundamental questions of
national security and the prosperity and welfare of countries currently
embroiled in civil conflicts around the world. The project provides novel cross-
country data compatible with leading civil war datasets, providing a valuable
tool to advance cutting-edge research on civil conflict. Moreover, The project
also provides training and mentorship opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students. Understanding the dynamics of cooperation between adversaries
will improve evaluation and forecasting of (in)stability. The PIs integrative
approach to cooperation provides insights into when cooperation signals
meaningful shifts in conflict dynamics and prospects for long-term
peace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three central aims: (1) to
create a comprehensive dataset on cooperation between combatants in multi-dyadic
civil wars, (2) to assess the impact of past cooperation on future cooperation
and conflict resolution, and (3) to evaluate the impact of past cooperation on
future conflict. To achieve aim 1, the PIs create the Cooperation in Civil War:
Multi-Dyadic Conflicts Dataset (CCW-MC). CCW-MC covers 12 countries that have
experienced the most complex civil conflicts in the post-cold war period. These
novel data will capture the full evolution of dyadic cooperation from initial
requests to final implementation. Using these data, the PIs test novel
theoretical expectations (aims 2 and 3) about how the legacies of past
cooperative attempts, both within a government-rebel group dyad and gleaned from
observing other dyads in the country, influence subsequent cooperative and
conflictual outcomes. Using network analysis, the PIs examine the influence of
other active rebel groups on this evolution of cooperation and conflict. By
engaging with the multi-dyadic context of these civil wars, the project
explicitly takes each dyad's context into consideration when theorizing about
and evaluating the role of cooperation. This project addresses a critical gap by
examining the evolution of cooperation within and across government-rebel group
dyads in multi-dyadic civil conflicts. It will provide novel insights into how
cooperation diffuses across dyads, how past attempts at cooperation influence
subsequent cooperative efforts, and how cooperation of one form influences
subsequent cooperation of another form. The project advances research on
conflict management and settlement by treating cooperation as an iterative
process that reveals unique information about combatant credibility that cannot
be revealed on the battlefield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.