* 2215408
* Collaborative Research: Teaching Engineering Design with a Contextual Perspective
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Renata Revelo Alonso, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 06/30/2025
* USD 184,800.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
understanding of how social, cultural, economic, and political systems can
inform their engineering designs. Traditionally, engineering design courses have
focused primarily on the technical specifications and requirements of a design
without full consideration of the wider context in which they will be used.
There is also a lack of engineering design courses in the middle two years of a
typical engineering curriculum. This leads to a gap in learning design
principles and skills for students between their first design course and the
final capstone design course. The project plans to develop, implement, refine,
and evaluate engineering design courses for second and third year students at
the University of Illinois-Chicago and the University of Texas-San Antonio. The
courses should help students learn how to conduct in-depth analyses of the
implications of design choices for society using historical and current examples
of engineering design. This project intends to develop an instructional
framework for the middle years of engineering programs' courses along with
instructional materials for those courses. Using interviews and student surveys,
the project will assess the impact of the courses on students. Project results
will be disseminated to engineering educators through professional development
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to help students
learn how to consider social, cultural, economic, and political factors during
the engineering design process. This project is based on Critical Consciousness
theory which suggests that students need to develop an awareness of inequitable
societal conditions that can occur due to engineering design decisions. A new
teaching framework for engineering design in the middle years will be developed
and refined so that engineering design includes a contextual perspective. The
goals for the new engineering design course are: (1) to empower students to be
more socially and critically driven engineers, (2) to help students learn about
the engineering design process from a Critical Consciousness perspective, and
(3) to help students become validated in their aspirations to pursue an
engineering career. An inter-group dialogue approach will be used in the course
to establish communication relationships, facilitate dialogue, and encourage
collaborations between students. This study will address two research questions:
(1) What teaching strategies are most helpful in developing students’ critical
consciousness through an engineering design course? (2) How and in what ways do
the programmatic features of the project impact students’ learning of
engineering design and engineering identity development? The project team will
use quantitative and qualitative methods to analyze data from classroom
observations, course artifacts, and student surveys. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.