* 2215063
* Market Design, Investment, and Interconnection to the US Power Grid
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Chenyu Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 451,974.00

The transition to a low-carbon electricity grid will require massive investment
in alternative electricity generation. An obstacle to this investment is US
electricity transmission policy, which was designed for fossil fuel generators
rather than renewable energy. This project will focus on the interconnection
process, which new generators use to connect to the existing transmission
infrastructure. This process is one of the most time-consuming and costly steps
before a generator goes online. The researchers will construct new data on the
cost of interconnection based on engineering reports, use the data to analyze
how the design of the interconnection process acts as a bottleneck to renewable
deployment and quantify the costs and benefits of policy reforms. Increasing the
rate at which renewable energy generators complete the interconnection process
has the potential to double the amount of renewable energy capacity the US adds
each year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its importance to the energy
transition, there has been little economic research on the design of this
interconnection process. New generators usually pay the entire cost of the
transmission upgrades required for their interconnection, even though existing
and future generators also benefit from these upgrades. As a result, there are
two spatial externalities across generators in the queue: (1) the withdrawal of
a generator may lead to re-evaluations of physically adjacent contemporaneous
generators, which further leads to delays and increases their interconnection
costs, and (2) the completion of a generator may reduce interconnection costs
for adjacent lower-queued generators, decreasing their likelihood to withdraw.
There is also a waiting time externality: as more generators enter the queue, it
takes longer for the transmission organization to give them cost estimates of
connecting to the power grid, which leads to more delays. The project will first
construct new data sets on interconnection costs, interconnection queue wait
times, and transmission planning. Second, using these new data, the project will
estimate how various factors affect the decision to withdraw and quantify the
importance of these externalities. Third, the project will develop and estimate
a new model of queuing that features rich externalities across generators in the
queue. Finally, the project will use the model to simulate the effects of
alternative queuing designs or a subsidy for interconnection costs on withdrawal
rates and welfare. Furthermore, the project will use the model to calculate the
impact of grid operators proactively planning transmission projects in regions
likely to see growth in renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.