* 2215645
* Mechanistic Investigation of Metal Sulfide Electrodes for High-Energy Non-Aqueous Anion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xiulei Ji, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2025
* USD 398,405.00

The energy density of the current Li-ion batteries has nearly reached their
ceiling; however, driving range anxiety still hinders the market growth of
electric vehicles. In addition, the current high-energy batteries rely on
expensive elements of cobalt and nickel with poor earth abundance and in
cobaltâ€™s case not plentiful domestically. Therefore, manufacturing such
batteries is not sustainable for transforming a large percentage of vehicles to
be electrified to mitigate climate change. Current high-energy batteries employ
Li-ions (positive charged ions) as the charge carrier to compensate for the
charge neutrality of metal oxides during charge and discharge. In theory, the
operation of battery electrodes can use anions (negative charged ions) as charge
carriers, but this research direction has yet to receive much attention,
particularly to achieve high energy density. This project will study earth
abundant materials that are plentiful domestically such as copper and sulfur.
This fundamental research project will fill the knowledge gap by employing light
(low molecular weight) anions as the charge carriers to couple with the redox
reactions of inexpensive metal sulfides as the electrode. The project will build
upon the preliminary findings of the reversible storage of anions in conversion
electrode reactions. In addition, the PI will study nonaqueous electrolytes to
facilitate the new battery reactions. As a part of the research, the project
will provide high-quality research opportunities for underserved undergraduate
and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to elucidate
the operation mechanism of a high-energy cathode converted reversibly between
Cu2S mixed with a lithium salt and the composite comprising a cupric salt, CuA2,
and sulfur. The targeted Cu2S, as a natural mineral, is a promising anion-
hosting cathode material because Cu2S is a conductor of both electrons and
copper ions. The project will generate knowledge about the interplays and
transport of three ions in a seemingly complicated conversion reaction. In the
electrochemical conversion reactions between Cu2S+LiA and CuA2+S, four electrons
are transferred. Li-ions never interact with redox centers of copper or sulfur
but only with A-anion; however, copper ions and anions transport between the
redox centers of Cu2S, CuS, and CuA2. This electrode design causes the
decoupling of device charge compensation and electrode charge compensation. The
outcomes of this project will be a new addition to solid-state ionics and
electrochemical systems. Unlike that of the sulfur cathode in Li-S batteries,
the presence of copper ions eliminates polysulfide formation due to the strong
binding between copper ions and sulfides. The insoluble nature of Cu2S and CuS
allows the characterization of the solid electrode at different state of charge
on detailed structural and kinetic properties. The project will delineate the
correlations that affect the utilization, the kinetic properties, and the
reversibility of the electrodes. The project will establish synergistic
selection rules of anion charge carriers and electrolytes to promote the
proposed battery chemistry performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.