* 2215133
* Using poetry-writing and poetry-analysis to enhance student learning in engineering education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Elif Akcali, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,990.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
outcomes in engineering education using technical poetry writing as an active
learning experience. Communication is the exchange of information and ideas and
plays a critical role in STEM teaching and learning. While educational materials
help an instructor communicate content knowledge to students, assessment tools
help students communicate their understanding of the content knowledge to
instructors. In today’s information rich environment, new approaches are needed
to help students make sense of this information. Technical poetry writing can
provide an active learning exercise so that students can synthesize information
from various sources and make meaning of the content for themselves by
constructing poems that are technically accurate. This project will provide
students with instruction on how to write and analyze poems with technical
engineering content. It is expected that these writing and analysis activities
will increase students’ imaginative capacities, deepen their conceptual
understanding of the technical content, and develop their communication skills.
An instructor training workshop will be developed and offered to STEM faculty at
the University of Florida and to engineering instructors at engineering
education related national conferences. The workshop will broadly disseminate
the potential benefits of using poetry based activities to enhance student
learning and provide training on how to incorporate these activities in upper-
level technical courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is
to develop a comprehensive framework for the use of poetry as a mechanism for
improving student learning in undergraduate engineering education. The specific
project objectives are to: (1) create poetry-based in-class activities as well
as homework assignments and evaluate the impact of such activities and
assignments on student learning; (2) develop poetry-based supplemental teaching
materials and evaluate their effectiveness on student learning; and (3) develop
a training workshop to help guide other instructors to incorporate poetry-based
activities into other engineering courses as an engaging instructional strategy.
Poetry writing as a learning tool is grounded in the constructivist learning
theory, which supports the need for active learning experiences. The guiding
research questions are: Does poetry writing improve students’ conceptual
understanding of the technical material? How do students experience the
utilization of their imaginative capacities, the enrichment of their conceptual
understanding of the technical concept, and the development of their
communication skills by writing poetry on technical content? This project is
expected to generate new data and insights as to how poetry writing and poetry
analysis can be used to enhance students’ conceptual understanding of technical
material. In addition to employing standardized quizzes to assess technical
knowledge, student learning will be assessed through new analysis methods
developed to measure the richness of technical content, the accuracy of
technical content, and the level of cognitive process demonstrated in student-
written poems. Further, a deeper understanding of how and why poetry writing
helps to impact student learning will be gleaned from a phenomenological
analysis of student self-reflection data. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.