* 2215300
* CAS-Climate: SRS-- U.S.-China: Quantifying drivers of greenhouse gas evasion from aquatic systems along rural-urban transitions to enhance regional sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2026
* USD 36,316.00

Rapid urbanization in many parts of the world has led to large changes in the
way that water moves through the landscape into downstream systems. Streams and
rivers are channelized and piped, runoff detention ponds are created, and water
supply reservoirs are established. Each of these manipulations of the urban
hydrologic system is conducted primarily to control the volume or timing of high
flows, with at best only secondary consideration given to impacts on water
quality and other environmental impacts such as production of greenhouse gases
(GHG). This project addresses the impacts of water infrastructure on greenhouse
gases (GHG) along the rural to urban transition of southeastern New Hampshire,
USA. In conjunction with Chinese scientists, the project will then compare New
Hampshire to the urban megacity of Beijing, China. Taken together, the two
projects will provide insights into the global range of urbanization’s impacts
along the rural to urban transition in humid, temperate climates. In both
regions, the effects of urban water infrastructure on water quality and GHG
evasion play an important role in regional sustainability. The projects in both
the US and China will work extensively with local environmental decision-makers
who have responsibility for maximizing sustainability through management of
water resources, nutrient loading, and urban infrastructure. Ultimately the goal
of the project is to help meet UN Sustainable Development Goal 12, “make cities
and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”, by providing
a knowledge framework to minimize GHG production as part of water quality
management along the urban to rural gradient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
fills a gap in current understanding of the role of inland waters in the
sustainability and the biogeochemical functions of the built environment.
Although extensive work has documented that the three major GHGs, carbon
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, are typically supersaturated in inland
surface waters, there is considerable uncertainty in emissions from urban
aquatic environments. Even less is known about variation in GHG emissions across
rural to urban gradients, or the specific biogeochemical drivers (principally
the availability of oxygen, nutrients and bioavailable organic matter and the
effects they have on redox conditions) that are likely to alter both the
magnitude of GHG emissions and the balance of radiative forcing potential among
the major GHGs. The project will fill this knowledge gap by examining the
drivers of spatial variability in GHG emission across the rural to urban
gradient. Concentrations of GHGs in streams (free-flowing streams, streams with
armored banks or channels, and piped streams), ponds and drinking water
reservoirs, and constructed detention ponds will all be sampled monthly and with
periodic sampling campaigns to assess variation throughout the day. Measured
concentrations will then be used to estimate evasion based on previously
established relationships between hydraulic geometry, wind speed, and evasion
rates. The project tests the hypothesis that urban aquatic systems produce more
GHGs than their rural counterparts, due to changes in water quality, and that
methane ebullition plays a particularly important role in total methane flux in
the urban environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.