* 2215203
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: How Group Diversity Affects Newcomer’s and Group’s Cooperation and Coordination
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Sherry Li, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,549.00

Improvement in technology, changes in cultural norms, and the expansion of
opportunities has diversified American workforce. Small teams have become an
integral part of how organizations accomplish tasks and achieve their goals.
Many work teams are dynamic in their compositions with new members often being
added to preexisting teams. However, our understanding of how teams function
generally assumes a static setting with limited changes in group compositions
and fails to capture the fluidity in group dynamics in the real-world
workplaces. Our research bridges this gap by investigating whether and how a
team, including old and new members, responds following an addition of a
newcomer. Understanding how newcomers’ social identity affects their
coordination and cooperation, and those decisions by the old team is relevant to
organizations at all levels. Our work will shed light on how organizations could
integrate newcomers from different backgrounds more successfully, thus improving
teams’ performance and boosting productivity. This research also expands the
frontier of our knowledge on how to forge a diverse workforce that will operate
more efficiently on an aggregate level. It thus has direct implications for the
output of the U.S. economy and that of the world
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding group dynamics and its implications
for economic decision making and efficiency presents an unprecedented urgency
for many organizations. This project uses a series of lab experiments to
investigate how social identity affects coordination and cooperation in dynamic
groups. The results from this project can inform us about the role that
individuals’ identities and group composition play in decisions by individuals
to maximize social welfare, to prioritize organizational goals above self-
interest, and to exert more effort. The insights from this study have the
potential to contribute to the theoretical and empirical knowledge in economics.
Firstly, our work will provide an empirical foundation for incorporating dynamic
group composition into our understanding of individual behavior in economic
decision making. We expand the understanding of groups by studying how
newcomers’ identity impacts groups, and how groups’ composition impacts old
members and newcomers. Secondly, we contribute to the literature on diversity
and its implications for productivity. This is an area of research that has
implications on how organizations design work teams to function effectively
together. Finally, our research will contribute to the literature on gender
differences in behavior. We add to this literature an understanding of dynamic
group gender composition and its impact on the performance of men and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.