* 2215526
* GOALI: Coordination of Multi-Stakeholder Process Networks in a Highly Electrified Chemical Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Qi Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 361,820.00

The chemical sector is currently the largest industrial consumer of oil and gas
and a major emitter of greenhouse gases. As the demand for chemicals continues
to grow, there is an urgent need to decarbonize global chemical production.
Electrification using power-to-chemicals and power-to-heat technologies is
considered one of the most promising emission reduction strategies for the
chemical industry, provided that renewable sources of electricity are used. As
electrification efforts intensify in the coming years, the chemical industries
will see a dramatic increase in the number of chemical processes that consume
large amounts of electricity. These processes will face the challenge of
increasingly time-sensitive availability and pricing of electricity, such that
significant operational flexibility will be required to ensure safe and cost-
effective operation. A major source of flexibility lies in the coordination of
multiple interconnected plants (and the respective multiple self-interested
stakeholders). Importantly, with a large number of power-intensive processes,
effective coordination must happen in real time, much akin to the way modern
power grids operate. This would, however, be a major paradigm change for the
chemical industry, which is used to highly steady operation and long response
times, where different companies coordinate their operations mainly through
long-term bilateral contracts. In this research, the research team aims to
develop efficient computational methods for the coordination of multi-
stakeholder process networks that improve the whole system's performance while
ensuring that all stakeholders benefit from cooperation. To this end, new fair
and privacy-preserving coordination mechanisms will be designed that can
consider multiple products, plants, stakeholders, and spatiotemporal scales.
Implemented at large scale, such coordination will not only enable the
electrification of the chemical industry in the most cost-effective manner but
also help improve grid reliability and facilitate further growth in renewable
energy generation. This project is jointly funded by the Electrochemical Systems
and the Process Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular Thermodynamics
programs of ENG/CBET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan is
organized into three specific aims: (i) Distributed cooperative industrial
demand response (DR), where DR refers to the adjustment of an electricity
consumer's load profile in response to price changes. The researchers will
develop capabilities for the distributed coordinated optimization of multiple
connected plants (possibly across an entire supply chain), which maximizes the
overall benefits from DR while accounting for local objectives, data privacy
requirements, and fair profit allocation. (ii) Risk-aware cooperative provision
of interruptible load, which aims to further incorporate uncertainty and risk
measures to consider participating in the reserve market through the provision
of interruptible load. Here, the major technical challenge is the
computationally efficient modeling of endogenous uncertainty and multistage
recourse. (iii) Market-based coordination of an electrified chemical industry,
where an alternative approach to distribution optimization for real-time
coordination will be explored. Specifically, a responsive and robust market
mechanism will be developed based on the idea of trading operational
flexibility. This project will be conducted in a close industry-university
collaboration between the University of Minnesota and The Dow Chemical Company,
which is crucial as it requires both the development of new computational
methods at the cutting edge of academic research as well as their application to
industrial use cases to gain practical insights and demonstrate the value of the
proposed approaches. This research will advance the state of the art in the
broad area of multi-agent decision making. Although this work will focus on a
specific manufacturing context, the methods will be sufficiently general such
that they can be adapted for many other applications. Generally, they can be
applied to multi-stakeholder systems in which conditions and resource
availability are highly time-sensitive and uncertain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.