* 2215770
* Integrating Inquiry-Based and Project-Based Learning in the Preservice STEM Teacher Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bugrahan Yalvac, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,980.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing secondary school
teachers to expose students to the field of engineering. Nationally, less than
fifty percent of the students who enroll in engineering disciplines complete the
program. Most of these students drop out of their engineering programs during
the first two years, and there is no indication that this trend will slow down
in the near future. This project addresses this downward trend by focusing on
preparing engineers to be K-12 teachers who will expose students to engineering
concepts and designs from an early age. Having engineers in the K-12 classroom
should allow children to learn math, physical science, engineering and
technology concepts and principles in ways that allow them to connect “abstract
ideas” to the world in which they live and with what they desire to learn.
Researchers have identified this approach as an effective way to address the
challenges and continually growing need for a skilled Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) workforce. This project hopes to produce
highly trained engineers to teach in secondary school classrooms. The broader
impact of this project is the development of teachers who are innovative,
pedagogically trained, and qualified engineers who place a high priority on
hands-on learning and student engagement. These teachers will be better equipped
to assist in laying the foundation in the preparation of the next generation of
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is
to train STEM preservice teachers to effectively utilize inquiry-based and
project-based learning in the secondary (middle and high school) classroom. The
project will pilot a set of evidence-based interventions to promote innovation
and novel engineering hands-on activities to accomplish this objective. These
interventions are (i) applied research training, (ii) professional development
training program in engineering design and makerspaces, (iii) intensive student
engagement in engineering design projects, (iv) mentoring support, and (v) a set
of well-structured early field teaching experiences. These interventions will be
integrated and offered to students as research experience credit. This
intervention plan will serve as a model for developing preservice STEM teachers
trained in engineering/engineering technology. Pedagogical training should
enable these preservice teachers to translate complex theory into age-
appropriate hands-on learning activities, such as robot building. The
participants of this project will be knowledgeable in inquiry-based learning and
how to apply it to be an effective teacher in the 21st century STEM classroom.
This project hopes to generate knowledge that will shed light on the factors
that contribute to the development of preservice teachers’ self-efficacies in
integrating new technology into pedagogical practice. The findings will
contribute to the body of knowledge in preservice STEM teacher preparation
programs by identifying and assessing a set of pedagogical and professional
training activities that produce effective STEM teachers. Materials developed
and lessons learned will influence the adoption of similar programs nationwide.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. Partial funding for the project
is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.