* 2215613
* Broadening participation, building STEM competencies, and strengthening identity formation through cross-cultural and international collaboration in project-based learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Seung Lee, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project engages pre-college Latinx, Black, and Indigenous learners,
educators, and collaborating undergraduates in an international, project-based
learning and media-making community in areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project addresses key challenges
including broadening participation in informal STEM learning, developing
capacity for leading informal STEM programs, and building stronger connections
between STEM learning and personal and social identity formation during
adolescence. The project’s community of participants is an asset-based learning
environment that treats each participant, their background, skills, and
interests as uniquely beneficial to the whole. Led by mentors at each hub
(teachers, leaders from science organizations, or other out-of-school learning
environments), participants collaborate with peers from the US and from other
countries. The collaborations encompass a broad spectrum of STEM projects.
Participants also create digital media to communicate their projects. The
project activities reflect a focus on STEM content, collaboration, and
communication, in a global context that includes school-age learners from the US
and peers from Central and South America, the Middle East, Asia, and Sub-Sahara.
The combination of the sophisticated STEM competencies skills for collaborating
across international and cultural boundaries, and media-savvy communication
abilities are essential to the nation’s future STEM workforce and to building a
scientifically vibrant citizenry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
two primary research questions co-developed with teachers and other informal
science providers. The first research question involves understanding and
optimizing conditions for broadening participation through this type of
distributed or virtual collaboration across boundaries of culture, race, gender,
ability, nationality, and socioeconomic status. The project features a design
experiment by which the overall community of participants comprises four
separate hubs, each hosted by the different project partners (primarily
teachers). Educators devise, test, and revise alternative designs for organizing
STEM collaborations. Publication of these teacher-led designs and their
evaluation are among the primary outputs of the project. The designs modify and
improve a template developed under this project’s proof-of-concept precursor
(NSF1612824). The second research question addresses how growth in STEM
abilities, collaboration, and communication mutually reinforce adolescent
personal and social identity formation. Participating students in the US will
intentionally reflect heterogeneous backgrounds. The project analysis will focus
on whether cultural and national cross-boundary collaboration can strengthen the
development of learners' personal identity and academic performance. The project
methodology relies heavily on quantitative ethnography and epistemic network
analysis. This approach enables the creation of visual models that highlight the
presence or absence of connections between constructs relevant to each research
question, along with changes between and within groups. The constructs include
variations of autonomy, competence, and connection (pillars of self-
determination theory) in tracing identity formation and STEM abilities. The
quantitative ethnography approach provides statistically reliable scaffolding
and insights about the hub designs and their efficacy in promoting goals of
broadening participation and fostering mutually reinforcing STEM competencies
and identity formation. This type of virtual collaboration, crossing boundaries
of culture, nationality, ethnicity, age, gender, economic strata, or ability,
can realistically be expected to play a significant role in next-generation
learning environments, especially through out-of-school activities. The project
is expected to reach 120 U.S. and 80 non-U.S. students annually. Research
findings, design principles and curricula will be widely disseminated to
researchers, designers, program developers, informal science institutions and
community organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance
new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.