* 2215937
* MRI: Acquisition of Magento-optical-high-frequency cryogen free probe station for research and education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Hao Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 242,716.00

Probe station is an essential scientific instrument used by scientists and
engineers to test and measure new materials and devices. This major research
instrumentation project will acquire a high-performance closed cycle liquid
cryogen free low temperature probe station with electrical, magnetic, optical
and high frequency probing capabilities for high impact research and STEM
education at the University at Buffalo (UB). The state-of-the-art tool with
several unique technical features will immensely improve the research
infrastructure at UB. The tool will have broad impact with usage from faculties,
researchers, students, and entrepreneurs at UB and other institutes in the
western New York region (WNY). The unique feature of the tool is the ability to
simultaneously probe magneto-optical-electrical properties across a wide range
of temperatures (5 K to 500K). The salient technical features of the tool will
enable high impact research in a broad range of fields spanning engineering,
physics, chemistry, materials science, and biology. The unique features of the
tool are the ability to probe materials and devices with magneto-electrical,
magneto-RF, electro-optical, magneto-RF-optical signals and combinations
thereof. These features are necessary for innovative research in materials and
devices for quantum information science, 5G and beyond communications and next
generation energy technologies. Furthermore, the tool will enable probing the
fundamental science and chemistry of emergent materials and interfaces opening
the avenues for new knowledge. Undergraduate and graduate students in the
engineering and science discipline at UB and across WNY region will have access
and training to the tool through courses and programs offered by various
engineering and science departments at UB. The tool will have positive effect
across a wide range of topics of current national focus on maintaining US
leadership. These include semiconductors, quantum information science, 5G and
beyond communication, clean energy technologies. The research opportunity given
to undergraduate and graduate students will help build the skills of the future
workforce and maintain the economic competitiveness of the US. The tool will be
incorporated into and managed by the shared instrumentation and equipment portal
at UB providing easy access to both academic and industrial users. The strong
outreach programs underway at UB will also use this facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probe stations are essential tools for engineers and
scientists to investigate fundamental science through convenient, fast,
repeatable measurements of electrical, optical, and magnetic properties of
materials and devices producing consistent results. They are versatile, flexible
but more importantly easy, fast to use research platforms that can be used by
multiple researchers in electronics, photonics, engineering, materials science,
physics, and chemistry departments. The unique features of the tool are the
ability to probe materials and devices with magneto-electrical, magneto-RF,
electro-optical, magneto-RF-optical signals and combinations thereof. The tool
will enable research in a broad range of topics: low power non-volatile high
speed magneto-electric based logic and memory devices for energy efficient data
intensive computing applications; next generation RF and power devices using
ultawidebandgap semiconductors; tunnel FETs and cold electron transistors based
on emerging 2-D materials; high power flexible electronics based on widebandgap
semiconductors; room temperature mid-infrared (MIR)/THz devices based on
coupling of optical phonons in III-V semiconductors to graphene plasmonic
structures; understanding of the fundamental physics in correlated electron
systems using noise spectroscopy; high temperature superconductors for quantum
information science and characterization of 2-D materials, heterointerfaces, and
devices. These high impact research have applications that range from computing,
communication, and energy. It will also help in understanding fundamental
physics in the 2-D magnets and polar molecules. The proposed tool to be acquired
will have high vertical magnetic fields, with DC, optical and RF probing
capabilities. These unique features are essential to conduct the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.