* 2215202
* Comparing student success, team dynamics, and cost in three different active learning formats in undergraduate physics education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Vera Margoniner, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,916.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by promoting student success in
an introductory college physics course. This project plans to implement and
compare three different active learning formats in physics teaching. All three
formats are based on proven best practices known to improve student success.
However, each format differs in how it incorporates team dynamics and student
leadership in the classroom. Each format also differs in cost. By comparing
student outcomes in the three formats, this project hopes to address how the
incorporation of student leadership and teamwork could cost-effectively improve
student success and learning in college physics class. This could advance
knowledge about building a diverse and inclusive workforce, as well as
broadening participation in STEM. The project has the potential significance of
creating a low-cost model that can be implemented in undergraduate STEM
classrooms broadly to promote student success and retention, while also
developing students’ leadership capacity and teamwork skills, both highly valued
workplace skills. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to develop, implement, and evaluate three active learning classroom formats in
the context of introductory college physics. The project will compare three
active learning formats, all of which vary in cost and use different active
learning, student leadership, and teamwork elements. The three formats will be
implemented in parallel over the course of four semesters and are distinguished
by having: (a) no undergraduate student learning assistants in leadership roles,
(b) paid undergraduate learning assistants who have previously completed the
course in leadership roles, or (c) rotating peer leaders drawn from current
students in the course. The project plans to assess the effectiveness of these
three approaches across several dimensions, including cost, student retention
and course completion rates, student performance on subject matter assessments,
and surveys assessing student leadership capacity and attitudes. While active
learning practices are generally known to improve student success and learning,
the specific cost and efficacy of different modalities may vary and is not well
understood. Situated in a Hispanic Serving Institution, this project hopes to
provide insights about sustainable, low-cost active learning formats in
undergraduate STEM education that could be broadly relevant. Also, the project
should advance understanding of how implementing different approaches to student
leadership roles into STEM courses might promote student success and retention,
while also developing students’ leadership skills. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE: HSI
program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM
education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of
students pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.