* 2215700
* Bridging Non-STEM and STEM Math Tracks: An Interest-Based Intervention to Increase Community College STEM Opportunity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Tatiana Melguizo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,991.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
remediating racial, gender, and class tracking in community college math in
order to advance opportunity and equity in STEM participation. As community
colleges around the country move towards eliminating developmental education,
students are increasingly eligible to take a college-level statistics / liberal
arts math (SLAM) or business and science technology, engineering, and math
(BSTEM) course. While direct access to college-level SLAM or BSTEM courses
reduces obstacles to the completion of degree and transfer requirements, having
both options could turn these college-level math pathways into potentially rigid
math tracks. This could have unintended consequences for STEM participation. The
project will begin by evaluating the extent to which students are tracked into
SLAM and BSTEM pathways along racial/ethnic, gender, first generation status,
and family income lines. Then, in partnership with a single community college,
project collaborators plan to design, implement, and evaluate a low-touch nudge
that encourages students in college statistics to meet with a math instructor or
counselor to “warm up” their STEM aspirations, and invites them to participate
in a week-long, non-credit intersession Bridge2BSTEM workshop. The workshop will
provide students with the opportunity to explore their STEM interests, learn
about STEM careers, establish a growth mindset towards math, and receive
academic support for switching to BSTEM courses. Emerging from this project will
be new knowledge on whether offering SLAM courses may inadvertently track
racially minoritized students and women out of STEM fields; causal evidence on
the potential effectiveness of nudging students to explore their STEM interests;
and a model for a statistics-to-STEM bridge experience that community college
math departments can adopt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue a
multi-staged effort with a large urban community district in California to: 1)
document the extent to which there is tracking of students into BSTEM and SLAM
course sequences, 2) collaborate with the math and counseling faculty at a
single Hispanic Serving Institution to develop a Bridge2BSTEM workshop designed
to introduce students to STEM careers, connect them to support services, and to
learn from peers in the BSTEM pathway about ways of exploring and developing
careers in STEM, and 3) evaluate whether a validating nudge can prompt students
to take up the opportunity to enroll in the Bridge2BSTEM workshop and,
subsequently, BSTEM math courses. The first project aim will be fulfilled using
descriptive quantitative methods to examine racial/ethnic, gender, and
socioeconomic trends in BSTEM and SLAM courses over time. The second project aim
will be fulfilled through the partnership between the research team and the
community college site for the study. The third project aim will be fulfilled
using experimental methods, specifically through section-level randomization of
college statistics courses at the community college site. A qualitative study
that captures math instructor and counselor perspectives, workshop observations,
and student experiences in the program will provide nuanced insights into
program design and implementation. The project will result in accessible
practice and policy briefs describing the validating nudge and Bridge2BSTEM
workshop, as well as the results of the evaluation and policy recommendations
for other community colleges. The project will additionally result in academic
papers describing the analyses and results. This project should contribute new
knowledge on the equity implications of offering multiple math pathways and
propose structures and supports that can increase representation of women,
racially minoritized, first-generation, and low-income students in STEM.
Ultimately, the project should result in actionable research findings community
college leaders and faculty members can use as they work to expand options in an
equitable manner, specifically through a culturally validating behavioral nudge
and Bridge2BSTEM workshop. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.