* 2215692
* Using media and technology to advance public awareness of research on microscopic larvae   in the deep ocean
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Craig Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,424,488.00

Few people realize that the largest part of our planet’s biosphere remains
virtually unexplored and unknown. This enormous habitat, accounting for an area
of 116 million square miles or the equivalent size of roughly 30 times the area
of the United States, is the abyssal zone of the deep ocean. The abyssal sea
floor, at about 6000 ft., contains more than four times as much habitat for
animal life as all of the dry mountains, forests, deserts, plains and jungles
combined. Microscopic larvae in the deep ocean, are essential for the renewal
and replenishment of life and they repopulate areas damaged by human activities
such as mining and trawling, and they make marine protected areas both feasible
and important. The National Science Foundation has funded intensive studies of
oceanography related to larval recruitment for decades. However, findings from
this large NSF investment of personnel, technology and funding have never been
widely presented to the public. This project proposes to remedy this by
developing a 40 minute giant screen film to be shown in science centers across
the country, supported by virtual reality and augmented reality learning tools.
The film will cover select deep ocean science expeditions using the deep-sea
vehicles Alvin and ROV Jason. Content will include elements of the research
process, activities related to the design and operation of deep-sea vehicles as
well as interviews with scientists and technologists. The companion activities,
Deep-Ocean Pilot (a VR-360° viewing station) and Plankton Quest (an AR biology
treasure hunt) will extend the audience experience of the deep ocean out of the
giant screen theater and into the surrounding museum environment. The website
and social media will extend awareness and resources into homes. The project
will be appropriate for a broad general audience, with particular appeal for the
target audience of women and girls (ages 7-20). The larval biologist team is led
by the PI at the University of Oregon, in collaboration with scientists from
North Carolina State University, Western Washington University and the
University of Rhode Island. Several young women scientists will be featured in
the film providing role models. The production company, Stephen Low Productions,
Inc. will use the latest technology on the Alvin and other cinematic tools to
capture the visual images in the abyss. Collaborating museums will participate
in the development and implementation of the Virtual and Augmented Reality
learning tools as well as showing the film in their
theaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact project goals include 1)Advancing
public awareness of the abyssal ocean, the role of microscopic larvae, and what
scientists are learning from expeditions that use deep submergence technologies;
2) Introducing public audiences and young women specifically to the wide range
of STEM-related occupations encompassed in the field of ocean exploration and
research; and 3) Advancing STEM learning research and practice in the area of
immersive media in conveying STEM concepts and enhancing audience identification
with STEM. Oregon State University’s STEM Research Center will build new
knowledge by conducting formative and summative evaluation of the film and its
associated support products (e.g., Virtual and augmented reality activities,
website resources), addressing the following evaluation questions: 1)What do
audiences take away from their experience in terms of fascination/interest,
awareness and understanding related to ocean science exploration? 2) To what
degree does the film alone or in combination with supplemental experiences
trigger career awareness in girls and young women, and youth of racial/ethnic
backgrounds? 3) To what degree do immersive experiences (a sense of “being
there”) contribute to learning from the film? 4) How enduring are outcomes with
audiences past the onsite immediate experience? Formative evaluation will be
designed as ongoing improvement informed by empirical evidence in which
evaluators work with team members to answer decision-relevant questions in a
timely and project-focused way. The summative evaluation will be structured as
an effectiveness study using mixed methods and ascertaining whether key
programmatic outcomes have been reached and the degree to which particular
program elements will have contributed to the results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.