* 2215527
* Collaborative Research: United States University CLOUD (Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets) Consortium Membership
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Richard Flagan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 454,659.00

This project will support the continued membership of Carnegie Mellon
University, the California Institute of Technology, and the University of
Colorado at Boulder in the CLOUD consortium at CERN to study the chemistry and
physics that drive new-particle formation and growth in Earth's atmosphere.
CLOUD is a state-of-the-art 26 cubic meter stainless-steel chamber with precise
control over temperature and relative humidity. The new research at CLOUD will
focus on the study of chemical mechanisms that generate extremely low volatility
organic compounds capable of nucleating and condensing onto freshly nucleated
particles. Target environments include natural (both forest and marine) and
polluted (urban) conditions, as well as cold temperatures characteristic of the
free troposphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned research over the next 3 years,
includes studies of: (1) aging of first-generation organic oxidation products
under conditions found in the free troposphere; (2) measurement and modeling of
key radical intermediates in organic oxidation and also inorganic sulfur,
nitrogen, and iodine oxidation, as well as interaction between organic and
inorganic systems; (3) measurement and modeling of interactions among vapors and
both charged and neutral particles below 10 nm to constrain key microphysical
terms; and (4) propagating CLOUD results to atmospheric models, testing their
capability to explain field measurements, and understanding the implications of
improvements to models for aerosol radiative forcing. In addition to providing
the required consortium fee, this project will support shipping and travel to
CLOUD experimental campaigns and associated consortium meetings and data
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both doctoral and postdoctoral students
associated with the project (supported by other awards) are integrated into an
international collaborative network of students and senior researchers who work
with some of the most highly regarded scientists in the study of aerosols and
atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.