* 2215263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactions among socio-demographic characteristics and identity in shaping aging
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Eugene Raikhel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 10/31/2023
* USD 19,820.00

Individuals experience aging differently according to both individual and
community attributes. How these factors interact to affect well-being in old
age, however, remains poorly understood. This project uses theory from
scientific cultural anthropology to test among multiple possible life courses in
old age among individuals of varying identities and socio-economic
characteristics to understand whether specific factors emerge as particularly
salient in predicting aging and welfare among older individuals. In addition to
training a graduate student in scientific research, this project trains
undergraduate students, disseminates its findings broadly to academic and non-
academic audiences, and develops undergraduate curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on aging has principally concentrated on analyses
of a single aspect of an individual’s identity. This study complements this
focus by investigating how a number of socio-demographic characteristics
interact with aspects of identity to affect an individual’s life and aging
experiences. This project employs ethnographic methods, including participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, and focus groups, to investigate aging
and welfare within a diverse senior population. It advances knowledge of human
aging processes and outcomes by investigating predictive factors at multiple
levels of an individual’s identity and livelihood, providing much-needed nuance
to studies attempting to unravel how patterns and consequences of human
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.