* 2215187
* Advancing Public Engagement with Science across the Long-Term Ecological Research Network
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sarah Garlick, Hubbard Brook Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2025
* USD 471,237.00

The goal of this project is to understand and support the development of
evidence-based public engagement with science (PES) strategies within STEM
research organizations. It specifically seeks to understand how scientists,
institutional leaders, and staff within the NSF’s Long Term Ecological Research
(LTER) Network make decisions about the design and implementation of PES
activities. The LTER Network includes 28 varied sites across North America and
provides a unique opportunity to study PES decision-making within scientific
organizations. The project is especially interested in the degree to which these
types of organizations consider the interests and assets of local communities,
including underrepresented communities. This project will lead to increased
capacity for effective, evidence-based PES in an essential sector of the
nation’s STEM research infrastructure. The project is a collaboration between
PES practitioners within the LTER Network and PES researchers at Michigan State
University and Oregon State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
address three primary research questions: (1) How do scientists, institutional
leaders, and staff view and make decisions about the design and implementation
of PES? (2) To what degree do PES activities and PES strategies consider the
interests and assets of local communities, including those underrepresented in
STEM? (3) How, and to what degree, can scientists, institutional leaders, and
staff develop shared PES strategies aimed at enhancing reciprocal exchanges and
ongoing relationships with communities? The project design includes: (a) surveys
and interviews with LTER scientists, institutional leaders, and staff; (b) case
studies coupled with strategic engagement planning to investigate the community
contexts of PES; (c) a PES working group with LTER scientists and PES-related
staff to integrate research and practice; (d) a PES monitoring system for
tracking PES activities at LTER sites; and (e) an external advisory board of PES
experts and representatives of other STEM research organizations to promote
accountability of the work and broaden its impact beyond the LTER Network. The
overall hypothesis is that it is possible to improve the effectiveness of PES
through a focus on helping scientific organizations develop PES strategies in
collaboration with relevant communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in
Service to Practice Project is a three year endeavor and supported by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments, multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.