* 2215905
* MRI: Acquisition of a Photo-Induced Force Microscope for High Resolution Nanoscale Spectroscopic Imaging and Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Runye Zha, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2025
* USD 304,668.00

The development of next-generation materials and processes requires advanced
tools for nanoscale imaging and chemical analysis. Conventional spectroscopy and
microscopy techniques are unable to provide molecular-level information with
high spatial resolution, limiting the ability of researchers to create high-
performance materials with unprecedented functionality. To bridge such a
critical gap in nanoscale characterization, this Major Research Instrumentation
award supports Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute with the acquisition and
installation of a photo-induced force microscope (PiFM). The instrument will
enable infrared absorption spectroscopy and chemical mapping of complex
nanomaterials with better than 10-nanometer spatial resolution. Research
projects supported by the PiFM will enhance the understanding of natural systems
and develop new materials, chemicals, and processes that have high-impact
applications in healthcare, computing, energy conversion and storage, and
materials/environmental sustainability. The PiFM instrument will be installed in
the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies (CBIS) CBIS
Microscopy Core, a multiuser facility that provides expert instrument training
and access to internal and external users from academic, industry, and non-
profit sectors in the U.S. Northeast region. Additionally, the PiFM will be a
crucial tool for educating the next generation of scientists in modern nanoscale
characterization modalities that integrate imaging with chemical analysis. To
that end, the PiFM will also be incorporated into hands-on learning experiences
designed for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from this Major Research
Instrumentation award, the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary
Studies (CBIS) at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will acquire and install a
photo-induced force microscope (PiFM). The instrument will be placed in a
multiuser instrumentation facility open to academic, industry, and non-profit
researchers via remote or on-site access. Developed and commercialized within
the past decade, PiFM is a cutting-edge platform that integrates non-contact
atomic force microscopy with mechanical detection of near-field optical
phenomena to generate label-free high-resolution images rich in molecular
information. The spatial resolution of PiFM is 5 - 10 nm, making it the highest
resolution technique available to date for molecular vibrational spectroscopic
imaging. The PiFM will enable activities such as: visualizing the spatial
distribution and evolution of chemical functionality and conformation of
surface-bound (macro)molecules; characterizing nanoscale domains and interfaces
in organic and inorganic materials non-destructively; and observing localized
molecular alterations in materials resulting from disease or from novel
materials fabrication processes. The PiFM will support ongoing research projects
in three thematic categories: 1) Surface Modification and Interfacial Phenomena,
2) Nanoscale Interfaces and Structures, and 3) Chemically Inhomogeneous
Materials. Example projects include: development of protein coatings for
biomedical surface functionalization, optimization of enzymes for polymer
depolymerization and recycling, design of filtration membranes with high
selectivity and flux, study of semiconducting thin films and ferroelectrics for
high performance microelectronics, elucidation of bone fragility mechanisms
caused by diabetes, synthesis of metallopolymer blends as semiconducting films
in ultra-sensitive FET-based sensors, development of bioelectronic materials
with high in vivo compatibility and resilience, and other areas of
multidisciplinary high-impact research. Open house showcases and workshops will
be offered recruit new users from the surrounding region. Additionally, the PiFM
will also be incorporated into undergraduate research training programs and K-12
educational outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.