* 2215111
* Development of Evidence-Based Viral Pandemic Guidelines for Community Corrections
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jill Viglione, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2026
* USD 207,531.00

During the COVID-19 pandemic, community supervision agencies (i.e., pretrial,
probation and/or parole) adapted practices to address public safety goals for
supervising individuals in the community and for reducing the spread of
COVID-19. Community supervision agencies had to drastically adapt policies to
manage social distancing during supervision contacts and provide assistance to
individuals to achieve supervision goals. One of the greatest challenges during
the pandemic was the lack of clear and consistent guidelines for supervision
agencies to use. This project combines research-based findings about the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic on community supervision agencies, experiences of
clients, and supervision officers during the pandemic. These findings along with
feedback from a panel of experts from a variety of fields will be used to
achieve two primary goals: 1) development of a comprehensive evidence-based
understanding of the response to and impact of COVID-19 on the field of
community supervision; and 2) application of the collected evidence to develop
empirically-supported pandemic response guidelines for supervision agencies. The
value of this effort is to systematically learn from the COVID-19 pandemic and
prepare for future pandemics. Collectively, these efforts will improve both
knowledge and practice by contributing to developing a knowledgebase of
empirical evidence and a toolkit for practitioners and agencies to use in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is informed by three main research
questions: 1) What responses during COVID-19 were successful and unsuccessful in
community supervision agencies? 2) What are the short and long-term impacts of
how supervision agencies responded during COVID-19?; and 3) What are the better
strategies to implement in response to future pandemics or emergency situations?
We will use a multi-staged approach involving research evaluation of responses
and impact of responses in three jurisdictions and collaboration with experts
across relevant fields to inform two key deliverables. These deliverables
include a database of successful practices and policies for the field and
Practice Guidelines for the Community Corrections Responses to Viral Pandemics.
This project has the potential to expand what has already been done on the
COVID-19 pandemic in the field of supervision through a comprehensive consensus
building process using the RAND/UCLA model. This will identify adaptations to
community supervision practice and the impact of those adaptations for agencies,
supervision officers, and individuals under supervision. This project includes
multiple perspectives and examines the impact of pandemic responses on key
outcomes to advance knowledge, inform evidence-based tools for the community
supervision field, and identify areas for possible
reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.