* 2215567
* MRI: Development of a frequency agile multistatic radio system for geospace imaging
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Fabiano Rodrigues, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,836,466.00

This project will develop a frequency-agile multistatic radio system to be
deployed near the Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO) in Peru for geospace
observations and studies. JRO is a facility of the Instituto Geofisico del Peru
(IGP) operated with support from the US National Science Foundation (NSF)
through an award to Cornell University. Jicamarca is a premier scientific
facility in the world that operates and maintains the largest radar capable of
50 MHz incoherent scatter radar (ISR) observations of the geospace at low
latitudes. The multistatic radio system will allow Jicamarca to provide new
breakthrough observations relevant to the space physics and aeronomy community
and expand its contributions in adjacent research domains. All the standard
observations provided by this new system will be made available to the
scientific community. Additionally, the community will be invited to propose new
types of observations and investigations with the system. The instrumentation
and expansion of the observational capabilities at Jicamarca are well-aligned
with priorities highlighted by the community in the 2021 workshop “Strategic
Vision for Incoherent Scatter Radar”. The workshop was convened by NSF to help
guide the future of the facilities program of the Division of Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences (AGS). The project will address an important component of
space weather and issues of societal relevance. The project will also expand
Jicamarca’s contribution to education through the creation of new research
opportunities and student training. Finally, the project will expand the
contribution of the Jicamarca to a wider range of research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an MRI Track-2 instrument
development project for a frequency-agile multistatic radio system for geospace
observations and studies. The instrument will comprise two radio array receiving
stations operating in the band between 10 and 88 MHz. Two sites suitable for the
deployment of the stations are chosen to allow for perpendicular-to-B radar
measurements and oblique observations. Multistatic modes add wavenumber
diversity to radar experiments and permit the unambiguous determination of
vector Doppler velocity. The project will advance significant progress in at
least five distinct research areas: (a) Mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT)
mesoscale dynamics, (b) Meteor science, (c) Ionopsheric irregularities, (d)
Meteor radio afterglows, and (e) Multistatic incoherent scatter radar studies
and observations of ionospheric plasma drifts. Additionally, the stations can be
used independently as passive systems (telescopes) for radio astronomy
investigations that are complementary to those carried out by stations of the
Long Wavelength Array (LWA) and LOw Frequency ARray (LOFAR) projects. A team of
experienced researchers committed with the advancement of radio and space
sciences and the maintenance of Jicamarca in the frontier of observational
capabilities has been assembled for this project. The project’s broader impacts
are Enhancement of JRO infrastructure for research, education and professional
training, national and international partnerships, benefits to technological
assets that are relevant to the society, increase in the participation of
underrepresented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM), and advancement in discovery and understanding while promoting the
training of a postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.