* 2215062
* MRI: Acquisition of a rapid-throughput NMR spectrometer at the University of Virginia
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 314,736.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Virginia is
acquiring a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with
a probe with multinuclear capabilities to support the research of Professor W.
Dean Harman and colleagues Robert J. Gilliard and Thomas B. Gunnoe. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of synthetic organic chemistry,
organometallic chemistry, catalysis, and chemical biology. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The multinuclear allows study of a wide range of elements above and beyond the
common hydrogen and carbon atoms. This instrument enhances the educational,
research, and teaching efforts of a diverse group of students and investigators
from fourteen research groups across five departments. The instrument also
enhances the research experiences of undergraduates, including those from
underrepresented groups, at regional institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award of the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as small molecule
therapeutics, synthetic methodologies, and molecular interactions with
biological materials. This instrument enables research focusing on synthetic
organic methods, chemical biology, transition metal complex characterization,
main group chemistry, and in situ mechanistic studies. The research projects to
be enabled by the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer could lead to impacts in fields such
as renewable energy, catalysis, and medicinal
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.