* 2215917
* MRI: Acquisition of A MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Accurate Mass Determination of Biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* David Salas-de la Cruz, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,000.00

The significance of this proposed Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project
is to fill in the existing gap of lacking scientific equipment to advance
multidisciplinary research and to promote educational and outreach activities in
the South Jersey area. Multiple schools and institutes will be benefited from
acquiring the equipment, including 16 key user labs from 7 different departments
at Rutgers-Camden, Rowan University and the Joint Health Sciences Center (JHSC)
in Camden. The potential impacts include the enhancement of STEM outreach for
under-represented/minority students in the Camden area; advancement of classroom
teaching, experiential learning and research training for undergraduates and
graduate students; the promotion of collaboration within local schools and
industrial partners. The proposed equipment will also interface with existing
facilities to enhance the setup of a core facility of Scientific Measurements at
Rutgers University-Camden. The success of instrumental use will be evaluated by
the number of users, product of publications, conference presentations, grant
awards, class participation, outreach activities and other scientific
disseminations. This project serves the interest and mission of NSF to promote
the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare;
and to secure the national defense.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The MALDI-TOF
instrument is used for the analysis of various high molecular-weight
biomolecules, such as nucleotides, peptides proteins and polysaccharides. The
acquisition of this instrument will support multidisciplinary research programs
and student education in the fields of biomimetic self-assembly, cellular
biochemistry, protein chemistry, novel biomaterials, nanomaterials, forensic
analysis and molecular sensing, as well as increasing knowledge of health-
relevant mechanisms. Multiple research and outreach projects will be enhanced by
this instrument, including: (1) Characterization of biomolecule modification and
conjugation for developing biomimetic assemblies and smart reactors; (2)
Development of biomaterials and biopolymers; (3) Nanoparticles synthesis,
assembly and delivery; (4) Enhanced bimolecular characterization for studying
cellular functions and activities; (5) Enhanced methods for forensic body fluid
identification; (6) Characterization of peptides and proteins for bimolecular
function; (7) Enhancement of research outreach and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.