* 2215857
* MRI: Acquisition of a state-of-the-art Fabry-Perot interferometer to measure upper atmosphere winds and temperatures for He, OH, and O nightglow and auroral emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Andrew Gerrard, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 587,288.00

Understanding and predicting thermospheric winds and temperatures during all
conditions of space weather activity is important in the determination of
satellite drag. The system proposed herein will yield unprecedented measurements
of winds and temperatures beyond that which are currently available, leading to
transformational changes in the understanding of not only satellite drag, but of
a myriad of outstanding questions in the space sciences. The wind measurements
have societal significance as they are important for space weather research and
global circulation models to understand and predict space weather. Deployment,
operation, and analysis of the data from this proposed system will enable
undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate opportunities in contemporary STEM
topics, ranging from instrumentation advancement to Big Data and beyond. The
project has good potential for high impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to measure winds and temperature in the thermosphere through an acquisition
of a Fabry-Perot interferometer with high sensitivity that will enable the
measurements of very weak airglow emissions in the MLT region. Large
thermospheric vertical winds are inconsistent with what the application of the
mass continuity equation would predict using the horizontal divergence of the
observed wind field. The measurements needed to resolve the discrepancy are
nonexistent, thus highlighting the compelling need for advancement in the
current remote sensing technologies. The observing system will yield
unprecedented measurements of winds and temperatures beyond that which are
currently available, leading to transformational changes in the space sciences.
The added benefit is the portability of the Fabry-Perot system thus enabling
collaborative studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.