* 2215690
* Investigating the historical dynamics of Indigenous forest  stewardship in a western Oregon Cascades landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bart Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,886.00

This project investigates the historical management of temperate rainforests by
indigenous communities. The research asks how traditional management practices
such as cultural burning and selective harvesting of natural resources may have
contributed to forest health and increased resilience to catastrophic wildfire
and changing climate. Past indigenous land management and its legacies are not
well understood for temperate rainforests. Historically indigenous communities
successfully stewarded lands for thousands of years. Recent increases in the
frequency and severity of wildfires have focused a new spotlight on the need for
improving forest resilience to these changing conditions. This research
contributes to efforts to improve forest resilience by informing forest planners
about how people successfully lived with and managed these same hazards in the
past, and by showing how such practices could guide contemporary forest
management practices. It also supports Tribal community efforts to preserve and
interpret their cultural heritage, and to re-engage in restoration and
stewardship of their traditional lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies
have examined the long term, intertwined history of temperate rainforests and
wildfires, but few have focused on records of fires and other cultural
activities preserved within the annual growth rings of trees. Still fewer
studies have linked these tree ring histories to the traditional harvesting and
burning practices of Indigenous peoples â€“ either through oral tradition or by
using archaeological evidence. In collaboration with traditional indigenous
culture practitioners, this project integrates tree ring studies and
archaeological evidence to reconstruct the history of indigenous forest
management. By synthesizing these diverse sources of information, this research
investigates how Indigenous cultural practices may have helped build forest
health and resilience in the face of potentially catastrophic wildfires. The
results contribute detailed knowledge that informs current forest management
strategies and supports efforts to mitigate the growing threat of extreme
wildfires under climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.