* 2215401
* Signaling Roles of Intermediate Filament Isoforms in Neural Development
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Bettina Winckler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2026
* USD 649,998.00

This project aims to advance scientific knowledge by addressing an unanswered
question in biology: what are the molecular principles that create different
types of cells? The research focuses on a class of proteins which are expressed
in strikingly cell-type specific patterns, the intermediate filament (IF)
proteins. The project focuses on neurons in the brain which are known to switch
IF subtype as they develop their mature shape, including extending long axons to
the correct location in the brain. The research aims to determine why neurons
switch from one IF subtype to another as they grow. The project will also
broaden the impact by contributing to desired societal outcomes: 1) broadening
education in STEM fields to support a better informed and more scientifically
literate public, and 2) increasing the diversity and inclusivity of the STEM
workforce. Especially, the lab aims for full participation of women, persons
with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in STEM at all levels. The
project funds research experiences for undergraduates (REU) for one
underrepresented minority student during each summer. The REU funded by this
project provides hands-on experience in laboratory research by investigating the
roles of diverse intermediate filaments in growing axons. In addition, the
selected REU student will participate in the institutionally established SRIP
(summer research internship program) at the University of Virginia which
provides professional skill training and guidance for pursuing a career in STEM
in individual and group settings. SRIP has a history of successfully placing
participating undergraduate researchers into STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to discover how developmental
IF subtype switching from nestin to neurofilaments in neurons affects signaling
to the microtubule cytoskeleton to regulate growth cone structure and motility.
The PIâ€™s lab recently discovered that the IF protein nestin regulates growth
cone morphology. In addition, nestin changes the response of growth cones to the
guidance cue Sema3a. It does so by binding the kinase Cdk5 and its substrate,
the microtubule associated protein DCX, thereby increasing DCX phosphorylation.
As neurons mature, they switch IF subtype from nestin to neurofilaments, which
bind DCX but not Cdk5. The project will test the novel hypothesis that neuronal
IFs regulate microtubule dynamics and bundling in axonal growth cones via DCX
downstream of Sema3a signaling. Aim 1 will discover how experimental IF
switching affects axonal microtubules and growth cone behavior. Aim 2 will
discover how experimental IF switching affects Sema3a responses in cortical
neurons. The project will use state-of-the-art imaging approaches in cultured
cortical neurons in combination with downregulation and overexpression of
different IF subtypes to uncover the mechanisms by which different IF subtypes
modulate microtubule dynamics in growth cones during axon outgrowth.
Responsiveness to extracellular cues by growth cones during development is
influenced not only by the cue available, the receptors expressed on the
surface, the intracellular substrates present, but also by the IF subtypes
expressed. The PI proposes that neuronal IF subtypes can act as either
amplifiers or dampeners of ubiquitous kinase cascades to provide local and cell-
type specific regulation of effector responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.