* 2215171
* MRI: Acquisition of an NMR Console, Probe, and Autosampler to Advance Undergraduate Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Scott Ulrich, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,012.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Ithaca College is acquiring an
upgraded console and probe for a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer to support the
research of Professor Scott Ulrich and colleagues Michael P. Haaf and Anna
Larsen. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of polymer science,
inorganic chemistry, and medicinal chemistry. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all
levels in the Chemistry Department at Ithaca College as well as provides
accessibility for use at nearby institutions. This instrument enables increased
diverse representation of undergraduate and high school students through
established outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer upgrade is aimed at enhancing undergraduate research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as polymer, organometallic, and
medicinal chemistry. The instrument impacts research focused on discovering
polymers of intrinsic microporosity, and on the characterization of chiral
lactide polymer catalysts. Other investigations include the synthesis of iridium
and rhodium pincer complexes and medicinal chemistry targeting bacterial
signaling enzymes and cancer cell metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.