* 2215931
* MRI: Dynamic Micro-Computed Tomography for Multidisciplinary Research and Foundational Education of the Sciences
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Tarik Dickens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2024
* USD 372,750.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
dynamic micro-computed tomography instrument. Dynamic testing is essential for
evaluating functionality over time. Micro-computed tomography techniques are
non-destructive and provide 3D information at the micrometer scale. This project
aims to integrate advanced research instrumentation in science and engineering
with educational training for minority students. The micro-computed tomography
instrument will be acquired by Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU), a historically
black college and university. The capability of the instrument provides an
efficient characterization tool for examining many microstructured systems. It
will be used in a range of research projects to conduct significant work in
novel polymer-metal-ceramic composites, actuation mechanisms, bio-composites and
macro-organisms, and fossilized creatures. The instrument will also help train
students from multiple disciplines in the behavior of materials to produce the
next generation of a STEM minority workforce. The instrument will also play an
important role in the newly established Materials Science and Engineering
graduate program. Additionally, this instrument will help FAMU establish the
X-Ray Imaging Science Center and be part of the training network for the United
States synchrotron facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The procurement of a Rigaku
Computed Tomography (CT Lab HX) system provides new research opportunities by
scaling experimentation through nondestructive 3D imaging, critical for
identifying key microstructural dynamic features. The CT500 is a 500N in-situ
tensile/compressive stage. The integrated mechanical testing unit within the
CT's available open-frame can achieve 10-20 mm, respectively, for compression or
tension modes. This will enable application-specific testing across a
multidiscipline basis to encompass varying scan times from seconds, minutes and
processes occurring over an hour. FAMU will be the steward and will coordinate
fundamental studies of novel interdisciplinary challenges. Fundamental research
projects using the instrument address cross-campus needs that encompass studies
of 1) multiarchitectured polymer material flow for functional fiber production
and 4D printing; 2) physiological and morphological growth of common pests for
the food-water nexus; and 3) enhanced computational image processing. By
systematically investigating material structures at length scales where critical
features can be detected, this instrument allows the research community to study
innate mechanisms of a range of problems spanning structural, environmental,
chemical, and organic-related processes. This project will also attract
collaborations with regional industry, national laboratories, and municipal
entities for public STEM engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.