* 2215568
* HNDS-R: Population-Scale Kinship Networks and Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Caglar Koylu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2025
* USD 477,734.00

From the prevalence of genetic diseases to provision of care for elderly,
kinship plays an important role in society. Kinship has been shown to be
particularly important in providing support to migrants, and migrants, in turn,
send money to relatives back home, but the typical methods used to study
contemporary migration cannot show its long-term effects upon kin networks in
space. Data at a larger temporal and spatial scale are needed. This project
creates a population-scale family tree dataset which links about forty million
people in crowd-sourced family trees to their common ancestors. The research
will use these data to study how migration influenced the geographic proximity
of kin over centuries. This project contributes to the development of globally
competitive STEM workforce by training graduate, undergraduate and high school
students in the areas of human networks and data science. It develops an online
visual storytelling and education tool to communicate how migrations form
cultural and demographic structures. This tool, which is being developed through
a collaboration with high school social studies teachers, has the potential to
increase public scientific literacy about and engagement in the study of
migration and kinship networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research compares the
spatial evolution of kinship networks under different conditions to test
theories about how and when different types of networks emerge, stagnate, and,
ultimately, disappear, showing how those networks change as a result of a
variety of economic and demographic circumstances. The project links information
such as occupation, household composition, and fine-scale locations of
residences from the historical census data to the family trees. This data can
then be used to characterize kinship networks and their evolution over
geographic space and time. This research helps reveal the conditions that favor
the development of large aggregations of related families, and those that favor
dispersion. Specifically, this project assesses how much migration contributed
to the development of different types of networks and how this relationship
changed as different locations were settled by different groups. This research
helps bridge the gap between geographic information science and social network
analysis by developing new measures, models, and visualization techniques for
studying the relationship between kinship networks and migration. The data will
allow researchers to study how the proximity of family members influences a
variety of other long-term multi-generational outcomes such as income
inequality, social mobility, and health. A better understanding of the forces
that transform kinship networks and methods for describing them helps anticipate
changes in the present and future, such as the extent to which elderly or
vulnerable populations can rely on kin nearby for
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.