* 2215741
* The brain organization of STEM concept knowledge: a neurally-based foundation for training, measuring, and assessing concept learning from basic knowledge to expertise
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Mason, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

The premise of this project is that an understanding of how STEM concepts are
organized in the brain would enable the enhancement of STEM concept learning and
its assessment. Research has shown that although students vary in how accurately
or completely they acquire knowledge related to a STEM concept, their neural
filing systems are remarkably similar, in terms of which brain systems are the
sites of particular aspects of concept knowledge. Understanding this neural
organization common to everyone makes it possible to take that organization into
account in the course of instruction. In effect, it makes it possible to “teach
to the brain”. More specifically, it makes it possible to develop innovative
cognitive training techniques based on modern machine-learning guided
neuroscience to supplement traditional STEM learning. The goal is to formulate a
detailed theory of how basic STEM concept knowledge in multiple STEM disciplines
is neurally organized, how the underlying organization develops with learning,
and how the organization is impacted by instructional and ability factors across
STEM domains. Findings from this project would advance the understanding of the
ontology of scientific concepts, theories of instructional design, and AI
(machine-learning) guided instruction. Altogether these advances would
facilitate more effective interventions towards expert-level knowledge. The
design of this project will purposefully include both University and Community
College students with a large range of STEM abilities in traditionally under-
studied groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess the brain
representations of STEM concepts (using several fMRI measures) in 4 different
domains (physics, biology, chemistry, and mathematics) in students at multiple
levels of expertise and assess the changes in those representations using
machine-learning analysis of fMRI data under different types of instruction
(class instruction, in-lab concept instruction, and expertise-focused training).
The goal of the instruction will be to generate neural representations in novice
learners that are similar to those of instructors or domain experts. This
project builds on the investigators’ prior NSF funded work which demonstrated
that fMRI can identify the underlying neural dimensions of physics concepts, and
can predict and assess learning of these concepts (more so than traditional
behavioral measurements). This research continues investigation of how neural
data can usefully guide instruction by extending the approach to additional STEM
domains and by guiding cognitive instruction with the accompanying neural
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.