* 2215976
* MRI: Acquisition of a Monochromated, Magnetic-Field-Free, Atomic-Resolution Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope Enabling Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Russell Hemley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,990,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Nanometer scale materials represent a class
of substances with at least one dimension that approaches the size of individual
atoms. These materials exhibit properties that are dramatically different from
substances at larger length scales and are essential to advance a wide array of
technologies, ranging from magnetic data-storage systems to superconducting
quantum computers to biomaterials applications. To study and improve upon these
materials, tools are required to examine them at the atomic level while
minimizing any disturbance to their structure. Electron microscopy, which uses
electrons to "see" atoms, is one of the fundamental means by which the
structures of such nanoscale materials can be studied. Current designs of high-
resolution transmission electron microscopes require a lens to focus the
electron beam on the sample surface. A side effect of this design is that the
sample material is inadvertently exposed to a high magnetic field. Yet, turning
the lens off to eliminate the magnetic field when studying magnetic or
superconducting materials makes atomic-resolution analysis impossible. The
instrument acquired through this major research instrumentation grant has a new
lens design, providing a magnetic-field-free sample region and, when combined
with a nearly mono-energetic electron source, allows for atomic-resolution
imaging as well as chemical analysis of these critical materials. In addition,
atomic resolution, magnetic-field-free analysis can now also be achieved during
heating or cooling experiments or when a controlled magnetic field is applied.
To reach a broader user community and for communicating the capabilities of the
instrument, the principal investigators hold annual workshops, organize sessions
at national and international conferences, and engage with local microscopy
societies. The instrument, moreover, provides the diverse undergraduate and
graduate student body at University of Illinois - Chicago (UIC), a Research-1
Hispanic-serving institution with opportunities for hands-on research and
learning experiences in cutting-edge quantum, superconducting or biomaterials
science. New in-class course modules and online teaching resources are developed
and freely distributed online using data from the field-free transmission
electron microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;While
the development of aberration-correctors, monochromated electron sources, and
advanced detectors has fueled the current revolution in resolution, nearly all
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments are still
performed with the sample being exposed to a high magnetic field, since the
objective lens (OL) pole-pieces require a magnetic field of about 3 tesla. Such
a magnetic field limits the samples that can be studied, preventing magnetic,
magneto-optical, magneto-electric, superconductive or topological materials from
being characterized under relevant conditions. Traditional magnetic imaging
methods, where the OL is turned off, limit the spatial resolution to nanometer
length-scales and do not allow for atomic-resolution chemical analysis. This
instrument has a novel lens design that allows for better than 100 pm spatial
resolution at 200 kV with a residual magnetic field of less than 0.3 mT and 40
meV energy resolution with a probe size of 110 nm. Atomic-resolution chemical
analysis, as well as novel image modes, such as 4D-STEM and differential phase
contrast imaging, can be combined with in-situ heating or cooling experiments to
study magnetic, superconducting or other electronic phase transitions. Research
projects at UIC enabled by the new instrument include the study of novel
magnetic phases in Ni-based perovskite oxides, excitons in 2-dimensional
materials, conventional and near-room temperature superconductors,
nanoparticles/quantum dots as topological insulators, and anti-cavity biofilms
and the mechanical manipulation of cells. External users, ranging from
universities, national laboratories and companies across the United States to
international partner institutions, can take advantage of the capabilities
provided by the instrument to study novel quantum materials, new magnetic
structures, photovoltaic materials, energy-storage devices, and biological
systems under controlled magnetic-field conditions and with atomic
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.