* 2215257
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Transformations and Network Formation in an Emerging Commodity Supply Chain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jessaca Leinaweaver, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Commodity supply chains have long proven to be important sites for examining
relationships between producers and consumers. The expansion of once niche
markets has provided new opportunities for exploring how those relationships
vary across different economic and social contexts. Contemporary consumption
practices around sustainable and equitable trade practices have significantly
shaped a range of commodity chains, as well as business and trade policies. This
doctoral training project explores variation in the socioeconomic impacts of an
entrepreneurially driven, government-supported commodity revitalization effort.
In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in the
methods of empirical and scientific data collection and analysis, findings from
the project will be shared with policymakers, non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, and rural communities.

The researchers will examine and analyze the dynamics of an expanding textile
supply chain as socioeconomically distinct groups constituting small-scale
industries interact in larger networks. This dissertation project examines a
textile commodity chain and asks how it is deployed in identity formation
amongst diverse social groups: craft producers, state bureaucrats, urban
entrepreneurs, and consumers. This textile commodity chain is an ideal site to
explore the emergence and expansion of niche markets, as it provides a context
for observing the social, economic, and political variables influencing the
transformation of a clothing industry generally associated with luxury markets.
The project relies on a combination of anthropological methods, including
observation, interviews, and archival research, to examine the integration of
rural women workers into larger economies of scale. The results contribute to
broader political economic theories about commodity frontiers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.