* 2215884
* MRI: Acquisition of a Drop Tower Impact Test Capability at Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Beth Last, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 384,930.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
drop tower impact test instrument at Penn State Erie, The Behrend College. Many
component and structural failures are due to sudden catastrophic fractures that
often occur without warning. The discipline that addresses these effects is
fracture mechanics. If mechanical loading reach critical levels, catastrophic
failure may occur. Understanding the conditions that may lead to fracture
requires test facilities that can vary parameters such as temperature, component
shape, and impact velocity. Sudden fracture events occur over very small
timeframes, like milliseconds or microseconds. This requires high speed camera
capability that can capture these events for detailed study. The drop tower
impact test instrument has these features and complements a set of other test
techniques at Penn State Erie. A wide range of materials, including metals,
polymers and composites, can be understood in terms of their fracture behavior
and this will enable closer collaboration with industry partners who must design
failure resistant parts and structures. This instrument will also enable
instruction on fracture and impact in engineering courses at the college level,
while also supporting student centered undergraduate research, industrial
workforce development in plastics engineering, and a summer outreach program
with middle school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
research program to be centered on this acquisition is to explore the rate-
dependence of the ductile/brittle fracture transition for both longstanding
material formulations and new chemistries and microstructure distributions. The
scope also includes use of this technique to induce controlled rapid deformation
of oriented polymer samples to better understand strain-induced crystallization
in thermoplastics, building on established research at Penn State Erie. Several
fracture modeling analysis theories have been planned including essential work
of fracture, crack opening displacement, crack tip opening displacement, virtual
crack closure, and J-integral. All of these have limitations, often imposed by
the fundamental material characteristics. In combination with numerical analysis
techniques, the data provided by the drop tower impact test instrument
capability will allow these modeling approaches to be evaluated, evolved and
optimized for a broad range of polymeric, metallic and composite materials. The
fundamental goal is to achieve reliable fracture models for materials of
variable morphologies and architectures based on accurate characterization of
material deformation and crack propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.