* 2215084
* Broadening the Participation and Persistence of Women in STEM Through Virtual Peer Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Amy de Jongh Curry, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by broadening participation and
persistence of women in STEM, especially women from diverse racial populations.
The project plans to develop and assess a virtual peer mentoring model. This
model is unique both in being virtual and in engaging women in peer mentoring
outside the context of STEM research laboratories. Peer mentoring activities
will address social, affective, cognitive, and persistence-related challenges
experienced by women in STEM. Little is known about the impact of virtual peer
mentoring approaches in STEM, and results from the model could be widely
relevant and adapted in a variety of institution types and professional
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Memphis aims
to develop and assess the efficacy of a virtual peer mentoring model with women
in residential and online STEM programs. Situated in this urban, public
institution, the project plans to to develop and test this mentoring
intervention among women students from diverse racial and personal backgrounds.
The project will adapt an existing peer mentoring program for women in STEM that
has only previously been tested in limited contexts. The current effort should
generate knowledge about the efficacy of the model with a more diverse
participant population. Additionally, this virtual peer mentoring model will be
assessed in two phases. During the first phase, a mixed-methods study using
survey and interview methods will guide program content and virtual interface
development. During the second phase, a rigorous, randomized controlled trial
approach will be used to examine the efficacy of the implementation of the
virtual peer mentoring model with BIPOC and White women. Specifically, social,
affective, cognitive, and persistence-related outcomes will be compared between
virtual peer mentoring participants and a matched control group. Further, the
project will use a case study approach to identify differential participant
outcomes and to determine how the components of the model facilitated these
outcomes. Evaluation of the project will be conducted by the campus’s Center for
Research in Educational Policy. Dissemination of developed mentoring materials
and research results will be accomplished through conference presentations,
peer-reviewed publications, and content sharing via the project’s website and
video channel. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.