* 2215236
* Assessing the Impacts of Social Categorization on Person Perception and Behavior: A Formal Modeling Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeffrey Sherman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 370,915.00

People categorize others according to the social groups to which they belong.
This is a fundamental principle of social perception and judgment. Social
categorization often has negative consequences when those categories are
associated with group stereotypes and prejudices. It can affect the ways in
which people think about, judge, and behave toward other people. It contributes
significantly to discrimination, exclusion, and intergroup hostility. Theory and
research in social psychology has provided many advances in understanding social
stereotypes and person perception. One challenge in this area has been the
difficulty in measuring the extent to which judgments and behavior are
influenced by social categories versus other kinds of personal information. It
is important to better distinguish among these sources of influence to
understand the origins of group bias more fully. This project develops a model
to measure the independent contributions of social categories and other personal
attributes more directly. The larger aim is to better understand the nature of
social bias that leads to discrimination, social exclusion, intergroup
hostility, and health disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances
the study of social categorization and stereotyping by developing and applying a
Multinomial Processing Tree (MPT) model to more directly measure the independent
contributions of social categories and other personal attributes. The model is
used to test specific hypotheses about the conditions that increase or decrease
the extent of social categorization and stereotyping. Foundational theories of
person perception propose that social categories are most impactful when
perceivers lack either the motivation or ability to pay careful attention to
others. The model identifies the extent to which increased bias in those
situations reflects greater use of stereotypes, diminished use of personal
features, or both. These data are used to evaluate existing theories of person
perception and to develop novel theories. The data also help to indicate when
different bias reduction interventions may be most effective. Because the model
offers a way of separately measuring the impacts of social categories and
personal attributes, it permits a careful assessment of which strategies are
most effective for reducing bias and in what contexts. The project also improves
science infrastructure by developing and sharing a novel instrument for
measuring and analyzing behavioral data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.