* 2215675
* Culturally and Linguistically Sustaining STEM Pedagogies Using Mixed-Reality Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* John Pecore, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,963.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing undergraduate
STEM education students’ ability to teach in a way that is culturally and
linguistically sustaining through a learning model that includes practicing
teaching with virtual avatars. While the number of students who speak a language
other than English at home continues to grow, English Speakers of Other
Languages (ESOL) students have persistently floundered in K-12 schools and are
underrepresented particularly in STEM fields in both college and the workforce.
Most STEM teachers in the United States have received only limited preparation
in ESOL instruction. Therefore, it is critical to prepare STEM pre-service
teachers to better serve students who do not speak English as their primary
language. This project provides online modules to develop culturally and
linguistically sustaining STEM pedagogies with focused mentor feedback and high-
quality mixed-reality simulation practices throughout the learning sequence.
Anticipated outcomes of this project are the improvement of undergraduate
students’ ability to enact culturally and linguistically sustaining STEM
pedagogies as they support learning of students who speak another language than
English at home, as well as the development of effective practice-based teacher
education learning experiences including replicable online instructional
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals include 1) developing
undergraduate STEM education students’ culturally and linguistically sustaining
STEM teaching practices and 2) understanding effects of an online learning model
with mixed-reality simulations on their improvement of culturally and
linguistically sustaining STEM teaching. This project uses a mixed-methods
research design. Developing instructional expertise requires not only learning
knowledge and observing exemplary teaching but also purposeful practices with
critical reflection and focused feedback. Compared to a typical teacher
education program in which pre-service teachers learn the knowledge and concepts
in their coursework and experience actual teaching toward exiting the program,
the experiential learning model provides "experience" in the very beginning so
that STEM pre-service teachers can recognize their existing practices, proceed
through purposeful learning, and develop more effective concept building.
Multilingual avatars are included in the mathematics and science simulations
developed through this project. In addition, embedding multiple mixed-reality
simulation opportunities with focused mentor feedback provides high-quality
practice opportunities purposefully distributed throughout the pre-service
teachers program of study. The mixed-reality simulations with mentoring are
designed to provide the pre-service STEM teachers with opportunities to practice
pedagogies that attend to the multi-layered conceptualization of language
demands in STEM and learners' buy-in regarding incorporation of culture as well
as complex implementation skill development. Results of this project are to be
disseminated through professional avenues (i.e., national and local conferences
and peer-reviewed journals), the NSF STEM for All video showcase, and a program
website. The project has the potential to benefit the STEM education community
by preparing STEM teachers for multicultural and multilingual classrooms, which
will eventually improve educational equity for all students. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.