* 2215267
* MRI: Acquisition of a Plasma Focused Ion Beam System for Dynamic In-situ Micro-Mechanical Testing Over Cryogenic and Elevated Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,298,294.00

Direct observation of deformation behavior at the micro/nano scales can lead to
significant advances in our understanding of the deformation mechanisms in
materials by correlating microstructural changes with load-displacement
characteristics. For example, the propagation of a crack-tip that would lead to
a catastrophic failure of a component, or deformation/temperature-induced phase
transformations and crystallinity changes are important processing phenomena
that can lead to failure in materials. The plasma focused ion beam (FIB) in this
project allows researchers to efficiently extract samples from specific sites of
interest in materials for micromechanical testing, which can be performed using
a state-of-the-art micromechanical testing device integrated within the same FIB
instrument. It is possible to observe both microstructural and crystallographic
changes that occur during deformation using this system, and these changes can
be directly correlated with localized stress-strain data. The equipment will
benefit a wide variety of funded research activities at Lehigh across sectors of
materials science ranging from ceramics, metals/alloys, 3D-printed materials,
polymers and biomaterials. In addition, the rapid material removal rate
achievable in the plasma FIB accelerates the fabrication of a wide range of
nanostructures such as tooling for micro/nano injection molding, as well as
enable large-scale internal characterization of various samples including highly
sensitive biomaterials and soft polymers at cryogenic temperatures. The
instrument also supports research projects from other universities, government
labs and industry through liaison programs already established at Lehigh. The
techniques and knowledge developed using this system are shared with Lehigh
students as well as numerous industry/government attendees of the Lehigh
Microscopy Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system as specified consists of
(1) a plasma focused ion beam (FIB) instrument, integrated with (2) a state-of-
the-art in-situ micromechanical testing device with testing capability over a
wide temperature range and (3) a high speed electron backscattered diffraction
(EBSD) camera. The system will be able to simultaneously acquire many types of
data, including highly sensitive transmission Kikuchi diffraction patterns,
during mechanical testing. The rapid milling rate of the Xe-ion based plasma
FIB, which is ~10â€“100 times greater than conventional Ga-ion systems, markedly
increases the fabrication throughput of micromechanical test samples, and hence
addresses what is currently a severe limitation, namely the ability to test a
statistically significant number of samples. In-situ mechanical testing within
the FIB at temperatures from minus 130 to 1000 degrees C will enable the
correlation of deformation processes (such as slip and microcrack/void
nucleation) with microstructural features at the nm scale. Furthermore, the
load-displacement signals can be sampled at 1.2 MHz, which is much faster than
the typical frame rates encountered in SEM imaging. This information will be
complemented by digital image correlation, which will be used to quantify
localized deformation. These capabilities are highly advantageous, but what
makes the requested instrumentation truly unique is the ability to
simultaneously extract real time EBSD data during mechanical testing, which is
made possible by a novel test platform geometry. Moreover, the efficiency of
serial cross-sectioning for the characterization of multi-component materials,
as well as specific features such as interfaces and boundaries in materials and
devices, is improved tremendously. The sample sectioning capability at cryogenic
temperatures is especially useful for cross-sectional observation of soft
materials such as polymers and biological samples, and for thin-specimen
preparation to allow more detailed observation in a transmission electron
microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.