* 2215102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge and processing of morphosyntactic variation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Jan Edwards, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 6,999.00

This project examines grammatical variation across two different dialects of
American English: Mainstream (or "Standard") American English (MAE) and African
American Language (AAL). The project compares speakers of both dialects to
participants who speak only MAE, using multiple experimental methods to
determine what participants know about the grammatical patterns of each dialect
and how they use that knowledge to guide moment-to-moment processing of
sentences. The results will show when and how listeners with different
backgrounds successfully accommodate dialect differences, which can inform
efforts to mitigate the difficulty of dialect variation in settings such as
schools and courtrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis
that people know the grammatical rules of dialects they frequently hear,
regardless of whether they produce a given dialect. In a sentence rating task,
participants listen to examples of Mainstream American English and African
American Language, then read a series of sentences and rate how likely a speaker
of each dialect would be to say each utterance. Items vary in their
grammaticality in each dialect, including sentences that are grammatical in both
dialects, ungrammatical in both dialects, or grammatical in AAL but not MAE.
Second, an eye-tracking task tests how participants use the grammatical rules of
a given dialect to guide their moment-to-moment interpretation of a sentence.
Stronger effects are predicted for bidialectal participants than for
monodialectal participants, since bidialectal participants have more knowledge
of each dialect and shift their expectations of grammatical form depending on
their interlocutor. This project unites central questions from the fields of
psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics, showing how linguistic experience and
social knowledge shape both representations of language in the mind and real-
time processing of varying grammatical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.