* 2215780
* Rebuilding Care in a Post-Pandemic World
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Heidi Gottfried, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2025
* USD 199,654.00

The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the importance of care as a necessary service
for people at different stages of their lives, yet very little is known about
the structure of the industry. This multi-country project will investigate the
impact of COVID-19 pandemic on care providers and recipients, identify care
system’s strengths and weaknesses, and recommend policy improvements. Teams from
Brazil, Colombia, Canada, France, UK, and US will coordinate research on
national care systems to understand why care systems proved inefficient in
providing care and protecting care workers. Project teams will collect and
analyze large and innovative data sets on the care industries in these
countries. By providing a unified approach to studying a fractured care system
across countries, this research project will make a significant contribution to
the literature on the care industry. The results of this research project will
provide important inputs into policies to improve care as well as the care labor
market. The results of this research will also help to establish the U.S. as a
global leader in care giving research and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study the matrix of
fragmented and uncoordinated care provision and identify polices and regulations
that shape care and its provision at different levels of governance. This cross-
national study will explore four aspects of the care market: (i) the impact of
the pandemic on needs and modalities of care provision; (ii) labor conditions
and rights in a post pandemic world; (iii) care as a strategic dimension and
pillar for public policies on social infrastructure rebuilding; and (iv) care
giving strategies when the state fails. Brazil, Colombia, Canada, France, UK,
and US will serve as test beds and provide variation in societal characteristics
crucial to understanding the different configurations of care across national
governance, welfare regimes, health-care systems’, and jurisdiction over health
policy. The research results will provide major inputs into the formulation and
implementation of care giving and care labor market policies in the world. It
will thus not only help to improve care but also establish the US as a global
leader in care giving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.