* 2215157
* Teaching Evolution and Behavior using Virtual Games
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Kyle Summers, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,177.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by stimulating student
enthusiasm for learning complex scientific concepts through interactive
activities embedded in highly realistic, immersive computer simulations. The
project will focus on the creation of two virtual labs (in two different
courses), one presenting key concepts from evolutionary biology, and one
demonstrating animal ecology and behavior. The first lab will transport students
back to a forest in the Jurassic epoch, when dinosaurs still roamed the Earth.
Students will undertake a guided series of activities, including tracking and
tranquilizing different species of dinosaurs, collecting data on their anatomy
(e.g. size, skin type, presence, or absence of feathers) and on their genetics
(DNA and protein sequences). The students will use the data they have gathered
to carry out analyses of the evolutionary relationships of the different
dinosaur species, and to make inferences about the evolution of key
characteristics, such as feathers and flight. In the second lab, students will
travel virtually to the Amazon rainforest to be immersed in the ecology of
predator-prey interactions. They will play both potential prey (toxic and non-
toxic frogs) and predators (birds) and will be able to follow different
strategies (e.g. be toxic and brightly colored, or be non-toxic and
camouflaged), and learn how their strategy affects survival given the strategies
that others (e.g. the predators) are pursuing, in an interactive
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ advanced computer
simulation methods to create virtual environments and exciting yet educational
storylines that are intended to make students want to attain academic goals by
engaging with and learning about topics in evolutionary biology and animal
ecology and behavior. The virtual environments and interactive activities will
include novel interactive displays using sophisticated and immersive computer
simulations and implemented with fast, powerful, cutting-edge software. Biology
faculty members will aid in the design and testing of the virtual labs.
Evaluation and assessment strategies will be designed to assess how innovative
computer simulations can result in educational goals. Evaluation will include
demographic surveys, pre- and post-activity tests, analyses of game play
metrics, and in-depth questionnaires. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.