* 2215353
* Exploratory research and co-design to identify opportunities to support caregiver engagement in early STEM learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Susan Letourneau, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,722.00

This project addresses the urgent need for the development of equitable
approaches to early childhood STEM education that honor the diverse cultural
practices through which caregivers (such as parents, grandparents, and other
adults in children’s lives) support young children’s learning. Recent studies
suggest that both formal and informal educational institutions often privilege
Western or Eurocentric parenting practices, neglecting many families’ cultural
practices and ways of learning. This study will bring together a group of
caregivers, pre-K educators, researchers, and museum staff to investigate how
families with young children negotiate among their own cultural practices and
the types of STEM learning they encounter in museums, schools, and other
community settings. The project team will work together to identify
opportunities for informal STEM learning institutions to strengthen their roles
as places that can bridge home and school environments and open up new
possibilities for building on caregivers’ knowledge and cultural practices
within this larger community context. The project will directly benefit the 330
families whose children attend the partnering public school each year, as well
as hundreds of families who attend family events at the New York Hall of Science
annually. Finally, by considering nuances in caregivers’ perspectives and
experiences based on multiple facets of their identities, the research will
reveal how structures in educational settings might be changed to become more
inclusive and culturally responsive for the broadest possible audience of
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilots and Feasibility project seeks to 1)
conduct exploratory research to understand caregiver engagement, defined as
caregivers’ expectations, values, and practices related to their roles in
children’s learning, from the perspectives of caregivers, and 2) engage in co-
design efforts with caregivers and pre-K educators to explore how the museum can
be leveraged as a material and creative resource to support caregiver engagement
in STEM learning. This work will be carried out in the context of a long-term
partnership between the New York Hall of Science and the New York City
Department of Education. Methods will include in-depth interviews with
caregivers, using narrative and intersectional research methods to extend
existing studies on caregiver engagement in informal STEM learning, while taking
into account multiple aspects of families’ social and cultural identities. This
work will be carried out in Corona — a neighborhood in Queens, NY, largely made
up of low-income and first-generation immigrant families. The project team will
collaboratively interpret findings and engage in the initial phases of co-design
work, which will include: reflecting on the systems currently in place to
support caregivers’ involvement in children’s learning across settings;
collaboratively generating new, culturally responsive strategies for leveraging
the museum as a material and creative resource for families with young children;
and choosing promising directions for further development and testing. Products
from this work will include directions for new caregiver engagement initiatives
that can be developed and refined as the partnership continues, and strategies
for supporting equitable participation by caregivers, pre-K educators, and other
community stakeholders in future research-practice
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2-year Pilot and Feasibility study is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.