* 2215697
* BPC-DP: Leveraging Institutional Data Collection and Analysis as an Entry to BPC Work: A Pilot Program to Support Emerging DEI Efforts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Linda Sax, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Broadening participation in computing (BPC) is a national priority. However, the
capacity of higher education institutions to monitor and report on BPC data is
highly variable. Building on work that was successfully conducted through the
BRAID initiative, a BPC effort at 15 undergraduate computing departments, this
project engages three to five institutions that have had no or limited
engagement with previous BPC initiatives. Efforts include collecting
undergraduate computing enrollment and degree attainment (EDA) data
disaggregated by gender and race/ethnicity, creating data visualizations to
analyze departmental trends and patterns, and working closely with institutional
partners to understand their BPC data and develop effective strategies for
maintaining and reporting it. This project stands to inform change and data-
driven decisions to improve BPC at the institutional-level and enhance the
validity of BPC data that is provided to external
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is broad consensus on the critical
necessity of robust data in addressing persistent participation gaps in
computing. This project’s data collection process is intentionally designed to
serve as an initial entry point into leveraging departmental data for BPC
efforts by focusing on EDA patterns narrowly within the Computer Science major
and more broadly across “All Computing” majors. The key outputs of this project
include: 1) detailed, interactive data visualizations that depict trends by
gender (e.g., women in computing), race/ethnicity (e.g., Black students in
computing), and the combination of these identities (e.g., Black women in
computing), and 2) one-on-one workshops with each participating institution to
highlight key findings and guide participants to consider specific actions and
interventions to address participation gaps. With an enhanced understanding of
their BPC data and related trends, institutions can engage more meaningfully in
other existing BPC efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.