* 2215259
* Collaborative Research: New Informationally Robust Approaches to Mechanism Design and Games of Incomplete Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Songzi Du, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 146,801.00

This project develops new tools for robust predictions in strategic games where
the outcome depends on some unobserved state of nature (although the players do
not observe the realized state, they may receive signals allowing to update the
likelihood of each possible state). These games are a fundamental tool in
economic theory for understanding behavior in a wide range of settings, such as
oligopoly, auctions, electoral competition, and bank runs. The classical
approach is to study behavior under a fixed model of player’s information. In
many practical settings, however, an analyst or policy maker may be concerned
about misspecification of the players' information. The tools that we develop
give predictions about the players' behavior and policy recommendations about
market design, without relying on a full specification of the informational
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three components. First, we
develop a new solution concept that characterizes rationalizable behavior under
common prior beliefs about payoff relevant states. This is a generalization of
the solution concept known as Bayes’ correlated equilibrium (BCE), replacing the
usual Nash equilibrium with a weaker notion of interim correlated
rationalizability. This is important, because in many settings (such as spectrum
auctions which occur infrequently), strategic agents may not have had sufficient
time or experience to converge on a Nash equilibrium; nevertheless, we can make
non-trivial predictions about behavior based on the premise that actions are
rational under some (not necessarily correct) beliefs. Second, we study a
distinct generalization of BCE in which there is an upper bound on players’
information. This complements the lower bounds on information found in the
existing formulations of BCE; and it allows us to obtain more realistic
predictions in settings where agents do not have access to all payoff-relevant
information (such as bank runs or auctions of "toxic" assets). Third, we extend
and apply the burgeoning theory of informationally-robust optimal mechanisms to
the problem of designing efficient trading mechanisms. Existing models of
bilateral trade are primarily focused on the simple and stylized case where
buyer and seller each know their respective values, and those values are
statistically independent. Using the informationally-robust approach, we derive
new trading mechanisms that are guaranteed to produce non-trivial gains from
trade even when buyer and seller values are interdependent and information is
correlated. The insights we develop about robust trading platforms could be
utilized to improve efficiency in a wide variety of markets with informational
frictions, such as the markets for financial securities or health
insurance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.