* 2215186
* Democracy, Demography, and Social Movements in the Northwestern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Sophie Bjork-James, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Social scientists have struggled with understanding how societies navigate
transitions from a single-dominant ethnic group to a multiracial democracy. The
United States provides an opportunity for improving our understanding this
larger phenomenon, as current racial minorities are projected to become a
majority of the population by 2042. Sustainable democracies depend on civic
participation and community engagement. This research explores what variables
contribute to the perceived vitality and effectiveness of civic participation.
The project contributes to undergraduate and graduate student training in
science and the research findings are being made accessible to a larger audience
through non-academic channels, thereby improving the publicâ€™s understanding of
science and the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through interviews and
participant observation, this project investigates a forty-year history of
community-based social movements in the northwestern United States to analyze
and generalize what resources and networks are marshaled by advocates of multi-
racial democracy to promote civic engagement and support. Methods include
interviews, participant observation among democracy advocates, and the textual
analysis of archival data across rural and urban sites in the Pacific Northwest
of the U.S. Through a multi-sited investigation of urban, rural, and small-town
contexts, along with integrating data from different time scales, it asks what
contributes to variability in demographic change and the sustainability of
democracy. The research improves social scientific understanding of the drivers
of civic participation, and the contributions that it makes to ensuring
sustainable democracy. This project also explores what role religion plays in
these movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.