* 2215767
* Elevating Language and Literacy Instruction during the Professional Preparation of Science Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Laveria Hutchison, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,835.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by fostering pre-service
elementary teachers’ beliefs, knowledge, and practices to effectively teach
science in classes with emergent bilinguals (EBs), who are developing their home
language while learning another new language. As an exploratory study, the
project integrates current research on science, literacy, and bilingual
education to pilot test an innovative teaching and learning model. It is
critical to prepare prospective teachers who can design and implement culturally
and linguistically relevant science lessons that support students’ science and
language learning. This could inspire young students to pursue STEM and
ultimately lead to a more diversified STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop pre-service elementary science teachers’
(PSTs) asset-based beliefs about teaching diverse students, content and
pedagogical knowledge, pedagogical design capacity, and instructional practices
for teaching science for all students, including EBs in urban elementary
schools. The project will engage PSTs in their teacher preparation program
through two consecutive science methods courses. The courses will model
contextualized lessons that draw on students’ funds of knowledge and embed
disciplinary language literacy strategies in meaningful science investigations.
PSTs will also engage in design and instruction of their own science lessons
during this period. Additionally, a goal of the project is to cultivate asset-
based frames of mind by providing opportunities for PSTs to reflect upon their
beliefs about teaching and learning science with linguistically and culturally
diverse students. This study will incorporate quantitative and qualitative data
sources, such as surveys, PST lesson plans, PST videos of instruction, and PST
reflections. Findings will generate new insights into opportunities, challenges,
and feasibility of designing and implementing contextualized science lessons
among PSTs, as well as inform the iterative development and future replication
of the study’s model. This project will go beyond traditional pre-service
teacher programs that compartmentalize science methods, second language
methodology, and content literacy courses to meaningfully and purposefully
integrate language, literacy, and Funds of Knowledge. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.