* 2215155
* Optimized spatial data conflation with topological conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rongrong Wang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 07/31/2025
* USD 372,621.00

This project addresses the study of geographic data conflation, which is the
process of merging two separate datasets of the same geographical region. In
particular, the goal of the project is to develop algorithms that can automate
the process of conflation. Conventionally, conflation has been achieved by time-
consuming manual processes, which can be unreliable and expensive to implement.
By developing methods that can be integrated into geographic information
systems, this project increases the potential for diverse organizations to
conduct conflation at larger scales in reliable and reproducible ways. The
project also contributes to the training and education of multiple graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project is to
advance computational methods for matching and merging map objects reliably and
better than trained human practitioners. To accomplish this goal, the
researchers developed automated methods that are based on strategies purportedly
underlying the logic used by humans. The first strategy is error minimization,
in which humans tend to match individual spatial objects based on their
similarity or distance. This is known as optimized conflation, in which object
matching is treated as a natural problem of minimizing discrepancy. The second
strategy is to use spatial context to deal with the more complex, ambiguous
matching cases. This latter perspective has been largely absent from previous
implementations. By allowing computers to incorporate the same contextual
conditions in neighboring objects, the new models will generate spatially
consistent matches, thus allowing human practitioners to focus on resolving a
small percentage of anomalous cases. Due to the increased reliability, the new
models and algorithms of this project can reduce the monetary and time cost of
conflation, making it a tool that can be used by students, planners, researchers
in geography and other spatial disciplines as well as the average user of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.