* 2215050
* Instrument Development: Racially &amp; Ethnically Minoritized Youths’ Varied Out-Of-School-Time Experiences and Their Effects on STEM Attitudes, Identity, and Career Interest
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Remy Dou, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 950,262.00

Increasing the diversity of the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) workforce hinges on understanding the impact of the many
related, pre-college experiences of the nation’s youth. While formal
preparation, such as high school course-taking, has a major influence, research
has shown that out-of-school-time activities have a much larger role in shaping
the attitudes, identity, and career interests of students, particularly those
who are members of groups historically underrepresented in STEM fields (Black,
Indigenous, Latinx, and/or Pacific Islander). A wide range of both innovative
adult-led (science clubs, internships, museum-going, competitions, summer camps)
and personal-choice (hobbies, family talk, games, simulations, social media,
online courses) options exist. This project studies the variety and availability
such experiences to pre-college students. The project is particularly interested
in how community cultural capital is leveraged through informal activities and
experiences, drawing upon the “funds of knowledge” that culturally diverse
students bring to their STEM experiences (e.g., high aspirations, multilingual
facility, building of sustaining social networks, and the capacity to challenge
negative stereotyping). This study has the capability to begin to reveal
evidence-based measures of the absolute and relative effectiveness of promising
informal educational practices, including many developed and disseminated by
NSF-funded programs. Understanding the ecology of precollege influencers and the
hypotheses on which they are based, along with providing initial measures of the
efficacy of multiple pathways attempting to broaden participation of students
from underrepresented groups in STEM majors and careers, will aid decision-
making that will maximize the strategic impact of federal and local
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project first collects hypotheses from the
wide variety of stakeholders (educators, researchers, and students) about the
kinds of experiences that make a difference in increasing students’ STEM
identity and career interest. Identifying the descriptive attributes that
characterize opportunities across individual programs and validating a multi-
part instrument to ascertain student experiences will be carried out through a
review of relevant literature, surveying stakeholders using crowdsourced
platforms, and through in-depth interviews with 50 providers. A sample of 1,000
students from 2- and 4-year college and universities, drawn from minority-
serving institutions, such as Historically Black Colleges, Hispanic Serving
Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and Universities will serve to establish the
validity and reliability of the derived instrument and provide estimates of the
availability and frequency of involvement. Psychometric methods and factor
analysis will guide us in combining related variables into indices that reflect
underlying constructs. Propensity score weighting will be employed for
estimating effects when exposure to certain OST activities is confounded with
other factors (e.g., parental education, SES). Path models and structural
equation models (SEM) will be employed to build models that use causal or time
related variables, for instance, students’ career interests at different times
in their pre-college experience. The study goes beyond evaluation of individual
experiences in addressing important questions that will help policy makers,
educators, parents, and students understand which OST opportunities serve the
diverse values and goals of members of underrepresented groups, boosting their
likelihood of pursuing STEM careers. This project is co-funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) and EHR CORE Research (ECR) programs. The ECR
program supports a wide range of fundamental STEM education research activities,
aimed at learners of all groups and ages in formal and informal settings. The
AISL program supports work that advances new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.