* 2215696
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Most Impactful Culturally-responsive Informal Pedagogical Practices for STEM Afterschool Programs Engaging Marginalized Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Cynthia Sanchez Tapia, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,134.00

Growth in the US Latinx population has outpaced the Latinx growth in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) degrees and occupation, further
widening the ethnic gap in STEM. Mathematics has often identified as a
bottleneck keeping many youth, especially minoritized youth, from pursuing STEM
studies. Unequal opportunities to develop powerful math assets explain
differences in math skills and understanding often experienced by minoritized
youth. Implementing culturally responsive practices (CRP) in afterschool
programs has the potential to promote math skills and motivation for youth from
minoritized groups. However, extensive research is needed to understand which
culturally responsive informal pedagogical practices (CIPPs) are most impactful
and why. This project aims to identify and document such practices, shed light
on the challenges faced by afterschool staff in implementing them, and develop
training resources for afterschool staff to address these challenges. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Program which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research questions addressed
by the project focus on (1) which CIPPs matter most in the context of a STEM
university-community partnership engaging Latinx youth, and (2) in what
context(s) and under what conditions do these CIPPs relate to positive outcomes
for both youth participants and college mentor/facilitator. A third aim is to
build capacity of afterschool staff for implementing CIPPs in informal STEM
afterschool programs. The first two aims are addressed through a mixed-methods
research study which includes quantitative surveys and qualitative in-depth
interviews with five cohorts of adolescent participants, parents, and
undergraduate mentors. Each year, surveys will be collected from adolescents and
mentors at four time points during the year; the in-depth interviews will be
collected from adolescents, parents, and mentors in the spring. In total, 840
adolescents and 210 mentors will be surveyed; and 87 adolescents, 87 parents,
and 87 mentors will be interviewed. The third aim will be addressed by
leveraging the research findings and the collective knowledge developed by
practitioners and researchers to create a public archive containing
documentation of CIPPs for informal STEM afterschool programs and training
modules for afterschool staff. The team will disseminate these resources
extensively with informal afterschool practitioners in California and beyond.
Ultimately, this project will lead to improved outcomes for minoritized youth in
informal STEM afterschool programs across the nation, and increased
representation of minoritized youth in STEM pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.