* 2215559
* Does reliance on kin erode with market integration? A social network perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Keith Hunley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 30,300.00

Kinship has been the basis of social structure for most of human history whereas
it plays a more variable role in organizing contemporary societies. Across
settings, kinship plays a fundamental role in regulating access to material and
economic resources, inspiring long-held interest across the social sciences in
explaining the feedback between social and economic systems. Market integration
is a process that involves a transition from subsistence-oriented lifestyles to
ones based more heavily on market-oriented consumption and production. This
project investigates the effects of market integration on social structure,
specifically focusing on variation in the density of kin in social support
networks. The project trains an anthropological graduate student in empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis in cultural anthropology. Additionally,
the project promotes public understanding of the science of human sociality by
broad sharing of findings through publications, collaborative galleries, and
lectures in academic and non-academic venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
hypothesis tested in this research is that kinship ties in personal networks
erode under increasing levels of market integration. The research uses a hybrid
theoretical framework, inspired by evolutionary cultural anthropology, and mixed
qualitative and quantitative methods to understand how market-integration-
related activities affect social support networks among kin and non-kin in a
society that is transitioning from an agricultural base to one more strongly
rooted in regional markets. The research includes a year-long ethnographic study
involving social network interviews, community mapping, semi-structured
interviews, socio-demographic questionnaires, and anthropometric assessments to
obtain data that links economic, social, and health variables in contexts with
varying degrees of market engagement. These systematically collected data will
enrich the understanding of when, how, and why kinship relationships may break
down and what consequences this has on social relationships and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.