* 2215060
* Data Science Exhibits: Developing Theoretical Grounding and Practical Guidance for Museum Practitioners
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Andee Rubin, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,455.00

Data science is ever-present in modern life. The need to learn with and about
data science is becoming increasingly important in a world where the quantity of
data is constantly growing, where oneâ€™s own data are often being harvested and
marketed, where data science career opportunities are rapidly increasing, and
where understanding statistics, data sources, and data representation is
integral to understanding STEM and the world around us. Museums have the
opportunity to play a critical role in introducing the public to data science
concepts in ways that center personal relevance, social connections and
collaborative learning. However, data science and statistics are difficult
concepts to distill and provide meaningful engagement with during the brief
learning experiences typical to science museums. This Pilot and Feasibility
study brings together data scientists, data science educators, and museum
exhibit designers to consider these questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the
important data science concepts for the public to explore and understand in
museum exhibits?&lt;br/&gt;2. How can museum exhibits be designed to support
visitors with diverse backgrounds and experiences to engage with these data
science concepts?&lt;br/&gt;3. What principles can shape these designs to
promote broadening participation in data science specifically and STEM more
broadly?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilot and Feasibility project combines
multidisciplinary expert convening, feasibility testing, and early exploratory
prototyping around the focal topic of data science exhibits. Project partners,
TERC, the Museum of Science, Boston, and The Tech Interactive in San Jose will
engage in an iterative process to develop a theoretical grounding and practical
guidance for museum practitioners. The project will include two convenings,
bringing together teams of experts from the fields of data science, data science
education and museum exhibit design. Prior to the first convening, an initial
literature summary and a survey of convening participants will be conducted,
culminating in a preliminary list of big ideas about data science. Periodically,
participants will have the opportunity to rank, annotate and expand this list,
as a form of ongoing data collection. During the convenings, participants will
explore the preliminary list, share related work from the three disciplines,
engage with related data science activities in small groups, and work together
to build consensus around promising data science topics and approaches for
exhibits. Participant evaluation will allow for iterative improvement of the
convenings and the capture of missed points or overlooked topics. After each
convening, museum partners will create prototypes that respond to the convening
conversations. Prototypes will be pilot tested (evaluated) with an intentionally
recruited group of families that includes both frequent visitors and those who
are less likely to visit the museum; diversity in terms of race, languages and
dis/ability will be reflected in selection. Pilot data collection will consist
of structured observations and interviews. Results from the first round of
prototyping will be shared with convening participants as a way to modify the
list of big ideas and to further interrogate the feasibility of communicating
these ideas in an exhibit format. Results from the convenings and from both
rounds of prototyping will be combined in a guiding document that will be shared
on all three partner websites, and more broadly with the informal STEM learning
field. The team will also host a workshop for practitioners interested in
designing data science exhibits, and present at a conference focused on museum
exhibits and their design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.