* 2215940
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI‐ToF Mass Spectrometer to Advance Research and Education in Polymer Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Foster, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials composed of manmade
molecules are indispensable in modern solutions to challenges in improving
healthcare, reducing emissions, saving fuel, and protecting the security of the
United States. Manmade materials consisting of large molecules formed by
combining many small molecules together are the focus of this project. Such
molecules are called polymers. Determining the molecular make-up, size, and
purity of manmade polymers requires special analytical tools. A key tool is mass
spectrometry, which gains information about molecular properties by precisely
and accurately determining molecular masses. The proposed equipment, a Matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) time-of-flight mass spectrometer,
supported by a Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, will enable this
task, thus facilitating the discovery and preparation of new materials with
properties fine-tuned for the desired applications. The instrument acquired will
have the capabilities needed by scientists and engineers at the University of
Akron and collaborating academic and industrial researchers to understand how
new polymers can be made that are recyclable, degradable, and from renewable
sources. It will also allow for the development of polymer molecules that are
connected in new ways and for the observation of the molecules located on the
surface of a material. The University of Akron has established itself as a
national hub of polymer mass spectrometry. The new instrumentation will help
this national resource to continue to provide access to an analytical method
growing rapidly in its importance for discovery and innovation with manmade
polymers. The instrument will be available to industrial researchers as well as
college faculty from Ohio and nationwide, helping fellow scientists to address
important societal needs. It will also be integrated into educational
activities, including instrumental analysis courses and research courses for
graduate and undergraduate students, and programs enabling the recruitment and
training of a diverse workforce, including NSF's Research Experience for
Undergraduates program, the McNair Scholars program, and the American Chemistry
Society's summer research experiences for underprivileged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed mass spectrometer will allow researchers to solve challenging
analytical problems at the molecular level, which is a prerequisite for the
creation of new materials with the properties required for specific
applications. Modern mass spectrometry (MS) facilities are essential in the
interdisciplinary enterprise of materials design and synthesis. The development
of synthetic methods for next generation materials and the elucidation of their
molecular structure-properties relationships both drives and benefits from
development of new MS methods that yield new structural information unattainable
with current instrumentation and measurements. The proposed instrument will be
used in the development of new characterization tools and in analyses that
answer central questions in the synthesis and evaluation of properties of
synthetic materials, including (bio)degradable polymers, self-assembled
macromolecules, recyclable composites, biomimetic materials, and functionalized
surfaces. Higher resolution MALDI-MS, coupled with tandem mass spectrometry will
make possible conclusive determination of molecular composition, primary
structure, architecture, and molecular weight range of new compounds or blends.
New insights into surfaces will be gained by advanced development of solventless
MALDI techniques. Higher resolution, higher speed imaging capabilities will
extend method advancements to 2D mapping of polymer films and biomaterial
surfaces, aiding elucidation of surface modification, adhesion, drug delivery,
and segregation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.