* 2215134
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Persistent measurements of surface waves in landfast ice using fiber optic telecommunication cables
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* James Thomson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 214,041.00

In shallow, coastal regions of the Arctic, sea ice forming on the ocean that is
attached to the coast is known as landfast ice. Breakup of this ice is likely
driven by a combination of melting and ocean wave action. Following spring
breakup, when ice is not present for the summer months, there is more wave
energy at the coast. Waves can increase coastal erosion. However, our
understanding of the processes by which waves break up coastal sea ice and
contribute to Arctic coastal erosion are still limited by a lack of
observations. This project will test use of a new technology for better
measuring waves in coastal ice. The success of this project will significantly
advance our ability to understand the rapidly eroding coastal Arctic. The
results will have broad applications for both scientific and coastal Arctic
communities, and the project will engage local high school students to build and
deploy instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test our ability to
measure waves in ice-covered regions using seafloor cables. The investigators
will measure waves along a seafloor cable and by surface buoys over week-long
periods in spring, summer, and fall 2022. Cable measurements will be collected
using shore-based instrumentation by collaborators at Sandia National
Laboratory, while buoys will be deployed along the length of the cable by
airborne or vessel-based methods. These measurements aim to address fundamental
questions about coastal ice and its breakup, including: (1) What is the role of
waves in breaking up ice? and (2) How do waves change and evolve in areas of
coastal ice? The co-location of buoy deployments and cable measurements during
this period aims to produce a method that will allow researchers to measure
waves using seafloor cables in the future with no additional deployment of
equipment. The potential for persistent, high-resolution observations of surface
waves using cables opens new avenues of research in this area. The ice-covered
season in the Alaskan Arctic is expected to continue to shorten in future years,
and the role of waves is likely to be greater. This project will begin building
networks to use this technology to answer societally relevant questions, through
Arctic science networks and in local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.