* 2215771
* MRI: Acquisition of LA-HR-ICPMS instrumentation for climate, environmental, ecosystem, and engineering research at the University of Maine
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrei Kurbatov, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2025
* USD 661,462.00

This award is for acquisition of new instrumentation to support acquisition of
the new LA-HR-ICPMS instrumentation for the trace-element analysis of various
environmental samples. This instrumentation will replace the original (and
heavily used over two decades) ThermoScientific Element2 ICP-MS installed at the
University of Maine’s Climate Change Institute (CCI). The new acquisition will
significantly expand research capabilities of the CCI/ICP-MS Facility to improve
the analysis of aqueous samples, supplemented with a laser ablation (LA) front
end for ice, biological, and other solid materials. The current ICP-MS Facility
was established in 2002 with an NSF/MRI award, which since then has served as a
vital resource for climate, environmental, ecosystem, and engineering research
and training at the U. Maine, across the state of Maine and beyond. The routine
use and primary support of the Facility come from the Principal Investigators
and their collaborators that group under three research areas: glaciochemistry
and climate/environmental reconstruction; paleoceanography and marine
biogeochemistry; and environmental sensor development and material science
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U. Maine is the State’s Land &amp; Sea
Grant university and only PhD granting institution, so the campus is the de
facto academic research and research training hub of the state of Maine. The
proposed advances of this research &amp; training instrumentation will
immediately impact current and future NSF-funded research projects that support
extensive national and international collaborations. Specific to this proposal
are collaborations with the University of Venice (Italy) and the University of
Cambridge/British Antarctic Survey to develop laser ablation ICP-MS imaging of
ice cores, and collaborations with New Zealand, Swiss, Chinese, Canadian, and
Brazilian colleagues to analyze ice, thereby maintaining our leadership role in
global ice core and climate change research. Likewise, the enhanced carbonate
analysis capacity of the Element XR will have an immediate impact on NSF-funded
research projects in the Gulf of Maine and in the South Pacific. The proposed
instrumentation will facilitate new and important collaborations between
academic colleges (College of Natural Science, Forestry, and Agriculture and the
College of Engineering) and research units - the CCI and the Frontier Institute
for Research in Sensor Technology - across the campus, as well as enabling new
and broader scientific collaborations with other academic and scientific
institutions across Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.