* 2215223
* Research Analytics Using the Higher Education Research and Development Survey (HERD) to Impact Institutional Strategy
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Erin Wallett, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 324,995.00

As funding opportunities for sponsored research and development become more
competitive and funding agencies hold research entities more accountable,
research support professionals, such as research impact librarians, research
data analysts, vice presidents for research, and provosts, need to develop new
skills to meet these demands. These skills should help research support
professionals make important institutionally-focused decisions to support their
research strategy, infrastructure, and create pathways for significant
investment. To be effective, techniques should employ advanced data analytics,
business intelligence tools, and benchmarking datasets. This project will first
collect empirical evidence of promising applications of data for institutional
decision-making, benchmarking, and best practices development, and then train a
select but diverse group of research support professionals in data-driven
decision making and relevant analytical techniques. Growth in the research
enterprise, facilitated by strategic data-informed decision making, not only has
a positive impact on faculty recruitment and retention but also provides
opportunities for expanded student participation in research, strengthens
quality graduate programs, and creates economic impact for the local and
regional economies. Enhancing these skills to help professional better support
research is particularly important for smaller and minority-serving institutions
to help them focus their funding requests and remain
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation’s National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics’ annual Higher Education Research
and Development (HERD) Survey is one source of benchmark data. This project will
conduct a national survey of higher education institutions to collect data on
the effective use of the HERD survey data in institutional planning and support.
The survey will identify what HERD data are most used and useful as well gather
ideas of other data and benchmarks that would be of use to institutions to help
make their decisions. Then, the project will host an in-person workshop that
will use the SCOPE framework for responsible research evaluation (developed by
the International Network of Research Management Societies’ Research Evaluation
Working Group, INORMS-REG) to help institutions expand their metrics of research
evaluation and make better informed decisions about research funding strategies.
This workshop will include analytical training on predictive analytics,
analytical tools, data visualization, and network analysis, elevating the skills
of research support professionals to focus and grow research at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.