* 2215639
* DDRIG in DRMS: Perceptions in sustainability transitions: planning for the potable reuse of wastewater in Arizona
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Marisa Manheim, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 26,473.00

Transitioning to more sustainable use of resources requires residents to make
significant shifts in institutional norms, values, and daily practices. The
prospect of such changes can provoke public resistance to interventions decision
makers view as necessary to regional resilience. Although the principles of
participatory decision making are becoming widely embraced in public policy,
common methods of participation are insufficient to productively engage with the
emotional and embodied foundation of risk perceptions. To address this gap, this
research project explores a novel approach to deliberation that uses embodied
methods and collaborative design to help communities make informed decisions
about sustainability transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers apply
this approach to the direct potable reuse of wastewater, which municipalities
have been slow to adopt because of widespread negative perceptions of the
resulting waterâ€™s quality. The researchers work with skeptical consumers and
water utility professionals to co-design an engagement activity that promotes
learning and reflection about the possibilities and drawbacks of potable reuse.
The resulting activity is presented at several public festivals and compared to
traditional text-based education to assess the learning that occurs. Combining
this research with stakeholder interviews will enable researchers to assess the
scalability and perceived legitimacy of using embodied engagement methods and
collaborative design in the management of sustainability
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.