* 2215274
* Building Supports Towards a Useful, Usable, and In-Use Framework of Professional Competencies in the Informal STEM Learning Field
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joe Heimlich, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,530,520.00

Each year, millions of Americans visit science centers and museums, children’s
museums, zoos, aquariums, nature centers, planetariums, and similar
institutions. Recognized as trusted and popular places for educational and
leisure experiences, these institutions are uniquely capable of engaging people
across a spectrum of beliefs, experiences, and identities on topics related to
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), as well as addressing
pressing societal problems related to science, technology, and innovation.
However, the potential impacts of these institutions are largely dependent on
the skills, knowledge, and abilities of the professionals working at them.
Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the need to shift the nature of
work, the informal STEM learning workforce was dramatically impacted. The recent
period of disruption is a time for innovation. The field is well-positioned to
promote new models of professional learning and development that are grounded in
the values and practices of informal learning. This project will benefit local
communities across the United States and society at large by advancing the
capacity of science-engagement professionals to respond to societal needs,
concerns, and interests more effectively through their institutions’
exhibitions, education and learning programs, and various forms of public
engagement (e.g., community outreach events, supports for teachers/educators and
schools). Led by the Association of Science and Technology Centers in
collaboration with the Center of Science and Industry’s Center for Research and
Evaluation and Oregon State University’s STEM Research Center, this work will
build on the Informal STEM Learning (ISL) Professional Competency Framework
developed and validated with prior National Science Foundation funding.
Competency frameworks are increasingly used across many sectors to identify the
suite of skills, knowledge, and capabilities necessary to be successful in a
particular area of work. Given dramatic changes to the ISL workplace in the last
two years, there is an even stronger potential for the Framework, particularly
if newly developed supports can link the Framework to the current, emerging, and
continuing needs of the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by a systematic
process for designing training and instructional materials, this project will
first capture changes in the ways diverse informal STEM learning professionals
describe, pursue, and achieve competencies to produce a revised Framework. Next,
the project will collaboratively develop companion resources with diverse
professionals through a series of participatory design workshops, using a
sequential and iterative approach. The resources are expected to include
indicators of professional competencies, self-assessments, training tools, and
other types of resources that have the potential to significantly advance the
professional learning (as undertaken by individuals and institutions) and the
professional development capacity (as provided by institutions, associations,
and other organizations) of the informal STEM learning field. Next, the project
will share final products–including a refreshed website that hosts the updated
Framework and newly-developed suite of tools–with professional association and
network partners who can disseminate directly to the institutions and
professionals who are developing and practicing these competencies. The project
will gather evidence from a small number of early adopters, providing data on
specific use-case scenarios. Finally, the project will document the potential
impact of the Framework on the field by measuring how the Framework is perceived
by informal STEM learning professionals as usable, useful, and beginning to be
“in-use." Over time—and with increased use—the Framework and its companion
resources hold the promise of contributing to the opening of the field to
professionals with identities currently underrepresented through more
transparent expectation and clearer growth pathways. This project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.