* 2215874
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer to Support Research, Research Training, and Education at Southern Oregon University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Samuel David, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,340.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Southern Oregon University is
acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with a
broadband probe to support the research of Professor Hala Schepmann and
colleagues Samuel David and Anna F. Oliveri. This instrument facilitates
research in the areas of aluminum chemistry, organic chemistry, and natural
products. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument enhances the educational,
research, and teaching efforts of students at all levels in the department. The
instrument is leveraged by students from underrepresented groups in hands-on
research and research training experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as polyatomic nanoclusters, organic synthesis,
and natural products. This instrument enables research focused on the
characterization of nanoscale aluminum oxyhydroxide clusters to elucidate
speciation of aluminum in aqueous solution and the development of new synthetic
methodologies to produce substituted phenol and benzoquinone ring systems. Other
investigations include the total synthesis of the natural products floricolin
and aspernigrin and the identification of a plant growth hormone in P. elata
(African teak).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.