* 2215143
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wenli Bi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2025
* USD 419,614.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
cryogen-free Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS
DynaCool). This instrument enables new interdisciplinary experimental capability
of materials research at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). The PPMS
will significantly accelerate the material research program at UAB physics which
heavily depends on the characterization of a multitude of material properties.
Furthermore, the PPMS will facilitate new collaborations with other materials
research groups at UAB, Historically Black College and University, Primary
Undergraduate Institution, and private research institution. The new capability
will enable the departmentâ€™s success as a materials research and education hub
in the central Alabama area. The instrument directly benefits the education and
training of diverse graduate and undergraduate students, high-school students,
and STEM teachers through research, education, and outreach activities. Exhibits
on the advanced characterization of materials properties and applications will
be developed and used in outreach programs at McWane Science Center in
Birmingham to promote science literacy in the general public and inspire K-12 in
pursuit of education and careers in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quantum Design Physical Properties
Measurement System (PPMS) will catalyze materials research at UAB. The multi-
functional measurement modules with cryogenic temperature down to 1.9 K coupled
with an external magnetic field up to 9 T will enable a broad spectrum of
materials research projects including i) pressure control of topological
magnetic materials, ii) studying of magnetic transitions in rare earth metals
under extreme pressure, iii) determining charge carrier of ultra-wide band gap
semiconductors for electronic applications, iv) discovery and characterization
of novel laser materials, v) enabling excitonic physics in hybrid perovskite
systems at cryogenic condition for energy and optoelectronic applications, vi)
expanding the analysis methods for functional nanofibers, and vii) discovering
new superconductors with superlattice structures. The success of current ongoing
research activities at UAB physics depends on the characterization of a
multitude of material properties including electrical
transport/superconductivity, magnetism, thermal, and optical properties under
external stimuli (temperature, pressure, and magnetic field). The new capability
will expand research in quantum materials, foster new intra-departmental and
inter-institutional collaborations, and promote the training of a skilled STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.