* 2215721
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The evolutionary history of the human and ape knee
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jeremy DeSilva, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 23,162.00

Bipedalism, or upright walking, is a defining characteristic of modern and
ancestral humans. It was one of the earliest defining traits of the human
lineage and played a significant role in shaping our behavior and anatomy. To
better understand the evolution of bipedalism, many researchers have studied the
pelvis, foot, and vertebral column, all of which play a part in bipedal
movement; somewhat less attention has been paid to the knee joint despite its
essential role during human bipedalism. This doctoral dissertation research
project studies the movement and anatomy of the knee joint and the results of
the research can be relevant both for understanding the origins and evolution of
human upright walking, as well as functional anatomy of the knee joint. Given
the high frequency of knee replacement in the U.S., this offers one key example
of how evolutionary understandings can potentially inform medical perspectives,
and approaches to injury prevention and intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to investigate the relationship between knee joint
anatomy and locomotor function in modern primates to help understand the pattern
of locomotor behavior in hominin and hominoid fossil records. This project is
carried out in three complementary phases that combine modern primate kinematic
data, modern primate skeletal data, and data collected from the distal femur,
proximal tibia, and patella of fossil hominins and hominoids. These phases
include collection of kinematic data on gait and degree of knee extension in
living primates as they walk bipedally, skeletal sample measurements in
individuals of the same species from museum collections, and application of
results of the first two phases to interpret anatomy in the human and ape fossil
record. Ultimately the results of this research can inform paleoanthropological
perspectives regarding the body form from which modern human bipedalism
evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.