* 2215716
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogenic Physical Properties Measurement System for Geophysical and Magnetic Materials Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Thelma Berquo, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 303,140.00

The Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will support the acquisition of a
Quantum Design VersaLab Physical Property Measurement System (VersaLab - PPMS).
The instrument will be used to support faculty research and teaching
laboratories (physics advanced laboratory, materials science, and geology) at
Concordia College in Moorhead, MN, a non-Ph.D. granting institution. The
VersaLab – PPMS is a versatile instrument, capable of conducting electrical,
magnetic, and thermal properties measurements in the temperature range of 50 –
1000 K. The apparatus installed at Concordia College will also serve a regional
consortium of higher education institutions in North Dakota and Northwest
Minnesota. The researchers will engage undergraduate students in hands-on
investigations of a broad range of materials during the summer and throughout
the regular school year, thus training the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the acquisition of a VersaLab
Physical Property Measurement System (VersaLab – PPMS), made by Quantum Design,
Inc (San Diego, CA), and to be housed in the Physics Department at Concordia
College in Moorhead, MN. The equipment has a 3 Tesla cryogen-free
superconducting magnet and can measure electrical, magnetic, and thermal
properties of materials over a broad temperature range (50 – 1000 K). The
VersaLab system will enhance the quality and scope of research possible by the
Principal Investigators and increase the speed at which data is collected.
Specific research topics include the investigation of (1) the magnetic
properties of iron oxides polymorphs submitted to thermal treatment; (2) the
effects of foreign elements in the structure of iron oxides; (3) the conversion
of iron oxides in a controlled environment versus their transformation in
ambient conditions; and (4) the properties of magnetic nanomaterials. The
apparatus will also support Concordia College’s physics curriculum by adding
teaching laboratory activities to materials science, advanced laboratories and
the geology course, thus furthering our mission of training the next generation
of scientists using modern technology and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.