* 2215941
* MRI: Acquisition of instrumentation for a node in the global SONG observing network for ultra high-precision seismology of bright stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jason Jackiewicz, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 950,000.00

SONG in New Mexico is a robotic telescope combined with an ultra-precise
spectrograph that will be an addition to the Stellar Observations Network Group
(SONG). This international collaboration will obtain near-continuous
observations of bright, oscillating stars in order to study their structure.
Understanding stars is a fundamental goal of astrophysics as stars are the most
basic building blocks of galaxies and the universe. This will be the only U.S.
participating facility in the global SONG project. It will provide the key link
to allow 24-hour coverage that is needed to accomplish the scientific goals. The
observations will lead to an improved understanding of a wide variety of stars,
including target stars that host Earth-like planets. This new facility overlaps
significantly with the interests of the students and faculty in astronomy at New
Mexico State University, providing long-term educational and research benefits
and commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oscillating stars have turbulent motions
within them that generate sound waves that cause the majority of them to wobble
and ring like bells. The measurement and analysis of these acoustic oscillations
is the primary means to study the interior of a star. This project will acquire
and assemble a telescope and spectrograph instrument that will close a gap in
the world-wide SONG network dedicated to monitoring oscillating stars 24 hours
per day. The state-of-the-art spectrograph comes from a well-tested design and
has already demonstrated radial-velocity precision of about 1 meter-per-second.
The goals this facility enables are to perform asteroseismology of stars to
obtain the most detailed information possible, and to search for and
characterize Earth-like planets around Sun-like stars. It complements past,
current, and future space missions with similar science
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.