* 2215823
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI Tandem Mass Spectrometer (MALDI MS/MS) for Imaging,  Biological Research and Chemical Materials Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kermit Murray, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 474,047.00

This award is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Kermit Murray from Louisiana
State University, on behalf of from 11 investigators in 4 departments across the
university, is acquiring a matrix-assisted laser desorption / ionization time-
of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-MS) equipped with a photodiode array. In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions
of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and
other similarly sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent
balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide range of samples. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and within
the regional. The instrument broadens participation by giving hands-on access to
a diverse student population. The instrument is also used in outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It especially impacts studies correlating molecular
structure, orientation and dynamics. Researchers use the MALDI-TOF-MS to study a
number of exciting projects. Research will be enabled that is aimed at the
development of a comprehensive approach to mass spectrometry imaging that is
quantitative and capable of biomolecule identification. MALDI imaging is
combined with IR and UV laser ablation sample transfer for liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry analysis. In addition, novel approaches to further
improve the MALDI technology will be developed. Two new platforms are developed
that improve biological imaging. Researchers are investigating the effect of
coronal charge patterning on the equilibrium aggregate structure of amphiphilic
ionic block copolymers. The impact of structural precision in the properties and
functions of discrete linear and branched synthetic polymers are being studied.
MALDI is being used to validate recently developed high-resolution and high-
speed Raman micro-spectroscopy method to detect lipid modulation and image
spatial distribution of lipids in vitro and ex vivo brain tissues. The
instrument enables the elucidation of the underlying chemistry of homogeneous
lignin depolymerization using a contactless gas phase reactor and upgrade fast
pyrolysis of lignin toward formation of biofuel. The instrument is aiding the
design, synthesis and study of the photophysical properties and potential
applications of new fluorophores that absorb and emit in the visible and near-
infrared region of the optical spectrum (400–900 nm). Among the current
fluorophores under investigation, boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) dyes display a
rich array of photophysical and optoelectronic properties. Fundamental knowledge
will be gained on alkyne metathesis reactions and the creation of design rules
toward catalysts with higher activity and broader substrate scope. This includes
the design and synthesis of new catalyst and ligand systems and analysis of
their reactivities both experimentally and computationally. Additional studies
enabled are the developmental competence of in vitro matured oocytes for use in
assisted reproductive technologies (ART), the synthesis and application of a
specific class of ionic liquid (IL) compounds termed, “group of uniform
materials based on organic salts” (GUMBOS), which are used as MALDI matrixes for
imaging applications, and uncovering the rules governing changes in electron
transfer after encapsulation of redox active molecules in confined spaces.
Researchers are studying molecular catalysts containing metal-ligand multiple
bonds that are driven by renewable energy for fuel production and industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.