* 2215292
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: What is crime in the context of post-conflict?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Clara Han, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 19,738.00

Restorative justice courts provide alternate means of mitigating conflict in
post-war contexts. As opposed to traditional, punitive measures more common in
civil courts, restorative justice courts create opportunities for victims and
perpetrators to engage in meaningful encounters that strive toward peace. Are
such courts more effective at achieving peace? How do definitions of crime and
peace vary in relation to judicial systems? To shed light on these questions,
this doctoral dissertation research uses theory from cultural anthropology and
legal studies to ask how the type of court affects definitions of crime and who
is considered a criminal in a post-conflict setting. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical data collection and analysis, the project disseminates results broadly
to academic and non-academic audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses
on research questions surrounding how violence and crime are defined, including
the boundaries between ordinary and political crimes, and how experiences in
judicial systems affect livelihoods of stakeholders. The investigators conduct
an ethnographic study involving court-based ethnography, observational methods,
interviews, and archival analysis to answer project questions. In so doing, this
doctoral research contributes to academic scholarship on the role of
transitional justice and criminal law in post-conflict democracy and
peacebuilding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.