* 2215833
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Acquisition of BioLayer Interferometer Octet RH16 for Label-Free Detection of Biomolecular Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhihao Zhuang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 365,567.00

An award is made to University of Delaware to acquire an Octet RH16 that allows
label-free detection of biomolecular interactions central to modern biochemical,
biophysical, materials and biopharmaceutical researches. As protein interactions
with a variety of biomolecules including other proteins, nucleotides,
carbohydrates and small molecules are fundamental for understanding biological
processes, graduate and undergraduate trainees will use the instrument
frequently and gain hands-on experience of using the instrument. The acquisition
of an Octet RH16 will be a critical resource for Sartorius BioLayer
Interferometer measurement and significantly impact the research and training
infrastructure at the University of Delaware, Delaware State University and
schools in the Delaware Valley, including Morgan State University, Haverford
College, Villanova University, and Rowan University. The Octet RH16 will be used
broadly in research and undergraduate training programs across multiple
campuses. We plan to actively integrate the instrument into the research and
teaching environments to increase student involvement in their own learning at
both University of Delaware and the participating primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs). The research and training opportunities provided by this
Octet RH16 to a large number of underrepresented minority and female students
are expect to positively impact their future careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Octet RH16 will support the research
of 20 groups at participating universities and colleges, reaching across
multiple departments and colleges (chemistry and biochemistry, biological
sciences, materials sciences, and chemical and biomolecular engineering). The
groups involved in this research represent a wide range of research areas,
including biochemistry, biophysics, chemical biology, molecular biology,
materials science and biomolecular engineering. The access to an Octet RH16 will
enable researchers at UD and surrounding PUIs and HBCUs in tackling cutting-edge
and interdisciplinary research problems, facilitating interactions among
researchers and forging new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.