* 2215382
* Engaging Rural, Latinx Youth in an After School Program That Integrates Design Thinking, Making and Math
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Jennifer Knudsen, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,661,554.00

The project will develop and research an after-school program designed to engage
rural, Latinx youth in design thinking and math through making. Making is a
learner-centered environment where participants design, create, and develop
projects. Latinx individuals are underrepresented in the STEM workforce. The
project will engage Latinx youth during the critical middle school years when
young people make choices that affect their futures. The project will work with
community members, after school staff, and youth as co-designers to develop and
pilot the complete after school program. The program will involve Latinx youth
who live in the agricultural regions of the Southwest United States with the
goal of developing agency and positive identity, as makers, mathematical doers
and users, and active community members. They will engage in developmentally
appropriate mathematics, such as the volume and surface area of geometric
shapes, within the context of informal learning projects. The program will
comprise four semester-long after school projects, involving participants for
2-4 hours each week, during which time youth will design and create objects to
address typical community challenges. Each project will incorporate smaller
modules to enable youth with different attendance needs to participate. Real
community problems (e.g., drought) and solution paths (e.g., water catchment
system) will motivate the making and the mathematics. The program, co-designed
in partnership with the Cesar Chavez Foundation, promises to reach 100,000 youth
over the next decade. Because the program can serve as a model for others with
similar goals, this reach has the potential to be expanded in many other
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will address a gap in the
current literature on mathematics, making, and community membership. The project
connects community mathematics—the rich mathematical knowledge and practices
drawn from communities—to educational making to both enrich understanding of
school mathematics and aid in developing students’ positive mathematical and
cultural identities. The project will also result in a model of professional
development that can be used and studied by after school programs and
researchers, contributing to the limited body of knowledge of professional
development on STEM making for after school facilitators. The research design
for this project will follow a mixed methods approach where quantitative and
qualitative data collection and analysis will occur simultaneously. Results of
both strands will be brought together at the interpretation and reporting level
to compare and bring out the convergence, divergence, or complementarity of
findings. The research will take place in two stages (co-design and pilot) over
3 years, with an additional half year for developing communications of the
findings. Research will address the following questions: (1) What are the key
features of projects for integrating community mathematics, school mathematics
understanding, and design/making? (2) How do facilitators support the youth in
engaging in program activities? (3) What math content and practices do youth
learn through participation in program activities? and (4) How do youth’s agency
and identity as makers, mathematics doers and users, and community members
change with participation in the program? Program research and resources will be
disseminated nationally through the Cesar Chavez Foundation and by sharing
project research and resources through publications and conference presentations
reaching researchers, educators, and program developers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.