* 2215705
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Acquisition of a Big Data HPC Cluster for Interdisciplinary Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Alber, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 659,979.00

An award is made to the University of California, Riverside (UCR) to acquire a
Big Data High-Performance Computing (BD-HPC) cluster designed to enable novel
and transformative research, outreach and training activities that are highly
relevant to the environment and society. The system will be managed by UCR's HPC
Center (HPCC) that serves a broad and diverse user population distributed across
colleges and departments. As a highly shared resource, the instrument will
enable a large number of NSF-funded programs, including those aiming to improve
practices in agriculture, environmental protection, technology development and
industry. Extensive educational and training activities are integrated to
disseminate multidisciplinary concepts of Big Data Science. These outreach
components will educate the public about the impact of Big Data Science on the
environment, economy and society. The HPCC supports many undergraduate and
graduate classes in a wide range of disciplines. Its resources are also
instrumental for the development of new courses and programs in various data
science areas. A high percentage of students in these classes and programs are
from populations that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
The availability of adequate computing and its beneficial impact on educational
programs will attract outstanding students to computational and quantitative
undergraduate and graduate programs. Combined with UCR’s diverse ethnicity and
research mission, this investment will benefit a wide array of translational
research directions and technology-based economic development
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new BD-HPC cluster will enable novel
research that cannot be performed on UCR’s current research computing
infrastructure or community cyberinfrastructure (CI), while also offering
sufficient capacity to ensure support of ongoing research with greatly improved
performance. Both current and new research addresses fundamental problems in a
highly interdisciplinary environment bridging a broad array of science and
engineering disciplines in basic and translational research. Grand challenge
questions asked include: How do genetic and population dynamics determine
phenotypic and evolutionary diversity? How can large-scale precision data be
translated into improved stress and pathogen tolerance to feed a growing world
population, and to develop interventions for reducing the rate and impact of
environmental changes, natural disasters and climate change? How can
quantitative modeling lead to high-performance molecules, materials, and help
prevent wildfires and predict earthquakes? UCR researchers working on these
problems are from a wide range of research specializations, including
environmental science, agriculture, biology, chemistry, physics, engineering,
computer science, statistics and applied mathematics. Since their research
relies heavily on high-throughput and computational modeling approaches, the BD-
HPC cluster will permit new computational approaches for solving these research
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.