* 2215990
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spinning Disk Confocal Super-resolution Microscope for Transcriptomics Research at Boston University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2025
* USD 615,508.00

Some of the most promising frontiers in life science are uniquely enabled by a
new class of microscopes that allow researchers to study molecular-scale
structures and the functions they perform within living tissue. This is a step-
change in the field of biomicroscopy. In this project, a collaborative group of
engineers, scientists, and physicians at Boston University (BU) will acquire a
new super-resolution spinning-disk confocal microscope and use it to study
precisely how gene expression within cells conduct their lifegiving functions
and how neurons connect to and signal one another in brain networks that guide
behavior and create memories. Access to this transformative instrument will
catalyze cutting edge research at the intersection of life science and
engineering disciplines, enhancing interdisciplinary training for graduate
students and future practitioners. Use of this shared research instrument
directly impacts BU's academic community, as well as robust summer programs
oriented to underserved groups and teachers in minority serving educational
institutions and community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
acquire a Nikon CSU-W1-SoRa super- resolution spinning disk confocal microscope
for a shared core facility managed by the BU Photonics Center. This recently
commercialized microscope offers a combination of imaging speed and resolution
that comprises a step-change in the field of biomicroscopy. It allows, for the
first time, fluorescence imaging with resolution and frame rate sufficient to
explore large biological sample volumes with molecular precision in real time.
Transformative research areas that are enabled by the microscope's unique
combination of features include spatially resolved transcriptomics, a technique
to connect gene expression to the spatial organization of cells; multi-scale
connectomics, a technique to create comprehensive three-dimensional maps of
neural connectivity in a living nervous system; and live cell and tissue
imaging, through which structural and functional attributes of living cells,
engineered tissues, organoids, and whole organisms can be studied. The first of
its type on the BU campus, this microscope will be a major asset for life-
science and engineering research groups at BU, including nine major users from
five different departments. High utilization of the microscope is anticipated,
especially given the instrument's reputation for robust, turnkey operation and
seamless switching among imaging modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.