* 2215769
* MRI: Acquisition of a Lab-Scale Instrument for X-ray Absorption Fine Structure
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Casey Wade, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2025
* USD 348,740.00

This award will support the acquisition of a lab-scale instrument for X-ray
Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS). XAS measurements are typically performed using
specialized synchrotron X-ray sources, but recent advances have enabled XAS data
to be collected using a local, lab-scale instrument. This is a game-changing
advance that has the potential to accelerate materials discovery and innovation.
XAS provides key information that is difficult to impossible to acquire using
other common spectroscopic techniques. The instrument will be critical in
characterizing (a) atomically precise catalysts, (b) high-performance
electrocatalysts for CO2 conversion and synthesis of chemicals, (c) advanced
batteries, (d) complex natural systems containing precious platinum group metals
and rare earth elements, and (e) advanced electronic and magnetic materials. XAS
characterization will provide key missing structural details that, when
understood, will enable the development of next generation materials. A
community of researchers at Ohio State, neighboring universities, and companies
will have access to the instrument. The XAS data will accelerate material
discovery to enable sustainable and energy efficient catalytic materials for
removing CO2 from the atmosphere. The PI and the team will provide training,
participate in outreach events, and incorporate the use of this instrument into
curricular components to foster future generations of scientists. Overall, the
instrument will have a broad impact on the scientific community at and around
Ohio State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire a lab-scale
instrument for performing X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS), including X-ray
Absorption Near Edge Spectroscopy (XANES) and Extended X-ray Absorption Fine
Structure Spectroscopy (EXAFS). The instrument will be used to answer
fundamental questions about synthesis-structure-function relationships for many
different types of materials. This includes providing the critical and often
missing characterization of bio-inspired catalytic materials containing paired
catalytic sites as well as key insights into the redox properties of perovskites
that are electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction or ammonia synthesis. Beyond
catalysis, the instrument will provide critical insights on the coordination of
platinum and other rare earth elements in geochemical materials to enable
extraction of rare earth elements, to understand complex chemistry in diverse
soil samples, and to provide a basis for waste remediation. It will also
facilitate characterization of new electronic and magnetic materials that have
the potential to enable room temperature superconductors as well as electrode
and electrolyte structure in batteries and energy storage materials to overcome
the current reliance on cobalt. Additionally, the X-ray Emission mode will
enable structural characterization of model proteins that are being investigated
as catalysts for small molecule activation. The instrument will help to
characterize advanced electronic and magnetic materials that have the potential
to enable room temperature superconductors. Overall, the lab-scale instrument
will accelerate materials discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.