* 2215101
* Research to Understand and Inform the Impacts of Ambient and Designed Sound on Informal STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Martha Merson, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,085,042.00

This Research in Service to Practice project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments. This project is
designed to support collaboration between informal STEM learning (ISL)
researchers, designers, and educators with sound researchers and acoustic
ecologists to jointly explore the role of auditory experiences—soundscapes—on
learning. In informal STEM learning spaces, where conversation advances STEM
learning and is a vital part of the experience of exploring STEM phenomena with
family and friends, attention to the impacts of soundscapes can have an
important bearing on learning. Understanding how soundscapes may facilitate,
spark, distract from, or even overwhelm thinking and conversation will provide
ISL educators and designers evidence to inform their practice. The project is
structured to reflect the complexity of ISL audiences and experiences; thus,
partners include the North Park Village Nature Center located in in a diverse
immigrant neighborhood in Chicago; Wild Indigo, a Great Lakes Audubon program
primarily serving African American visitors in Midwest cities; an after-
school/summer camp provider, STEAMing Ahead New Mexico, serving families in the
rural southwest corner of New Mexico, and four sites in Ohio, MetroParks,
Columbus Zoo and Aquarium, Franklin Park Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, and
the Center of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will
conduct large-scale exploratory research to answer an understudied research
question: How do environmental sounds impact STEM learning in informal learning
spaces?  Researchers and practitioners will characterize and describe the
soundscapes throughout the different outdoor and indoor exhibit/learning spaces.
Researchers will observe 800 visitors, tracking attraction, attention, dwell
time, and shared learning. In addition to observations, researchers will join
another 150 visitors for think-aloud interviews, where researchers will walk
alongside visitors and capture pertinent notes while visitors describe their
experience in real time. Correlational and cluster analyses using machine
learning algorithms will be used to identify patterns across different sounds,
soundscapes, responses, and reflections of research participants. In particular,
the analyses will identify characteristics of sounds that correlate with
increased attention and shared learning. Throughout the project, a team of
evaluators will monitor progress and support continuous improvement, including
guidance for developing culturally responsive research metrics co-defined with
project partners. Evaluators will also document the extent to which the project
impacts capacity building, and influences planning and design considerations for
project partners. This exploratory study is the initial in a larger research
agenda, laying the groundwork for future experimental study designs that test
causal claims about the relationships between specific soundscapes and visitor
learning. Results of this study will be disseminated widely to informal learning
researchers and practitioners through workshops, presentations, journal
articles, facilitated conversations, and a short film that aligns with the focus
and findings of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.