* 2215713
* Acquisition of the EMX-plus EPR Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Natalia Noginova, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,543.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists at Norfolk State
University (NSU) work on developing novel materials and nanostructures where
quantum physics plays a significant role producing unusual magnetic, electric,
and optical properties not found in common materials. These unique properties
are related to the quantum behavior of electrons and interactions between them
at the atomic scale. This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will
purchase an electron spin resonance spectrometer, which allows one to get
information on individual unpaired electrons and electron assemblies,
characterize magnetic properties of materials, and explore possibilities for
manipulation of electrons with light. The materials and systems that are being
developed can revolutionize future technology, contribute to energy technology
with new photosensitive materials, and accelerate Information processing to
optical speeds of operation (orders of magnitude faster than now). In addition,
the electron spin resonance instrumentation is important for the education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented minority
groups (many of whom are first-generation college or graduate students) by
involving them in cutting-edge research and providing hands-on experience on
advanced scientific equipment. Furthermore, the instrument serves as a multi-
user facility supporting STEM research at NSU and other local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron magnetic
resonance methods provide an important information on unpaired electron spins,
their interactions and dynamics, and allow one to characterize magnetic phases
of magnetic materials, and the presence of defects and valence states of
impurities in diamagnetic systems. The new EMXplus EPR Spectrometer is a vital
characterization equipment for materials science and is involved in several
research directions in the Center for Materials Research of Norfolk State
University, which include: (i) quantum materials, which demonstrate unusual
magnetism and interplay between magnetic and charge transport degrees of freedom
associated with chiral topology; (ii) nanostructured systems with coupling of
plasmonic, magnetic and electric effects; (iii) transition from quantum to
classical behavior in supermaramagnetic nanoparticles; and (iv) effects of light
illumination and spin-dependent transport in organic systems. The
instrumentation will serve as a multi-user facility, and also enrich education,
providing hands-on experience in training of graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented minority groups at Norfolk State University, one of the
largest HBCUs in the nation, and partner HBCU institutions (Elizabeth City State
University and Virginia State University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.