* 2215185
* MRI: Acquisition of a SEC-MALS Instrument for Research and Teaching at California State University, Sacramento
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Linda Roberts, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 203,116.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. California State University-
Sacramento (Sac State), is acquiring an instrument for size exclusion
chromatography with multi- angle light scattering (SEC-MALS) analysis, which
will include an HPLC instrument with a UV detector and an autosampler for high
throughput analysis, a refractive index (RI) detector, and a MALS detector to
support the research of Professor Katherine McReynolds colleagues Linda Roberts
and Stefan Paula. In brief, SEC-MALS is an absolute technique for determining
molar mass and size of molecules in solution. The instrument involves the
combination of size-exclusion chromatography with multi-angle light scattering
and offers an advanced characterization technique and overcomes the many
limitations of column calibration. SEC-MALS is an extremely valuable and useful
technique for the characterization of a wide variety of macromolecules,
including synthetic polymers, lipids, proteins, and other biomaterials. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching
efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides
accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument will be used to
trains a student population at the primarily undergraduate institution that is
also classified as Hispanic serving and Asian American/Native American/Pacific
Islander serving with a large portion of the student population identifying as
being from underrepresented minority groups. The instrument gives students
experience using vital instrumentation that they carry with them into their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this instrument that includes size
exclusion chromatography with multi- angle light scattering (SEC-MALS) is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts areas
including chemistry, biochemistry and polymer science. Research is focused on
the analysis of synthetic/biologic macromolecules and derive important
structural information about these molecules. This work includes the study of
the interactions between synthetic glycopolymers and various viral spike
proteins (HIV and SARS-CoV-2) to better understand early-stage viral binding to
host cells. The instrument will also enable the study of liposomes as models for
prebiotic life forms, using the instrument to determine diameter and consistency
of liposome preparations, as well as the examination of the abnormal
oligomerization of apoA-I, which contributes to deposition of amyloid protein in
arterial plaque.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.