* 2215191
* Collaborative Research: Highly ordered concentric multilayer nanostructures with probable liquid crystalline features from rigid sphere-rod amphiphiles in solution
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 113,018.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program as well as the Condensed Matter Physics program, both in the
Division of Materials Research, this project combines experimental and
computational research and education aimed at advancing the fundamental
understanding of how rigid block copolymers behave and self-organize in solution
to liquid crystals. Liquid crystal is a state of matter between fluid liquids
and solid crystals, and broadly used as display devices in TV screens (LCD),
cell phones and contact lenses. Block copolymers are formed by linking two or
more different long chain polymers together. Different blocks often possess
different properties such as solubility, which lead block copolymers to self-
organize into various nanometer-scale structures and make them important
materials in drug delivery, coating and lubrication. While block copolymers with
flexible chains have been well studied, those with fully rigid components are
poorly understood. Investigators from the University of Akron and Kent State
University design and study fully rigid block copolymers with special shapes for
each block. This fundamental investigation enables the researchers to understand
how these rigid copolymers behave in solution, what types of supramolecular
structures they can self-organize into, and how the structure formations are
controlled by temperature, solvent, as well as the shape and architecture of
copolymers. The team focuses in particular on exploring the possible liquid
crystal features emerging from such rigid block copolymer assemblies. The team
examines a probable new type of liquid crystals formed by rigid block copolymers
and their potential applications as materials through a series of experiments
and complementary computer simulations. Furthermore, the project engages
graduate students, undergraduate students through the NSF-REU center at the
School of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering at the University of Akron,
and high school students from the Akron-Kent areas in Ohio. Graduate students
from both institutions supported by this grant can expand their experience by
mutual visits, collaborative experiments and discussions. The team also visits
local schools that are serving large numbers of minorities and encourage
students to take science courses and pursue careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program as well as the Condensed Matter Physics
program, both in the Division of Materials Research, Professors Liu and Tsige at
University of Akron, along with Professor Lavrentovich at Kent State University,
team up to explore the self-assembly of fully rigid, sphere-rod shaped
amphiphilic block copolymers. Such rigid copolymers demonstrate completely
different assembly behaviors from the well-studied flexible block copolymers, by
forming uniform, onion-like, multilayer concentric assemblies with identical,
well-defined inter-layer distance. The assemblies respond to the change of
solvent polarity, temperature and others by changing the number of layers while
maintaining the overall structure and inter-layer distance. The project includes
the following objectives which are pursued by combining experimental
characterizations and computer simulations: (1) investigation of the mechanism
and driving forces of this novel onion-like assembly and the reason for the
uniform assembly size; (2) elucidation of the rational control of their size
(number of layers) via changing solvent, counterions or temperature; (3)
studying the effects of rod length, rod number, sphere size/shape, and rod
orientation on the self-assembly, and (4) determination whether these onion-like
supramolecular structures possess liquid crystalline features, and if so, how
these unique features impact liquid crystal science and technology. The research
expands the fundamental understanding of block copolymer materials (from
flexible ones to rigid ones) and liquid crystals, as well as their potential
applications as functional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.