* 2215614
* Community College Mathematics Partnership for University Teacher Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Cristina Runnalls, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,799.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by leading to the preparation
of well-qualified and diverse elementary mathematics teachers. Through
partnerships between community college and university mathematics teacher
educators (MTEs), the project hopes to impact mathematics education at multiple
levels. First, college faculty will be engaged in professional development that
should greatly impact the instruction of math content courses for future
elementary teachers. Second, college students will have increased opportunities
to learn essential components of mathematics taught in elementary school
classrooms, developing positive outlooks towards themselves as mathematicians.
Third, the work intends to foster a regional community of MTE faculty. Faculty
from multiple institutions will participate in two summer institutes and a year-
long Professional Learning Community to discuss, engage, and support one another
in the work of mathematics teacher education. This shared commitment towards
math content courses will result in articulation between community colleges and
Cal Poly Pomona. The broadest impact will be to increase the number of diverse
and highly qualified teachers, specifically in math. The future teachers
prepared in this region of California frequently go on to teach in historically
underserved districts in Southern California. With increased entry points and
more alignment in instruction, this work contributes to expanding the teacher
pathway through training and preparing more qualified elementary
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main goals for this project. The
first goal is to develop and implement professional development designed to
strengthen the teaching of a first mathematics content course for future
elementary teachers at three community colleges and one university. These
institutions are Mt. San Antonio College, Chaffey College, Riverside City
College, and Cal Poly Pomona. The second goal is to foster a network of support
consisting of colleagues within and outside participants’ institutions.
Participants will engage in a sustained program that includes: 1) a one-week
summer institute during Summer 2023 that provides intensive training of
mathematical topics and pedagogical practices in the first math content course
for elementary teachers, 2) a structured professional learning community to meet
regularly during the academic year, and 3) a one-week follow-up institute that
provides an opportunity for the community to further develop knowledge of course
content and pedagogical practices. Evaluative data will include pre- and post-
surveys as well as recordings of participants’ classroom teaching. Assessment
will investigate perceived changes in mathematical knowledge, pedagogical
practices, and sense of community support for teaching math content courses for
elementary teachers. Additionally, lesson recordings will be used to understand
participants’ pedagogical practices and changes over the duration of the
project. Results from this study will be shared at conferences focused on the
teaching of mathematics, two-year colleges, or both, such as the American
Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges conference. Dissemination will
support mathematics educators in better understanding professional development
of MTEs and will also show how building a community across institutions may
impact enrollment of students in degrees that lead to elementary school
teaching. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.