* 2215307
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry System
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Durham, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 383,538.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Missouri State University is
acquiring a liquid chromatography mass spectrometer (LC/MS) to support the
research of Professor Richard Biagioni and colleagues Laszlo Kovacs, Cyren Rico,
Natasha DeVore, and Paul Durham. This instrument facilitates research in the
areas of analytical chemistry, biochemistry, environmental chemistry, and
biology. Mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions
and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection
and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as
provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions. Students gain hands-on
experience with the instrument in their research and learning in diverse fields
including analytical chemistry, biochemistry, environmental chemistry, and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the LC/MS is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially of benefit to the scientific
community in areas such as animal and plant metabolism; disease and treatments;
and studies relevant to agriculture. The instrument enables research focused on
the metabolomics of plants exposed to pollutants, the analysis of flavonoids in
grapes as a function of rootstock, the effects of grape seed extracts on
trigeminal pain signaling, and dietary supplements as prebiotics to suppress
migraine and TMD pain. It also assists in the study of metabolites related to
orphan human CYP4X1and canine cytochrome P450, in elucidating the molecular
basis of alpha-synuclein fibrillation and other amyloid proteins, and in the
development of peptide- and peptidomimetic-based therapeutics that capture and
neutralize melittin and histones. Other investigations include quantifying the
presence of modified DNA bases that lead directly to deleterious effects within
the cell, metalloporphyrins that contain lanthanide metal centers as novel
ionophores, ultraviolet light exposure in calcium regulation of a benthic
reptile, and the activity and reproductive patterns of the critically endangered
Central American River Turtle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.