* 2216137
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI Tandem Mass Spectrometer (MALDI MS) as an analytical tool to support multidisciplinary research at University of South Carolina
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Linda Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 470,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Qian Wang and colleagues Linda
Shimizu, Johannes Stratmann, Michael Walla, Chang Liu from the University of
South Carolina - Columbia, are acquiring a matrix-assisted laser desorption /
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-MS) equipped with a
photodiode array. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal
for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates,
synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized species) with a detection mode
that offers an excellent balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide
range of samples. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
university and within the regional. The instrument broadens participation by
giving hands-on access to a diverse student population. The instrument is also
used in outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies
correlating molecular structure, orientation and dynamics. Researchers use the
MALDI-TOF-MS to study analysis of bioconjugation products of proteins and
protein-based nanoparticles, supramolecular assemblies, nanoreactors and
conjugated polymers, imaging of intracellular algal toxins, protein &amp; DNA
characterization, electronics and photophysics of metal-organic hybrids, organic
ligand analysis , analysis of boronic acid modified peptides, molecular weight
analysis of functional polymers, characterization of peptides and small proteins
from microbes, study of plant-pathogen interactions, biosensors and biomarkers
for clinical diagnosis, cell and tissue targeted drug delivery, study the
protein interactions, imaging of vascular structures and tissue scaffolds,
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics studies, imaging of vascular structures,
imaging of vascular structures, analysis biodegradable polymers, dendrimer based
biomaterials for tissue engineering applications, analysis of ligands for
organometallic synthesis, analysis of insoluble organic
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.