* 2216023
* Exploring Students’ Data Science Learning and Participation through Engagement with Authentic, Messy Data at DataFest
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jessica Karch, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,981.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by supporting the development
of undergraduate students’ data literacy skills and by promoting the inclusion
of historically marginalized students in data science. It will do so by studying
DataFest, a rapidly growing national co-curricular data competition with over
2000 participants from over 100 institutions annually. DataFest is an
opportunity for students to work collaboratively with authentic datasets over
two intense days. As technology and computing power continue to rapidly advance,
it is critical to ensure undergraduate students have the skills to work with and
make sense of large, messy datasets. This project aims to develop a deeper and
more fundamental understanding of how students work with and think about these
types of data, and how they work together to bring their other expertise to bear
in investigating these types of datasets. It is also crucial to ensure that
these skills are developed equitably. Although the traditional competitive
hackathon model has been found to be exclusionary to marginalized students,
there are several aspects of the DataFest design that may better foster
inclusion, such as more opportunities for collaboration and socially relevant
tasks. Thus, this project will also seek to understand who currently does and
does not participate in DataFest and why. This will be done to understand how
DataFest can be leveraged as an opportunity to make data science more
accessible, engaging, and welcoming to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of
this project includes collecting data from multiple DataFest sites in order to
(1) better understand how undergraduate students navigate big, messy, authentic
data and, in particular, how they draw on interdisciplinary resources in doing
so; and (2) examine who participates in DataFest and why, in order to explore
how DataFest can potentially be a vehicle for broadening participation both in
data science as a discipline and in fostering the development of data literacy
for students across disciplines. The investigators will use mixed-methods and
multimodal data streams that include surveys, interviews with DataFest teams,
focus groups with site organizers, close observations and video recordings of
teams working, and video recordings of final presentations. This project will
develop (1) rich, detailed descriptions of (a) ways in which teams draw on
interdisciplinary reasoning in the context of DataFest, (b) phases of the Data
Investigation Process that benefit from interdisciplinary thinking, and (c)
challenges of messy, authentic data that provide entry points for
interdisciplinary thinking to become woven into the solution. This project will
also develop (2) a survey instrument that can begin to assess openness to
interdisciplinary thinking; and (3) initial insights into broadening
participation in STEM through co-curricular events like DataFest. Findings will
be disseminated to participating sites, the larger DataFest community, as well
as to the broader field of STEM and data science education. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.