* 2216253
* MRI: Acquisition of a cathodoluminescence (CL) detector for nanoscale defect and impurity analysis in a shared-user facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Rosario Gerhardt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 184,466.00

Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) is a member of the NSF-supported
Southeastern Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC), an initiative for
invigorating advances in nanotechnology. The designed-for-nanoscale research-
grade cathodoluminescence detector is installed in a Georgia Tech shared-user
analytical facility accessible to academic researchers, small and large
companies, and NSF-supported training activities for educators and the public.
Underserved minority, female, and assistant professors rely on this instrument,
to further their advancements in nanotechnology. Researchers external to Georgia
Tech employing the detector include those at Clark Atlanta University, a
historically black university, and members of the University System of Georgia,
namely Kennesaw State University, University of Georgia and nearby Georgia State
University, a minority-serving institution. Other institutions within the state
of Georgia access the detector through the scientific instrument-sharing project
called the Georgia Research Alliance Core Exchange. The research projects,
academic courses, training, and outreach exercises that tie in this sensitive
detector provide opportunities for female and minority students to master
technical skills. The number of students exposed to the techniques through
academic instruction alone is well over 100 per year. The principal investigator
leading the training activities has over 30 yearsâ€™ experience with hands-on
training of students and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cathodoluminescence
(CL) occurs when natural and synthetic semiconducting materials emit light
(luminescence) during high energy electron bombardment. The intensity and
wavelength of the emitted light can be used to measure the physical structure,
chemical composition, and nature of defects in a semiconducting material. When a
CL detector is coupled to an electron microscope, measurements are possible down
to the nanometer (10^(-9) m) scale. This novel approach is useful for a wide
range of scientific and engineering applications, including: 1. determining the
optical properties and defect structure of wide-bandgap semiconductors (e.g.
GaN) for improving semiconductor fabrication and properties; 2. optimizing
luminescence properties of ceramic polycrystalline materials (e.g. SiC) for
miniaturizing electronic devices; 3. measuring the effects of radiation on
extraterrestrial materials for the purpose of planning future space exploration,
and 4. studying the structure and composition of natural materials for
predicting the terrestrial occurrence of economically critical mineral
resources, and refining climate and tectonic models of
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.