* 2216799
* US Participation at the Twenty-sixth International Domain Decomposition Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jonathan Siegel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Since 1987, the International Conferences of Domain Decomposition Methods (DDM)
have been held in 15 countries throughout Asia, Europe and North America. The
27th edition of this prestigious conference will be held at the Czech Technical
University in Prague, Czech Republic, on July 25-29, 2022. The primary topic of
the conference concerns large scale scientific computing problems, which are an
important and very general interdisciplinary research field and plays a crucial
role in many application areas, for example weather forecast, seismic
predictions, fluid simulations, material industry, oil field exploration,
medical imaging, among others. This project will enable US based junior
researchers to travel to the conference, network, and present their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conference of Domain
Decomposition Methods is the only regularly occurring international forum
dedicated to interdisciplinary technical interactions between theoreticians and
practitioners working in the development, analysis, software implementation, and
application of domain decomposition methods, which are important in scientific
computing. The complexity and size of such problems often lead to very large
systems, where massive computing resources and special computational approaches
must be employed to obtain approximate solutions. As we approach the dawn of
exascale computing, scalable techniques such as DDM are vital tools for solving
complex problems that would otherwise be intractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.