* 2216500
* Antiracist Writing Across the Curriculum in STEM at a Developing Polytechnic Hispanic-serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Elizabeth Eschenbach, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 98,158.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving university-level
STEM instruction through antiracist pedagogical approaches for writing
instruction and assessment. The project, based at Cal Poly Humboldt, a Hispanic-
Serving Institution, will provide professional development opportunities to STEM
instructors in antiracist approaches to teaching and assessment of writing.
Twelve School of Engineering instructors will participate in a faculty learning
community over the one-year project period, and approximately 100 STEM faculty
will participate in a writing workshop series. Antiracist approaches to writing
instruction in this project are defined as inclusive frameworks for language and
writing development, antiracist writing assessment theories, and pedagogies that
sustain students’ cultural and linguistic knowledge. This project will support
the teaching and assessment of writing in STEM for a racially and linguistically
diverse student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many inclusive
pedagogical practices in the teaching of STEM have gained momentum over the
previous decade, antiracist writing theories and pedagogies have remained
largely absent in STEM instructional designs. This early-stage project will
develop, support and measure STEM instructor understanding and application of
antiracist approaches to writing pedagogy and assessment in STEM disciplines.
The one-year project activities include a twelve-week faculty learning community
(FLC) for instructors in the School of Engineering and a six week Writing
Workshop series available to all STEM faculty at Cal Poly Humboldt. The FLC will
allow School of Engineering faculty to engage in sustained study, collaborative
discussion, and applications of theories that inform antiracist, culturally
sustaining frameworks for writing instruction. The Writing Workshop Series will
present actionable, straightforward models for antiracist, equity-minded writing
assignment and assessment designs that can be immediately implemented. The
project will use instructor-facing rubrics and survey instruments to study,
apply, and test the effectiveness of the professional development design in
regard to antiracist instructional transformation. The project’s evaluative
tools are designed to allow the project team to study instructor and
instructional design changes over the project period in response to the
professional development content and goals. Measurement will primarily examine
the types and degree of instructional changes (practices and beliefs) for FLC
and Workshop participants over the one-year period of the project. Across the
California State University system and the national network of post-secondary
Hispanic-Serving Institutions, the project has potential to help to spearhead
knowledge about the impact of professional development in antiracist writing
instruction for STEM faculty and specific to STEM instruction, for which there
is no known existing models or research. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.