* 2216461
* RaMP - Understanding and Preserving Tropical BioDiversity on a Changing Planet
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* William McMillan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,992,828.00

RaMP-UP Tropical BioDiversity is an ambitious, multi-level mentoring and
training program formed through a partnership between the Global Sustainability
Scholars Program (GSS) and the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) in
Panamá. The program identifies and supports young scholars with a passion for
sustaining a biodiverse planet and connects them to cutting-edge, integrative
research opportunities focused on the response of tropical biodiversity to
global change. RaMP-UP Tropical BioDiversity is built upon the need to build a
more diverse community of scholars with varying perspectives to help solve
challenges such as land use change, biodiversity loss, and climate change. The
program focuses on the need to be proactive in identifying and supporting
talented individuals from traditionally underrepresented groups, the opportunity
for broadening participation through training in global change research and
improving mentoring practices across research communities, and the benefits of
continued professional development in our scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The earth’s landscapes and seascapes are undergoing a
transformation at an unprecedented rate, threatening biodiversity and the
maintenance of ecosystem services. These concerns are especially pressing in the
tropics, where 80% of the world's biodiversity is found, where most humans live,
and where current models predict the greatest climate induced environmental
change. Our ability to understand, predict, and manage how organisms,
communities, and ecosystems respond to environmental changes will determine the
sustainability of diversity on our planet. RaMP-UP Tropical BioDiversity seeks
to build a transformative training program for rising biologists interested in
research focused on how tropical organisms, communities, and ecosystems respond
to environmental change. This program recruits and supports a diverse national
network of postbaccalaureate that reflect perspectives and experiences of the
communities disproportionately affected by global change impacts and under-
represented in science and policy making. The program connects three, year-long,
cohort-based research experiences. Each year, the RaMP-UP program will
matriculate 12 Fellows to join tropical biodiversity research programs at STRI.
Trainings and research projects will be conducted within state-of-the-art field
and lab facilities embedded throughout Panama’s diverse tropical landscapes and
seascapes. RaMP-UP Tropical BioDiversity will connect STRI senior scientists,
postdocs and graduate students with Fellows. Fellows will engage with the GSS
network of mentors, alumni and supportive programming. STRI mentors will form a
community of practice around mentoring, and document how their mentoring changed
as a function of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.