* 2216561
* BPC-AE: Scaling and Sustaining Gender Diversity in Postsecondary Computing using NCWIT's Systemic Change Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Teresa Hogan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,410,472.00

The University of Colorado extends the The National Center for Women &amp;
Information Technology (NCWIT) Alliance. The systematic social and structural
disadvantages to women in computing, at all identity intersections and levels of
pathways to careers, is deeply concerning both from the viewpoint of equity and
the nation's need for a highly qualified scientific workforce and improved
innovation. While the nation has seen some improvement over the past two
decades, underrepresentation of women continues, both in terms of numbers and of
influence. NCWIT seeks to ensure that women have nontrivial influence in
computing because technical products are better, people are better served, and
computing research is relevant to more people. Women’s low participation in
computing is rooted in inequitable societal structures and everyday social
interaction, not in women. NCWIT change approaches interrupt the reproduction of
these inequities at the level of social systems, altering policy, everyday
practices and decision making, beliefs, and norms to sustain change. Building
inclusive cultures in computing departments will increase diversity of thought
and advance the computing discipline, a field integral to all other STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCWIT unites over 1500 member organizations across the
computing ecosystem to ensure the perspectives and contributions of those who
identify as women—at the intersections of gender identity, race, ethnicity,
class, age, sexual orientation, and ability status—are meaningfully represented
at all levels of computing. NCWIT guides its members—including postsecondary
institutions, a lynchpin in the ecosystem—in understanding, implementing, and
institutionalizing research-based practices and strategies that produce systemic
change. NCWIT helps organizations realize systemic change by providing
resources, tools, guidance, and direct support to change leaders. In this
project, NCWIT proposes to accelerate department-level culture change at all
levels of postsecondary computing through several inter-connected activities: 1)
Growth, diversification, and engagement of its Academic Alliance so more
postsecondary computing programs have the knowledge, awareness, and motivation
to increase participation of women of different backgrounds and educational
levels in colleges and universities; 2) Further development and implementation
of NCWIT’s unique, research-based systemic change (Tech Inclusion Journey)
platform to enable more postsecondary undergraduate programs to efficiently
self-assess and develop srategic solutions to increase representation of women
in their programs; 3) creation and deployment of Learning Circles peer cohorts
and a supporting community of practice model to guide academic change leaders in
building inclusive cultures; 4) Extension of NCWIT’s freely available resource
collection to include more actionable resources on inclusive culture
construction, systemic change, and intersectionality; and integration of NCWIT’s
talent pipeline programs and the resources of external BPC and other partner
initiatives; and 5) Advancement of public awareness and support for increasing
women's participation in computing through existing and new communication
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.