* 2216612
* RESEARCH-PGR: Dissecting the dynamic evolution of paralogs in shaping trait variation across the Solanum Pan-Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Amy Frary, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,172,645.00

The growing population and climate extremes are threatening food security.
Agriculture is largely based on a few major crops, and revolutionary
technologies in genome sequencing and CRISPR genome engineering are accelerating
their improvement. These technologies can also improve “orphan” crops, which are
not widely cultivated or studied but have the potential to increase the
diversity and resilience of food production. Orphan crops are related to major
crops, allowing translation of knowledge between them. However, orphan crops
lack research tools, and an even greater challenge is determining whether
specific genetic mutations that benefitted major crops can be engineered to
improve traits similarly in orphan crops. This is because gene sequence and
function change as species evolve, especially among genes that become
duplicated, which is common in plants. This project will take advantage of the
nightshade family – a source of many major and orphan crops, such as eggplant,
pepino, and tomato – to study how duplicated genes evolve and affect
agricultural traits in related species. Combining genome sequencing and CRISPR
will reveal sequence diversity among thousands of duplicated genes and enable
improved predictability in engineering genes and traits across species. This
project will train young scientists with a focus on diversity and inclusion, as
well as promote public understanding of genome engineering in plant biology
through a community science program on orphan crops. Finally, new curricula and
research opportunities for undergraduate students at a small liberal arts
college will broaden participation and training of underrepresented groups in
the plant sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit advances in
large-scale reference genome sequencing, gene co-expression analyses, and CRISPR
genome editing to dissect how paralog diversification impacts species-specific
phenotypes in a genus of both fundamental and applied importance. Fifty Solanum
species, including 16 orphan crops, will be sequenced to establish a Solanum
Pan-Genome with telomere-to-telomere reference assemblies, providing a
foundation for genus-wide comparative genomics and functional genetics.
Computational approaches based on genomics data will be developed for precise
assembly and comparison of complex genomes, and identification and
classification of paralogs and their relationships based on their variants and
expression patterns. Simultaneously, transformation protocols and genome editing
will be developed and deployed for an array of Solanum to test how paralogs
impact genotype-to-phenotype relationships within and between species. By
focusing on major domestication gene families and the adaptation and
productivity traits they control, this synergistic work will provide both a new
understanding of paralog diversification in evolution and a more robust
translation of agriculturally relevant genotype-to-phenotype relationships to
orphan crops. Beyond a valuable community resource of Solanum reference genomes,
expression data, and CRISPR lines for plant researchers and breeders, this
multidisciplinary project will result in new tools, resources, and principles
that will enable the study and engineering of other taxa and traits of
significance to both plant biology and crop
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.