* 2216308
* Improving the Quality of Learning among Physics Students through a Synergistic Implementation of a Team-Based Learning Approach in a Hispanic-Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Edgar Corpuz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,875.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in undergraduate physics using Team-based Learning (TBL) in multiple sections of
lower division and advanced level physics classes. The project will address
common gaps in students’ conceptual and problem-solving skills using interactive
delivery of content that is essential for understanding the fundamental laws of
nature. In TBL classes, students engage in learning through pre-class
preparation, readiness assurance testing (with immediate feedback), and concept
application via group-problem solving. Carefully formed permanent teams of
students work on a task that has direct application of physics concepts. By
implementing TBL, passive instruction and learning will be replaced with
interactive teaching and active engagement learning techniques, which have been
shown to be effective in promoting deeper learning and in enhancing social and
collaborative skills essential in today’s STEM workforce. By improving students’
understanding and enhancing development of core competencies (such as critical
thinking, empirical and quantitative skills, written and oral communication,
teamwork skills) the project will benefit the local Hispanic community and serve
the national interest of improving quality of education in underrepresented
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: (1)
improve the quality of learning of physics students through a concerted effort
in implementing Team-Based Learning (TBL); (2) investigate how TBL can be
utilized for providing a culturally responsive teaching environment; (3) study
the issues associated with the implementation of TBL teaching approach; and (4)
create a supportive mechanism for sustaining TBL implementation in multiple
physics courses. Physics faculty members will be trained and supported to
implement team-based learning in their courses. Working in teams, instructors
will redesign their physics courses by developing TBL curriculum materials that
engage students while guided by the principles of Backward Design. Lessons
learned from this project could provide a model for other departments or
institutions for a collaborative approach to implementing active learning in
their STEM courses. In addition, the project will provide substantial
professional development opportunities for faculty, both locally and nationally,
via workshops and hands-on training in the development and implementation of
specially designed instructional materials for TBL classes. The project is also
expected to generate valuable data on TBL implementation issues, on
sustainability of active learning environment in physics classes, and on
comparisons of TBL with other active learning techniques. Overall, the project
will serve the local community and the national interests of improving STEM
education both at the students’ and instructors’ level. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program,
which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education,
and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students
pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.