* 2216473
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next-Generation XPS for Research and Education in the Southwest Borderlands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jorge Gardea-Torresdey, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Texas at El Paso
is acquiring an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) to support the research
of Professor XiuJun Li and colleagues Carlos Cabrera Martinez, Jorge Gardea-
Torresdey, Hongmei Luo, and Sreeprasad Sreenivasan. This instrument facilitates
research in the areas of chemistry, materials science, and physics. XPS spectra
are produced by irradiating a sample with X-rays that have sufficient energy to
eject electrons. Next, the kinetic energy of the electrons is measured and
subsequently related to their binding energy. These data can be related to the
chemical elements in the sample and effects from their bonding environment. This
instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students
at all levels in many departments and broadly impacts research in the fields of
catalysis, sensing, energy materials, magnetic materials, and additive
manufacturing. The instrument is leveraged in many courses including a new
course focused on surface analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award for the XPS
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels to explore advanced
surface chemistry, new properties of advanced materials and sensors through
systematic characterization of elemental, chemical, and structural information
by this instrument, thus meeting the research and educational needs of the
southwest region. Research focuses on investigations relevant to catalysis,
electrocatalysts for water electrolysis, photovoltaic applications. It also
assists in studies involving nanostructure catalysts relevant to fuel cells and
investigations of novel energy storage materials. Other studies focus on
understanding structural and compositional impacts on doped graphene quantum
dots for electrocatalysis, sensing and quantum science; nanoparticle transport
in plant structures; 3D printed non-oxide ceramics; and magnetic nanoparticles
for nanoelectronics, data storage devices and quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.