* 2216501
* Developing Change Leaders in Advanced Teaching and Learning in Higher Education: A Change Leadership Development Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ann Austin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,984.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing future faculty to
lead change efforts toward sustained improvement in undergraduate STEM teaching
and learning. The Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning
(CIRTL) Change Leadership Development Program (CLDP) will strengthen
undergraduate STEM education by preparing graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars (GS/PS) to be future change leaders in advancing inclusive evidence-
based teaching (EBT). CIRTL, a National Science Foundation Center for Learning
and Teaching in higher education, aims to improve Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning of all students at every college and
university, thereby increasing diversity in STEM fields and improving the STEM
literacy of the nation. To meet this goal, CIRTL’s training through online
workshops, courses, and teaching institutes, prepares GS/PS to use inclusive EBT
approaches as a means for developing a national STEM faculty committed to
implementing and advancing effective teaching practices for diverse students.
While CIRTL graduates enter careers well prepared to support the learning of
diverse students within their own classes and labs, they typically do not have
opportunities to learn about change leadership; defined by the ability to
navigate complex organizational systems, model leadership characteristics to
inspire action in others, and effectively guide the change process. GS/PS will
become change leaders by using strategies to advance inclusive EBT, as they
assume their teaching and research responsibilities. Through participation in
CLDP, trainees will be better prepared to influence their colleagues,
departments, and institutions from both formal and informal leadership roles.
Through both the examples they set in their own practice and their informed
knowledge of how to engage in institutional decision making, culture change, and
policy development, they will be prepared to lead the effort toward lasting
change. In collaboration with 42 graduate universities in the CIRTL network, the
trainees of CLDP will advance education to be more inclusive and evidence-based,
ultimately increasing student engagement, learning and retention in STEM fields
and reducing the equity gaps across the nation’s diverse student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CLDP supports GS/PS in achieving three primary goals:
1) Identifying as a Change Leader, 2) Examining higher education institutions as
complex institutions, as well as analyzing leadership approaches and change
theories and 3) Developing strategies, skills, and abilities appropriate for
serving as a change leader while holding a position as an early-career faculty
member. The CDLP is a two-tiered program that provides an ever-increasing level
of engagement. Through participation in a 10-week online course, Tier I equips
participants with the knowledge and skills to inspire and influence others and
analyze their institution’s structure. Tier II furthers their leadership
development through participation in an online Leadership Institute followed by
an applied leadership project or experience at their home institution. The
program culminates in a virtual Leadership Summit where participants present
their projects and share their experience with their mentors, peers, and the
CIRTL network and national partners. Additional training on specialty topics
offered through CIRTL cross-network programming allows participants to further
their leadership development as they have time and interest. The planning and
piloting of the CLDP will be carried out over a two-year timeline. The project
will (1) develop a needs assessment to inform our learning outcomes for each
domain, (2) develop content and formative assessment for the two tiers of
engagement, (3) pilot all elements of each tier and (4) develop and implement a
research and evaluation plan for the program. Collecting data about leadership
expectations from multiple perspectives, including students, faculty, and
administrators, will inform and guide the program's development and ensure its
long-term sustainability. As our understanding of what makes an effective
leadership development program expands, the results will contribute to the
knowledge and quality of change leaders. This effective development of future
change leaders will become a critical lever for bringing about organizational
change in higher education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.