* 2216394
* CAREER: The Role of Basement Membrane Stiffness in Regulating Kidney Filtration
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Nicholas Ferrell, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 481,588.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate how tissue
stiffness regulates the kidneyâ€™s ability to filter blood. The kidney
continuously purifies the blood to remove toxins and waste while keeping cells
and large proteins in circulation. How the kidney performs this essential
function is not fully understood. The blood and urine are separated by a thin
basement membrane lined with cells. This membrane provides a barrier to the
movement of large molecules into the urine. Leakage of proteins across the
kidney filter is a primary indicator of kidney damage. It is known that the
structural and mechanical properties of the basement membrane are altered in
diseases such as Alport syndrome, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. This
research project will increase understanding of how changes in basement membrane
stiffness affect protein transport across the kidney filter. This will be
accomplished using an integrated experimental approach. The work will combine
combines chemical, enzymatic, and genetic methods to modify basement membrane
stiffness and bioengineered models of the kidney filter. This award will also
promote science and engineering concepts to high school and undergraduate
students through implementation of a near-peer mentoring program and development
of a cell-basement membrane themed curriculum. There will be an emphasis on
engaging socioeconomically disadvantaged and underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this project is to understand
how basement membrane mechanics regulates the molecular selectivity of the
glomerular filtration barrier. This project will investigate the hypothesis that
the mechanical properties of the glomerular basement membrane play a critical
role in regulating permeability through two distinct mechanisms: (1) by altering
compression-dependent transport across basement membranes and (2) through
mechanically mediated effects on glomerular epithelial and endothelial cell
function. The first objective is to determine how alterations in stiffness
regulate the molecular permeability of biologically derived basement membranes.
The second objective will evaluate the effects of basement membrane stiffness on
podocyte and glomerular endothelial cell permeability. The third objective is to
develop a multilayer bioreactor model of the glomerular filter to evaluate the
coordinated role of the basement membrane, podocytes, and endothelial cells in
regulating pressure-dependent molecular permeability. These studies aim to
provide new fundamental understanding of the basic mechanisms of kidney function
and determine how disease-mediated changes in basement membrane stiffness
contribute to development of proteinuria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.