* 2216240
* MRI: Acquisition of Small/Wide-Angle and Non-Ambient X-Ray Diffraction Packages for Research and Education in Energy and Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Zhiyong Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 127,699.00

X-ray diffraction techniques are essential for nondestructive, high-throughput
microstructural analysis of functional materials such as thin films and
nanomaterials to enable material innovations for clean energy production,
pollution abatement, and public health protection. This project aims at
enhancing the capabilities of UMass Lowell’s X-ray diffraction system to serve
the research and development needs of a broad portfolio of on- and off-campus
users in the relevant areas of chemical, physical, engineering, and health
sciences. The system upgrades will leverage historical strengths of UMass Lowell
in plastics, polymer science, nanotechnology, and biomedicine while bringing
unique capabilities to the region. The upgraded X-ray diffractometer will be
made available as a shared instrument within UMass Lowell’s Core Research
Facilities, providing opportunities for internal and external research
collaborations as well as community outreach activities. Direct access to the
equipment by graduate and undergraduate students will facilitate advanced
education and research training. X-ray diffraction techniques and applications
will be incorporated into several graduate and undergraduate courses in the
Colleges of Engineering and Sciences. Furthermore, the instrument will be
integrated into well-established K–12 outreach programs organized by UMass
Lowell’s Core Research Facilities and will be used by students participating in
UMass Lowell’s undergraduate research opportunities, collaborations programs,
and professional co-op programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMass Lowell seeks to
upgrade a state-of-the-art multifunctional X-ray diffraction system to support
interdisciplinary collaborative research in green electronics, environmentally
sustainable polymers, catalytic metallic nanostructures, and reactive minerals
in the aquatic environment, among others, all of which are relevant and timely
topics in energy and environmental sustainability. Discoveries enabled through
this project will facilitate cutting-edge research in the synthesis and
processing of environmentally sustainable materials, generation of clean energy,
and pollution abatement in water and soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.