* 2216701
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The genetic basis of epigenetic variation and environmental response in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,079.00

Genetic changes which influence the regulation of how and when genes are
expressed are a prominent source of heritable differences between individuals.
Individuals differ in their degree of epigenetic marks across the genome, which
are chemical changes that do not impact the DNA sequence but that alter which
genes are turned on or off. This doctoral dissertation research uses a non-human
primate population to investigate the genetic differences responsible for
epigenetic differences between individuals, and to study how an individual’s
social or ecological environment may modify the relationship between genotype
and gene regulation. This research aids our understanding of complex genotype-
phenotype relationships in primates and identifies the genes where genetic
differences may contribute to differential risk or susceptibility following
exposure to adversity. This has potential implications for human populations
facing similar experiences, including psychosocial stressors and natural
disasters. This project trains a female graduate student in STEM and supports
high school and undergraduate research mentoring initiatives for individuals
from groups that are underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene
regulatory change is an important mechanism of primate evolution and regulatory
differences within populations correlate with fitness-relevant traits. Despite
this, the genetic variants responsible for these differences are relatively
unknown. This research tests the hypothesis that sequence variation predicts
individual differences in a well-known epigenetic mark, DNA methylation, in
functional regions of the genome, and that gene-environment interactions (GxE)
are prominent contributors to phenotypic differences at the molecular level. The
project generates whole genome and methylation data from the same individuals to
identify genetic variants associated with methylation differences in the
population, and explores the epigenetic changes associated with individual
social status and hurricane exposure, to identify context-dependent genetic
effects on methylation at environmentally sensitive sites (GxE).&lt;br/&gt;The
research reveals genes whose expression is sensitive to environmental and
genetic changes, and the sources of individual differences in physiological
response to the same environmental stressor. Finally, the project
comprehensively catalogues the factors that best explain differences in DNA
methylation at each site in the genome to determine the relative contribution of
genetic, environmental, and GxE effects to gene regulatory variation. Project
outcomes shed light on the proximate mechanisms driving transcriptional
differences across individuals and environments and generating phenotypic
variation on which selection can act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.