* 2216452
* Developing and Evaluating a Classroom Orchestration Toolkit for Visualization Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Ashish Amresh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a software tool
that will help students to learn data visualization theories and design
principles. The use of data has become an essential part of the modern decision-
making process. It is imperative that students learn how to analyze and reason
about data. Visualization has become an essential method for analyzing and
understanding data. Educators currently lack the tools that allow them to
effectively teach students how to visualize data. The goal of this project is to
develop a software tool, VisSymphony, that will allow instructors to create and
moderate visualization-related classroom activities. To promote active learning,
instructors will be able to provide real-time feedback to students, and the
system will provide immediate feedback on student submissions. The project team
plans to work together with partnering instructors to design the tool and to
collect and analyze data to understand the effectiveness of the tool.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to address two significant issues in
visualization education: (1) The need for software tools that help students
learn visualization design theories and principles, and (2) The lack of
understanding of how classroom orchestration can improve visualization education
and prepare students for the workforce. By evaluating how VisSymphony impacts
the educational experience, the investigators hope to learn about how classroom
orchestration can be operationalized to effectively teach and learn about
visualization. The research team will use a two-cycle coding technique. In the
first cycle of coding, the project team will use an open/initial coding method
and in the second cycle use a pattern coding method. The team will then apply
statistical tests to the coded data to understand how VisSymphony affects the
visualization education experience. VisSymphonyâ€™s development and refinement
will follow a participatory design approach utilizing community feedback to
create a flexible tool for education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.