* 2216108
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Acquisition of a GPU Cluster to Advance the Land Grant Mission at Washington State University Using AI-Driven Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Peter Mills, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

This project will enable Washington State University (WSU) to acquire a high-
performance computing (HPC) cluster called Camas that incorporates state-of-the-
art Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) accelerators. The cluster of GPU-accelerated
computers, with their vastly greater density of small compute cores and matrix
processors, will radically speed up computationally intensive tasks in machine-
learning (ML), artificial intelligence (AI), genomics, and simulation. Through
this speedup, Camas will provide new capabilities for scientific computing in
research areas ranging from computer hardware design using deep learning to
plant genome analysis and climate modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Camas will
enable GPU-accelerated research that focuses on three key scientific and
engineering research pillars. These pillars are software and hardware
development using ML, simulation and analysis of natural systems, and big data
analytics for infrastructure management, planning, and decision making.
Applications that leverage GPU acceleration as well as AI and ML range from
astrophysics and quantum information science, to modeling coupled human-natural
systems and chemically-reactive transport, to decision making that optimizes
demand response in electricity markets. The Camas cluster will strengthen a
broad spectrum of research areas, promote the synergistic transfer of knowledge
across disciplines, and increase collaborative opportunities both within the
University as well as with regional and national partners. Through a breadth of
collaboration that spans three of WSU's major campuses and five different
Colleges, Camas will have broad impact in nucleating AI-driven research efforts
throughout the WSU system as well as fostering training opportunities for
students in AI, ML, and data science. Through partnerships with student-led
groups including the Python and R Working Groups, as well as the Office of
Undergraduate Education, Camas will increase student engagement in research
computing including strategic activities that create a pathway for increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM. The new computational
capabilities and the concomitant development of HPC computational literacy
throughout the research community will further enable additional regional
partnerships and engagement opportunities for both faculty and students. A
project website and repository for Camas that holds links to research artifacts
and details of project activities will be housed at https://hpc.wsu.edu/camas.
The Camas project website will be maintained under the auspices of the
Washington State University Center for Institutional Research
Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.