* 2216356
* MRI: Acquisition of a Purge and Trap Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Compound/Position-Specific Applications in Biogeochemistry and Ecological Studies at TAMU Corpus Christi
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sharon Derrick, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 258,571.00

This award supports the acquisition of a Purge and Trap Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometer (PT-IRMS) at Texas A&amp;M University Corpus Christi (TAMU-CC),
which will enable leading-edge compound-specific isotope analysis (CSIA) of key
organic (e.g., amino acids) and inorganic (e.g., nitrate) materials in one
location. While nitrogen (N) and carbon stable isotope analysis of bulk tissue
and particle samples have been broadly used in a remarkable variety of research
fields such as archeology, astrobiochemistry, ecology, forensic anthropology,
oceanography, and paleo-sciences, the isotopic signatures of single compounds
will reveal more critical information on food web isotope baselines and
biochemical processes during trophic transfer and under different physiological
conditions. Broadly, this acquisition will expand TAMU-CC's basic research
infrastructure and enable collaborative and transformative research among a
diverse group of users at TAMU-CC that addresses pressing questions of
importance to society. This acquisition will make a fundamental contribution to
TAMU-CCâ€™s education goals as a Hispanic Serving Institution and Minority Serving
Institution, by providing graduate and undergraduate students, especially those
from underrepresented groups (e.g., McNair and LSAMP scholars), equal access to
cutting-edge instrumentation and hands-on experience directly transferrable to
STEM careers, which will promote diversity and inclusion in both regional and
national STEM workforces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TAMU-CC will acquire a
customized PT-IRMS with the ability to measure low levels (nanomoles) of nitrous
oxide (N2O) converted from amino acids and inorganic nitrogenous nutrients
(ammonium, nitrate, and nitrite). This instrument will enhance analytical
capabilities at TAMU-CC and allow researchers to investigate 1) food web
structural response to variation in upwelling (Gulf of California), alterations
in hydrological cycles (coastal Texas), and disturbance by environmental
stressors (hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico) caused by climate change and human
activities; 2) nitrogenous nutrient assimilation and amino acid metabolism in
phytoplankton (key players in the biological carbon pump and climate systems)
under different physiological conditions, 3) greenhouse gas N2O production in
Texas coastal wetlands and estuaries experiencing elevated anthropogenic N
loading, which will provide key information to policy-makers regarding N
mitigation in Texas; and 4) nitrogenous nutrient exchange mechanisms within
coral holobionts in response to ocean acidification. A dedicated PT-IRMS will
further allow researchers to develop position-specific isotope analytical
methods for the sidechain-N in polynitrogenous amino acids which may contain
unaltered N isotope baseline information. Advanced forensic identification
methods using CSIA of amino acids will also be developed to help identify
deceased border crossers in South Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.