* 2216454
* Exploring the Impact of POGIL on Student Engagement and Conceptual Understanding
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Patricia Campbell, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,985.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate STEM
education and identifying best practices to increase student engagement.
Numerous studies have shown that evidence-based teaching strategies, such as
Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL), lead to better student
outcomes, from higher grades to increased self-efficacy and sense of belonging.
The research community is only beginning to understand why POGIL has these
effects on students and what aspects of POGIL are most important for maximizing
learning and other outcomes. This project plans to investigate how student
engagement and understanding are affected by instructional approaches, including
interactive lectures (lectures interspersed with student activities) and POGIL.
Engagement is known to be important to student learning, but the nature and
extent of this engagement is not well documented. Both approaches involve
multiple practices, but not enough is known about which practices faculty use
and the resulting impact on student learning. This project hopes to identify how
these practices impact student outcomes, and how faculty can enhance these
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to: (1) Examine similarities
and differences in engagement-related behaviors of students and instructors
during POGIL activities and interactive lectures; (2) Measure the degree of
concurrent validity between classroom observation results and the student and
instructor perceptions of student engagement; and (3) Look for possible
differences in students' understanding of a concept when it is introduced using
a POGIL activity and when it is introduced using an interactive lecture. To
explore the relationship between student engagement and learning, the PIs will
measure the engagement of the same students in different class periods taught by
the same instructor, using either POGIL or interactive lectures. Student
learning when concepts are introduced via POGIL versus interactive lectures will
also be analyzed. Student engagement will be measured by triangulating classroom
observations with student and faculty ratings. Quizzes will be developed and
administered that will measure different kinds of conceptual understanding. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.