* 2216489
* MRI: Acquisition of Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAV) Infrastructure to Support Cooperative Human-Robot Driving and Pedestrian Safety
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Paul Oh, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 393,291.00

This project funds the creation of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV)
Mixed Driving (MixeD) “living laboratory” through the purchase and deployment of
advanced environmental sensors and vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication
equipment. The equipment will augment UNLV’s basic automated vehicle
demonstration platform and equip at least three intersections adjacent to campus
with high-resolution cameras, radars, and lidars and V2X communication for
collaborative vehicle-infrastructure sensing and safety. The equipment will
enable new research in connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs), with emphasis
on artificial intelligence (AI) that can support the transition from human
drivers to fully self-driving cars, and provides a real-world testbed for the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While significant advances have been made in
environmental sensing from a vehicle or infrastructure, much less work has
focused on their cooperation and collaboration. This project will consider how
V2X connectivity can enable sharing of information between vehicles and
infrastructure and how to develop AI algorithms that take advantage of the
strengths of each – e.g., high resolution measurements from a vehicle with the
high availability and behavior diversity observable from infrastructure. The
research will consider i) collaborative vehicle-infrastructure sensing and
control, ii) on-road behavior modeling for better understanding of human actions
for less conservative and more natural CAV operation in mixed traffic
situations, iii) computer vision-based AI algorithm development for continual
adaption, and iv) real-time, continuous characterization of safety at
intersections through trajectory analysis. The MixeD project will promote
collaboration between future automated vehicles and humans and enable safer and
more natural interactions. The research will explicitly consider human behavior
and intentions rather than rules-of-the-road to ensure safety to improve the
safety of CAVs around pedestrians and other vulnerable road users. As a
Minority- and Hispanic-Serving Institution, project will provide UNLV’s diverse
student population with technical skills and unique learning and training
experience in the growing areas of self-driving cars, AI, and computer vision.
Full project details, including publications, datasets, and code, are available
at https://MixeD.sites.unlv.edu. The website will be maintained for at least
five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.