* 2216463
* MRI: Acquisition of a micro-computed tomography scanner for interdisciplinary research at Western Washington University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Casey Saenger, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 534,617.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program award supports the acquisition
of a micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) scanner to support diverse research
and training programs at Western Washington University (WWU). Micro-CT imaging
is an X-ray technique that allows the surfaces and internal structures of
diverse analytes such as rocks, bones, teeth, sediments, composites and wood to
be observed in three dimensions without damage to the sample itself. Acquisition
of the micro-CT scanner will promote the advancement of science by supporting
the research programs of at least 10 WWU faculty spanning 5 departments, as well
as foster new collaborations with regional community and technical colleges.
Because WWU is a predominantly undergraduate institution with a considerable
population of first-generation and/or students of color, the scanner will also
support education and diversity through student-led research, integration into
existing courses and the development of a new micro-CT course that will train
the next generation of instrumentalists. The addition of a micro-CT system will
complement existing instrumentation on campus and allow WWU to continue to serve
as a regional hub for research and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The micro-CT
instrument will complement existing scanning electron and Raman microscopes on
campus in support of a micro-imaging core facility. Although it will be used by
many researchers at WWU and neighboring community and technical colleges, it
will receive particularly heavy use in the fields of geosciences, anthropology
and materials science to explore questions ranging from volcano eruption
dynamics to the evolution of primates to recycling thermoset polymers to how
ocean acidification affects economically-important fisheries. The absence of
access to a micro-CT scanner has limited research productivity in many of these
fields so acquisition of this instrument will immediately advance existing
research projects and create a viable path toward exploring new research ideas.
The micro-CT scanner will be maintained and operated by a trained, Ph.D.-level
technical staff within a university-wide organization that has a long track
record of operating, managing and maintaining major instrumentation in support
of research and education across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.