* 2216178
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Education with Regional Impact
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nathaniel Rosi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 308,651.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Pittsburgh is
acquiring a dual-source single crystal diffractometer equipped with Cu and Mo
X-ray sources, an enhanced detector, and a cryogenic device to support the
research of Professor Raul Hernandez Sanchez and colleague Nathaniel Rosi. In
general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the
full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a
molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact
many areas, including organic, inorganic, organometallic chemistry, catalysis,
and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students in
chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument is
used to study and characterize a number of different chemical species and
materials. The research enabled includes the development of conjugated tubular
species, macrocyclic furan based structures, and conjugated ladder-type
heteroacene compounds, the elucidation of peptide and protein structures, the
analysis of Cu complexes bearing bidentate and tridentate scaffolds, the design
and synthesis of multicomponent MOFs for H2/CO2 separations, the engineering of
novel metal clusters capable of performing challenging chemical transformations,
harnessing surface core-ligand interfaces in nanocluster catalysts, precisely
determine the structure of intermediates and products relevant in the activation
of small molecules at polynuclear clusters of Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu,
organic molecule development: from fundamental
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.