* 2216310
* MRI: Acquisition of Broadband and All-in-One Optical Workstation for Micro-scale Vibration and Topography Measurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2024
* Gunes Uzer, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 10/31/2024
* USD 479,500.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
all-in-one optical measurement workstation instrument with micro-scale vibration
and topography characterization capabilities. The instrument will enhance
research and education capacity in the mountain west and enhance collaborations
at regional industries and universities. It will catalyze interdisciplinary and
fundamental research involving additive manufacturing, materials science,
biomedical engineering, and quantum physics. Integrated into course projects and
research lab internships, the instrument will enhance the science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) diversity and retention at Boise State University.
The instrument will also be used for outreach activities with K-12 students and
educators in the state of Idaho, to enhance STEM recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument consists of a laser doppler vibrometer
enabling sub-picometer magnitude vibration measurement up to 2.4 GHz and a white
light interferometer enabling three-dimensional surface topography down to sub-
nanometer resolution. The laser doppler vibrometer can visualize acoustic wave
propagation in various materials, including alloys, ceramics, soft tissues,
particulate composites, and printed porous films. Transformative research on
these materials will potentially lead to advanced ultrasonic sensors for nuclear
reactors, innovative bioscaffolds for tissue engineering, efficient embedded
neuro stimulators, and novel quantum information delivery methods. The white
light interferometer can detect microstructure morphing in real-time. Along with
customized electromagnets or heat sources, the instrument will provide
unprecedented material properties of smart materials, such as magnetostrictive
materials and magnetic shape memory alloys. The fundamental understanding of
these multiphysics and multifunctional materials will result in new devices for
structural health monitoring or drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.