* 2216487
* MRI: Development of an ultra-resolution ARPES facility.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 975,000.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award plans to develop the world’s lowest temperature and highest energy-
resolution angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) instrument,
bringing almost an order of magnitude improvement in resolution compared to the
best presently available in the United States. ARPES is the most direct probe of
the quantum behavior of electrons in a solid and is thus indispensable for
modern-day physics, chemistry, and materials science research. Nevertheless, it
remains limited by the energy and temperature scales of present-day
technologies, and the surface sensitivity means that many materials can’t be
measured in their uncontaminated state. This facility will resolve these
deficiencies by being the first instrument in the United States to bring ARPES
to the natural energy and temperature scales of most modern quantum materials as
well as by connecting to remote growth facilities via an airplane-transportable
customized vacuum suitcase. This instrument will thus allow for a tremendous
acceleration in progress towards the community-identified Grand Challenge of
measuring, controlling, designing, and synthesizing materials at the fundamental
level of the electrons so as to develop the next generation of materials for
quantum technologies and energy efficiency. It will give United States
researchers a critical new toolset to take the lead in these critical fields of
physics, chemistry, and materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project plans to develop the world’s lowest temperature and highest resolution
ARPES instrument. ARPES is the most direct probe of the quantum behavior of
electrons in a solid and is thus indispensable for modern-day physics,
chemistry, and materials science research. Nevertheless, it remains limited by
the energy and temperature scales of present-day technologies, and the surface
sensitivity means that many materials can’t be measured in their uncontaminated
state. This facility will resolve these deficiencies by being the first
instrument in the US to bring ARPES to the natural energy (sub-meV) and
temperature (sub-Kelvin) scales of most modern quantum materials as well as by
connecting to remote growth facilities via an airplane-transportable customized
vacuum suitcase utilizing standard flag-style sample holders. The instrument
will make use of brand-new cryogenic technology developed in Colorado as well as
an existing ultra-resolution laser source that will be utilized for the first
few years. The plan is for the instrument to eventually move to a beamline at
the Advanced Light Source Berkeley, which is being upgraded with a new ultra-
resolution monochromator that will be matched to this ARPES instrument. This
instrument will thus allow for a tremendous acceleration in progress towards the
community-identified Grand Challenge of measuring, controlling, designing, and
synthesizing materials at the fundamental level of the electrons so as to
develop the next generation of materials for quantum technologies and energy
efficiency. It will give United States researchers a critical new toolset to
take the lead in these critical fields of physics, chemistry, and materials
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.