* 2216313
* MRI: Acquisition of Q-TOF LCMS for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at Christopher Newport University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Lisa Webb, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 305,832.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Ronald Quinlan from Christopher
Newport University and colleagues Lisa Webb, Todd Gruber, and Christopher
Meighan are acquiring a liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometer,
quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF LCMS). The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as agriculture
and food chemistry, neurobiology, developmental biology, and biochemistry. In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components are heated and flow
into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized. The ions' masses are measured
very accurately. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of
molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass
spectrometer. The various ionization sources provide added flexibility with
regard to the types of samples that are analyzed. The acquisition strengthens
the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in research and
research training using this modern analytical technique. Particularly, the
instrument would enhance research experiences for under-represented and first-
generation college students. The instrument would be incorporated into four
teaching laboratories impacting a significant number of individuals including
those from under-represented groups. The instrument gives students experience
using vital instrumentation that they carry with them into their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this mass spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies
that include metabolomic analysis of bacteria-antibiotic interactions to improve
antibiotics, metabolomic analysis of plastic-degrading bacteria to allow pathway
engineering to convert waste plastic to valuable compounds, analysis of the
effect on hormones of sub-lethal concentrations of nanoparticles in model
organisms, quantitative profiling of membrane lipids to better understand
cellular compartments, and many additional
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.