* 2216311
* MRI: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous High-Performance Computing Cluster Driven by Computational and Data-Intensive Multidisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anne Fennell, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2025
* USD 978,708.00

South Dakota State University (SDSU) will enable regional research and
educational programs with high computational and data-intensive needs through
the acquisition and deployment of an advanced computing instrument. The goals of
this initiative will accelerate scientific discovery, promote active engagement,
advance collaboration within the research community, and provide a resource
within the region to advance and elevate multi-disciplinary STEM education and
research. A breadth of science and engineering fields will benefit from this
acquisition, including climatology, satellite image processing, national food
safety and security, genomics of bacterial infections, antibiotic resistance,
and power grid security. This project will also be a focal point for supporting
the educational and research needs of underserved communities throughout the
region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team within SDSU Research Cyberinfrastructure
(RCi) will acquire and implement a robust advanced computing instrument that
accomplishes the following key project objectives: (1) Widening and boosting
computing core capabilities within research pipelines that harness the power of
vector and parallel computing; (2) Advancing the usability of CPU and Graphics
Processing Unit (GPU) resources using Open OnDemand and Science Gateways; and
(3) Amplifying the accessibility of highly cost-effective computational tools to
a larger user base. The system design uses a next-generation computer
architecture with hardware resources specifically designed for boosting
computing capacity. The instrument will offer the flexibility of scaling
research applications, allowing the user to self-provision resources and
facilitating ease of access for new researchers. This will be achieved using
off-the-shelf open-source software resources and pre-built scientific workflows.
This instrument will serve as a computational core for RCi at SDSU, serving
researchers, collaborators, staff, and students engaged in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.