* 2216956
* RUI: Molecular Mechanisms of Short-Range Electron Transfer in Metalloproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Debra Mohler, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2027
* USD 645,457.00

This project is focused on understanding the molecular level mechanism of short-
range electron transfer in proteins. All living systems obtain energy through
electrons occupying high energy states, either through respiratory chains (food)
or from light (photosynthesis). Electron transfer is a vital function of the
many proteins responsible for storage, transfer, and transformation of this
energy. While there is some understanding of the factors controlling charge
transfer over longer distances, little is known about biological electron
transfer at distances shorter than 1 nm. Filling this gap will advance our
knowledge of the fundamental steps in bioenergetics. By developing computational
and experimental models to predict and explain the key parameters of these
reactions, a cohesive understanding of short-range biological electron transfer
will be obtained. In addition, the project will provide research training for
undergraduates and underrepresented minority students and will also support
innovations in the science curriculum. This project will also facilitate
curricular updates in several upper-level laboratory courses at James Madison
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PpcA, a 3 heme c-type cytochrome from
Geobacter sulfurreducens, genetically modified and covalently labeled with
several photosensitizers will be used as a model system to study charge transfer
reactions. The overarching hypothesis is that tight structural coupling and
effective dissipation of excess heat energy are essential to achieve ultrafast
charge transfer rates. The kinetics of the reactions will be studied with time-
resolved fluorescence and absorbance spectroscopies at room and cryogenic
temperatures. The structural integrity of protein-photosensitizer complexes will
be monitored with SAXS and CD spectroscopy. Extensive all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations will be performed to predict structures and to evaluate
structural dynamics. These predictions will be tested experimentally with
several structural techniques including nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
and x-ray crystallography. The collected kinetic data will be analyzed in the
context of molecular structures and will be used to test and revise currently
available computational and theoretical approaches for the prediction of
electron transfer rates and pathways. This project is funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.