* 2216855
* RAPID: Mapping drought stress and hydraulic refugia with repeat hyperspectral data
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Leander Anderegg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2024
* USD 188,177.00

Increasing droughts accompanied by heat waves that are associated with climate
change are harming ecosystems and economies worldwide. This project takes
advantage of a unique time series of remote sensing images being produced by
NASA and an ongoing drought in southern California to develop new techniques for
mapping and monitoring plant drought stress. Detailed measurements of plant
drought stress, plant water use and plant water source (e.g. surface soil or
groundwater) will be linked to remotely sensed measurements of plant water
content to develop methods for remotely monitoring drought stress. These methods
will be used to identify areas of drought resilience and drought vulnerability
on the landscape during the ongoing drought, and will facilitate global drought
monitoring for agriculture, forestry and water resource management using
satellites being launched in the near future. This project will also train
graduate and undergraduate students and provide the foundation for new field-
based undergraduate courses at the University of California, Santa
Barbara.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand spatial
variation in drought stress with unprecedented spatial and temporal granularity.
The project takes advantage of unique repeat airborne hyperspectral imagery from
the NASA Surface Biology and Geology High Frequency Timeseries Pathfinder
mission March-June of 2022 that coincides with an ongoing prolonged drought in
southern California. The proposed research framework will tackle some of the key
outstanding questions surrounding drought-induced tree mortality, subsurface
water access, and variations in stress resistance within a species. Detailed
physiological measurements on two species of oak trees across topographic and
edaphic gradients in water availability will be linked to remotely sensed
metrics of plant canopy water content and leaf water content to follow the
development of drought stress in thousands of trees across the landscape during
the spring dry down. This will increase understanding of how water stress
develops spatially and identify landscape features such as topo-edaphically
vulnerable sites and hydraulic refugia that likely have access to rock water.
Rigorously linking ground-based measurements of physiological stress to
hyperspectral airborne imagery at high temporal resolutions will provide the
tools to understand topographic, geomorphic, and ecohydrological controls on
plant drought stress, and develop methods for global drought monitoring using
upcoming hyperspectral satellite missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.