* 2216167
* Project Empower: Collaborative Curriculum Design Tailored for Student Success and Inclusive Culture in Algebra-Based Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Geoffrey Potvin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2025
* USD 285,469.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula in
physics education. Algebra-based physics is taught to thousands of U.S. students
every year, many of whom are non-physics majors who may be apprehensive of
physics and may not know how physics knowledge may be relevant for their future
careers. This project involves recruiting undergraduate students in algebra-
based physics courses to help identify their career needs, exploring their
interests related to physics, and aligning their needs with the utility of
physics concepts to design a culturally appropriate and student-centered
curriculum. This project intends to provide algebra-based physics students with
an opportunity to meaningfully engage in their physics learning by giving them a
voice in the curriculum and allowing them to build connections between their own
career interests and physics concepts. The project should yield curricular
materials for algebra-based physics courses that other instructors will be able
to adapt through their participation in immersive workshops. It is hoped that
improved algebra-based physics curricula will support better-prepared STEM
professionals who can more effectively use their physics knowledge in their
chosen careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by elements of a framework for
culturally relevant pedagogy, the project plans to design, adapt, and pilot
Modeling Instruction curriculum materials for introductory algebra-based physics
courses. The three-year project design will address the following research
questions: 1) What are the motivations and expectations of students enrolled in
the algebra-based physics course? 2) How does culturally responsive and student-
centered curricular activities impact students’ expectancy values, physics
identities and sense of belonging in physics? 3) For instructors implementing
this curriculum, how do they perceive that culturally responsive pedagogy and
student-centered activities can be applied within their own course contexts? The
data that will drive the design and adaptation of the curriculum will center the
experiences of undergraduates enrolled in algebra-based physics, who will be
recruited to be participant researchers and co-designers of curricular reforms.
Immersive summer workshops will be offered for faculty from other institutions
who are interested in adopting the new curriculum. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program,
which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education,
and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students
pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.