* 2216076
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Raman Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research at Oakland University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ziming Yang, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2025
* USD 315,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
acquires a confocal Raman spectrometer to support research, education, and
outreach activities at Oakland University (OU). A Raman spectrometer is an
optical instrument that measures vibrations of atoms in molecules and materials.
It performs non-invasive materials characterizations with high spatial and
spectral resolutions, supports existing research activities, and enables new
research directions across disciplines from chemistry, physics, biological
science to materials science pursued by researchers at OU. The Raman instrument
provides research training and education opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students through research projects, curriculum, and laboratory
sessions, and is integrated into outreach activities to help under-represented
community members excel in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Located at OU, this advanced Raman instrument also provides research and
educational opportunities to nearby universities and industry, and promotes
research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy analyzes the inelastic scattering
between incident photons and vibrations of molecules and materials, determines
their vibrational modes, and provides a structural fingerprint by which
molecules and materials can be identified. The acquired Raman instrument
supports a wide range of research topics at OU spanning battery materials,
chemical and biosensors, two-dimensional magnet and magnetism, mineral-organic
interactions, to organic electronics. The advanced features of this Raman
instrument include (i) confocal Raman with high spatial and spectral resolutions
(0.5 micrometer and 0.2 cm-1); (ii) electrochemical cells with optical windows;
(iii) a cooling and heating stage working from 77 K to 873 K; and (iv)
photoluminescence measurement capability from visible to near-infrared (up to
2000 nm). These characteristics enable fundamental research, from understanding
the electrochemical processes at electrode-electrolyte interfaces for high
energy density batteries and greenhouse gas sensors, to investigation of hybrid
magnonics phenomena for future quantum transduction systems and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.