* 2216351
* Implementing and Assessing Multi-Tiered Mentoring within Introductory Undergraduate Biology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Chelsea Ward, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,393.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing student retention
in STEM through a multi-tiered mentoring approach in introductory undergraduate
biology courses. The project plans to establish multi-tiered mentoring to engage
student leaders and instructors in collaborating to promote effective,
inclusive, and evidence-based teaching practices in biology courses. Student
leaders and faculty will participate in professional development about effective
mentoring and inclusive teaching practices. Goals of the effort include
increased communication between students and instructors, as well as improved
student success and retention in introductory biology. The project intends to
implement and assess a multi-tiered mentoring model designed to significantly
improve persistence and retention of STEM students from diverse backgrounds. As
such, results from the project could be broadly relevant to improving
undergraduate STEM education and ultimately broadening participation in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this project are to
develop a structured, multi-tiered mentoring model to improve student and
instructor communication and ultimately the retention of first- and second-year
students in introductory biology courses. Upper division student leaders,
enrolled in a credit-bearing mentorship course, will serve as mentors and work
with small groups of introductory course students to help them navigate the in-
class experience. Additional paid student mentors who are alumni of the course
will serve as supplemental instructors and facilitate communication between
students and faculty. This multi-tiered mentoring approach will engage student
leaders in improving introductory courses with the additional goal of increasing
their own sense of belonging in science and their science identity. Further, the
project will develop instructional supports and incentives for faculty to
redesign introductory biology courses to incorporate multi-tiered mentoring and
inclusive pedagogy. Student leaders and faculty will work together to re-design
courses to incorporate small-group learning, continuous assessment, feedback,
and open communication. The project plans to use a mixed-methods approach and a
pre-post, within-subject design to assess the impact of multi-tiered mentoring
on the introductory course learners, student leader mentors, and faculty
instructors. Evaluation will be conducted in collaboration with an external
evaluator and an advisory board. This project hopes to expand knowledge about
the impact of multi-tiered mentoring, involving both student leaders and
faculty, that could be broadly relevant to promoting student success in
undergraduate STEM education, especially in introductory courses. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.