* 2216819
* Conference Support for the Twentieth (20th) International Beacon Satellite Symposium; Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts; August 1-5, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Patricia Doherty, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 22,944.00

This project will support activities to organize and hold a Beacon Satellite
Symposium at Boston College from August 1 to 5, 2022. This 5-day conference
anticipates 120 participants onsite with 100 oral presentations and a poster
session. The Beacon Satellite Symposia are the only long-term international
symposia dedicated to studies of satellite signals and the radio propagation
effects on applications of societal interests. With space weather a global
problem, this symposium can enable international collaborations and partnerships
among the stakeholders. This symposium will provide exposure for students to
worldwide research on their topics of interest. It will also provide rare and
unique opportunities for US scientists and students to gain a worldwide
perspective on the state of the art of research in ionospheric studies and space
weather. A global perspective on these topics can be achieved by engaging
scientists and graduate students from all over the world, including developing
nations where ionospheric behavior and space weather effects are not well
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to host an international
conference that addresses current topics in ionospheric and space weather
research. The technical sessions include studies on Total Electron Content
(TEC), ionospheric irregularities and scintillation, monitoring natural hazards
from space, polar effects on Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), data
assimilation modeling, ionosphere-thermosphere modeling and validation,
ionospheric effects on satellite-based navigation systems (such as GNSS), radio
occultation studies, space weather, machine learning and new techniques. The
Beacon Satellite Symposium is intended to be an in-person meeting. Plans are in
place to enable virtual participation. The symposium will host a special issue
of Radio Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.