* 2216292
* MRI: Acquisition of a nanoIR3 for Polymers and Life Science Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robb Winter, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 548,158.00

An award is made to South Dakota Mines to acquire an atomic force microscopy-
based infrared spectroscopy instrument (AFM-IR, nanoIR3). In general, nanoIR3
combines IR spectroscopy and chemical imaging of bio-material interfaces at
resolutions below 10 nanometers. Especially important is the ability of nanoIR3
to provide a method for mapping IR-absorbing species in biological materials,
correlating the electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties, and enriching
the understanding of the heterogeneity of the sample, while imaging the surface
topography. Hence, nanoIR3 enhances the state of SD infrastructure to perform
interdisciplinary research at the intersection of biology and surface
engineering, especially in the fields of applied biology, bio-inspired
engineering, biophysics, chemical engineering, materials science, and nano-
engineering. The fundamental knowledge from the nanoIR3 enabled research
projects will support the design of innovative course materials, technical
workshops, and hands-on research training, as well as broadening the
participation and enhancing the technical skills of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers. The nanoIR3 supported projects will enrich additional
programs that will be instrumental in the training and development of the next-
generation STEM workforce who work with the faculty as they develop a background
in both IR spectroscopy and high-resolution AFM microscopy. Much of the research
to be performed with this instrument is related to developing bio-based
materials and energy storage materials that will protect the environment, result
in sustainable manufacturing, and enhance the role of the agricultural economy
in next generation of materials synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new AFM-IR
capability enables South Dakota faculty and research centers to study structure-
property relationships with sub-10 nm spatial resolution, far below the
conventional optical diffraction limit (micrometers) for biological specimens,
polymer-based composites, bio-composites, nanocomposites, and 2D materials. The
research enabled by the nanoIR3 will especially benefit the studies of the
principal investigators related to design, synthesis, characterization, and
tuning of sub-cellular properties of new biodegradable polymers, which address
major issues related to the use and replacement of polluting fossil-fuel based
plastics. The new capability also provides a path for in-depth chemical
characterization of thin films of nanomaterial-reinforced biopolymers,
thermoplastics, electrospinning-enabled heterogeneous structures, stacked
assemblies, or hybrid composites formed from 2D materials. The ability to
measure nano-scale variations in the material properties at the interfacial and
interphase regions also enables SD researchers to develop next-generation
protective coatings that will be resistant to corrosion and engineer high-
capacity lithium-ion anode materials to resist excessive lithium-ion entrapment
in the solid-electrolyte interphase. In summary, the nanoIR instrument will
allow South Dakota Mines to become a hub for high-resolution AFM-IR analysis,
supporting researchers in the state of South Dakota and the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.