* 2216214
* Supporting  Students' Critical Evaluation of Evidence in Socioscientific Issues Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Alena Moon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,983.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students' ability
to understand, evaluate, and address complex social problems and issues. A
fundamental goal of STEM education is science literacy, or empowering people to
make informed decisions about challenging real-world issues. Science literacy
necessitates that individuals and groups understand and use scientific evidence
in the process of problem-solving and decision-making about complex issues. This
community-level science literacy can be supported in classrooms, and requires
building skills such as collaboratively discussing ideas, making sense of
scientific evidence to reach a conclusion, and reaching a consensus on solutions
to complex environmental, medical, and technological social problems. The goal
of this project is to produce instructional tools that effectively engage
students in collaborative evaluation of scientific evidence to address and
consider solutions to socioscientific issues (SSIs). This project plans to
develop and refine these instructional tools in the context of an undergraduate
science literacy course in which students work collaboratively to evaluate
scientific evidence to address SSIs. The research team will work with students
to create strategies that support effective evaluation of evidence in SSIs.
These strategies will then be implemented in the science literacy course and in
a chemistry course to assess the their effectiveness in different course
contexts. Ideally, these instructional tools will be refined for wide
distribution and use across STEM courses. Ultimately, this work has potential to
lead to a greater understanding of how undergraduate students collectively
reason through evidence when considering possible solutions to complex SSIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lean on theories of social constructivism
and situated cognition, and educational psychology and science education
literature on classroom discourse and argumentation, to perform foundational,
design-based research using qualitative and quantitative data. The project plans
to describe challenges students face in critical evaluation of evidence during
community deliberation and to assess teaching tools that support proficiency of
this practice. This project will address two research questions: (1) What are
effective strategies for community deliberation (e.g., discourse patterns and
critical questions), when evaluating evidence to solve an SSI problem? (2) Do
instructional activities based on co-created strategies for improved community
deliberation (e.g., critical questions) impact studentsâ€™ ability as individuals
and groups to apply scientific evidence in an SSI decision-making context? The
research team will track the evidence-evaluation progress of several teams of
students in the science literacy course and perform clinical group interviews
that will simultaneously allow researchers to describe proficiencies in group
discourse and develop strategies for improved group deliberation in subsequent
course assignments (e.g., critical questions that improve group sense-making).
These strategies, co-created by students and researchers during the interviews,
will be evaluated for their impact within the interdisciplinary science literacy
course during design-based research. The project will also translate and
evaluate the strategies in a disciplinary chemistry course context. The proposed
work is intended to provide a fundamental understanding of how undergraduate
students reason during evidence evaluation in the context of decision-making
about complex SSIs. This work will be foundational for future research on models
for student learning and teaching about evidence evaluation, particularly in
large post-secondary classrooms, and will support long-term goals to understand
the role of science education in supporting science literacy practices. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.