* 2216976
* Literacy, Education, and Language Processing: Special Sessions at the Human Sentence Processing 2023 Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Natasha Tokowicz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 41,613.00

Language is vital in everyday life. The field of psycholinguistics seeks to
understand the cognitive mechanisms of language comprehension and production. It
examines how working memory, attention, world knowledge, and learning systems
affect language use. But, much research in this field has relied on literate,
university-educated samples. Scientific theories have not been tested across the
full range of language and literacy skills. This gap makes it harder for
educators to use psycholinguistic research to improve language-related
education. There is a clear need to unite research and researchers in
psycholinguistics with those in education and literacy. This project supports a
special session at the 2023 Annual Conference on Human Sentence processing. The
session highlights connections between psycholinguistics, educational
psychology, and educational technology. The session will help describe how
language processing is shaped by formal education and literacy. It will also
characterize how we can use our knowledge of human language processing in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This special conference session is titled
"Literacy, Education, and Language Processing." It will be held at the 2023
Annual Conference on Human Sentence Processing at the University of Pittsburgh.
The HSP conference is formerly known as the CUNY Sentence Processing Conference.
It has been the top psycholinguistics conference in North America for decades.
About 400 people attend the three-day conference. The conference includes about
35 oral and 150 poster presentations selected from over 300 abstracts. As part
of the special session, six invited speakers will discuss the interface of
psycholinguistics with literacy and education. They will talk about (1) how
formal education and literacy may alter language processing, (2) how students
experiencing a nonstandard dialect at home may be disadvantaged by the burden of
adapting to the language of formal education, and (3) how educational technology
can quantify language experience and attainment. The project helps train junior
scientists with discounted registration, need-based travel stipends, and junior
researcher awards. The project broadens participation in the field by inviting
minority-serving institutions to a livestream of the special session
talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.