* 2216140
* MRI: Acquisition of the Kentucky Research Informatics Composable Cloud (KyRICC)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Jeffery Talbert, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,136,612.00

Scientific discovery today is driven by computation and data-intensive research
that exploits the growing amounts of available data. However, the wide variety
and size of emerging datasets often make analysis challenging on current high-
performance computing (HPC) infrastructures because system configurations cannot
be customized to process the data efficiently. This project will acquire and
deploy a dynamically composable computer infrastructure called the Kentucky
Research Informatics Composable Cloud (KyRICC). This KyRICC architecture will
support complex data analysis pipelines with highly heterogeneous hardware
requirements not currently supported by current HPC infrastructures. As a
result, this project will enable and support a wide range of new research
activities. KyRICC will be used by hundreds of University of Kentucky (UK)
researchers (faculty, staff, and students) and by other computational research
collaborators at institutions across the region including Centre College,
Morehead State University, Eastern Kentucky University, University of
Louisville, Northern Kentucky University, and Kentucky State University. As a
leading-edge system, KyRICC and the exciting projects it makes possible will
help recruit students, including students from groups underrepresented in STEM,
to computational research. The system will also enhance the research training of
many undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs in Kentucky colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KyRICC architecture will support complex
data analysis pipelines with highly heterogeneous hardware requirements across
individual data analysis steps. Specifically, KyRICC will integrate four
subsystems that will enable dynamically composable cloud infrastructure: (1) A
cluster of peripheral-composable compute nodes, allowing for up to 10’s of GPUs
and 10’s of TB of main memory on a single node. Groups of nodes can be
dynamically allocated to allow the training and inference of very large deep
learning models and datasets; (2) A next-generation high-speed NVMe-based
storage cluster capable of efficiently serving large volumes of data to multi-
GPU nodes. Unlike traditional clustered storage systems, this composable
filesystem allows the partitioning of storage on the project-level, allowing us
to isolate data and better manage system performance; (3) A Peta-scale storage
system provided by UK’s current research storage infrastructure, providing a
total of 2.2 PB of storage; and (4) An innovative workload management system for
dynamic infrastructure composition, workload profiling, model and infrastructure
tuning, supporting common pipelines and machine and deep learning models through
templated projects. KyRICC will be a regional computational resource and will
also be made available to the broader national computational research
infrastructure through the NSF-supported ACCESS projects. Areas of expected
breakthroughs in KyRICC-enabled research include deep learning and computer
vision; natural language processing and multimodal embedding; computational
modeling and simulation with data analytics; and omics analysis and systemic
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering (CISE) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.