* 2216220
* MRI: Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 798,809.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Tulane University is acquiring a
600 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with a helium-
cooled probe to support the research of Professor Bruce Gibb and colleagues
Nathalie Busschaert, Stassi DiMaggio, and Janarthanan Jayawickramarajah. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of structural biology,
supramolecular chemistry, polymer chemistry, and organic chemistry. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The cryogenic probe provides a significant increase in sensitivity relative to
standard NMR probes. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of a diverse population of students at all levels. This
instrument enables these activities for over 16 research groups from Tulane
University and regional institutions in the New Orleans, southeast Louisiana,
and southern Mississippi regions including Xavier University and Loyola
University of New Orleans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the 600 MHz NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as synthetic polymers, superconductors, membrane
structures, inorganic complexes, and host guest interactions. This instrument
enables research in a variety of projects including the synthesis of polymer
architectures, supramolecular chemistry at membranes, characterization of nano-
material platforms for drug-delivery, and the identification and
characterization of inorganic complexes. It also assists in the study of abiotic
and biotic aqueous supramolecular chemistry, polymer design for drug delivery,
and the structure of functionalized synthetic DNA-based assemblies. Further
investigations include designing agents for cancer cell imaging, studying
polypeptiod interactions with lipid bilayers, conformational flexibility in CD4+
T-cell epitope processing, the synthesis of low-coordinate, low-valent metal
complexes, and the NMR detection of small molecule binding to target proteins.
Additionally, the instrument facilitates the understanding of the unusual
structure and bonding in complex aromatic molecules, the development of novel
organic superconductors, transition metal complex chromophores and light
harvesting ensembles, catalysis with porous materials, and new rhodamine dyes as
chiral sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.