* 2216268
* Braiding Opportunities in Training, Advocacy, and Networking for Young Scientists  (BOTANY Scientists)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* James Cohen, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2025
* USD 297,407.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing practices to
improve student mindset and persistence in botany. Given the importance of
botany to agriculture, land and natural resource management, conservation, and
mitigating climate change it is imperative that students pursing these areas
have a strong understanding of botany. Given the broad scale of these issues it
is important that we recruit and retain students from diverse backgrounds into
the field. Therefore, this project will investigate academic, social, and
research support interventions under which improved learning occurs for persons
excluded because of their ethnicity or race (PEERs). Through a multifaceted
approach to engage student learning, this project will build on educational
practices that are demonstrably effective and extend and explore these in novel
ways. These include, in part, actively working with students who have community
ties, upending the commonly used pipeline model to one that encompasses the
manners in which the vast majority of students approach higher education and
success, and incorporating outreach to K-12 educators in botany. Additionally,
strategic partnerships will be developed with native Utah nations, the Utah
Native Plant Society and Zion National Park. Emerging from this project will be
a model to better understand the most useful interventions to help students
reach their academic and career goals in botany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project intends to integrate six approaches to improve recruitment and retention
in botany: 1) early intervention in K-12 via development and implementation of
educational and outreach materials, 2) a summer bridge program to help with
transition to college, 3) early introduction to research through botanical and
ecological field experiences at Zion National Park, 4) peer mentorship, 5)
academic training utilizing active-learning practices for teachers across Utah,
and 6) appropriate self-assessment to revise and identify the best (combination
of) practices. A Bayesian approach will be employed to evaluate the combination
of intervention strategies in order to generate novel information on which
combinations of recruitment and retention interventions lead to greater success
in botany. As such, this project offers a new analytical lens that can be used
to address long-standing questions on best practices for broadening
participation in botany. Collectively, these approaches will help increase
access to and participation in higher education for PEERs in an important area
of study and will aid students more broadly in reaching a successful career in
botany. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning Level 1, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.