* 2216272
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for West Chester University, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Brandon Mitchell, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 391,730.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. West Chester University of
Pennsylvania is acquiring a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM)
coupled to an energy dispersive spectrometer to support the research of
Professor Kurt Kolasinski and colleagues Howell Bosbyshell, Brandon Mitchell,
John Pisciotta, and LeeAnn Srogi. This instrument facilitates research in
chemistry, biology, physics, geology, and earth sciences. Scanning electron
microscopy is used to image and understand chemical phenomena at the nano and
mesoscales. A focused electron beam, which is scanned over a surface to generate
a SEM image and subsequently produces signals, reveals information about the
composition and topology of a sample. This instrument enhances the educational,
research, and teaching efforts of students at all levels in many departments as
well as provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument is
leveraged by at least three departments and in outreach activities with local
community colleges and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award for the FE-
SEM is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in
areas such as biology, chemistry, earth sciences, and physics. Research focuses
on nanomaterial structure elucidation, interactions of nanoparticles with the
environment, and fundamental Earth materials and processes that encompass
imaging and microanalysis. High-resolution imaging and chemical analysis are key
for studying thin films, nanomaterials, and porous solids so that we size-
structure-property relationships can be established. In addition, other
investigations include evaluation of antimicrobial activity of metallic
nanoparticles against pure bacterial cultures and microbial communities in
biofilms to better understand nano-ecotoxicology. It also assists in
reconstructing microscale textures and chemical compositions of mineral grains,
integrating spatial-composition of model tectono-thermal evolution of mountain
belts and magma chamber processes associated with volcanic
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.