* 2216676
* Maintenance of Escherichia coli cell envelope integrity under stress
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Anuradha Janakiraman, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2026
* USD 997,716.00

The bacterial cell envelope is a complex multi-layered structure that is
essential for cell viability. In a large group of bacteria, the Gram-negatives,
the cell envelope is composed of two membranes with a rigid cell wall sandwiched
between. The envelope is a selectively permeable barrier allowing the uptake of
important nutrients from the outside, expulsion of toxic wastes from the inside,
and is a first line of defense against environmental stress. Nearly 30% of the
cell's proteins are embedded in the envelope where they perform critical and
diverse functions including in construction of the envelope and maintenance of
its integrity. Among these, lipoproteins are an important and abundant class of
proteins that bear characteristic fatty acid chains which anchor them to the
cell's membranes. The fatty acid addition takes place on the membrane itself,
and this necessitates the tight coordination of lipoprotein modification with
membrane homeostasis. However, little is known about the mechanisms that
regulate this coupling. This project characterizes the means by which bacteria
control lipoprotein modification when the cell envelope is subject to
environmental or mutational stresses. The work will likely be applicable to
other Gram-negative bacteria which play important pathological and non-
pathological roles in virtually all environments on the planet. To achieve its
goals, this project will use a combination of genetics, biochemical and cell
biological methodologies thereby providing multidisciplinary and
multidimensional training for a broad range of undergraduate and graduate
students at the City College of New York (CCNY). An inquiry-based laboratory
module that is closely aligned with the research goals of this proposal will be
incorporated into an undergraduate microbiology course providing access to and
retaining a diverse group of students that include women, first-generation
college students, and/or those belonging to historically underrepresented
groups, in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Gram-negative
bacteria, the post-translation modification of lipoproteins with fatty acyl
chains derived from membrane phospholipids occurs at the inner membrane. Some of
these mature lipoproteins are retained at the inner membrane while most are
localized to the outer membrane. Their processing and functions are not fully
understood. Further, if and how cells regulate lipoprotein modification,
particularly when membrane homeostasis is altered under envelope stress, is
unclear. This project aims to address this question by investigating specific
molecular mechanisms that serve to maintain the fidelity of lipoprotein
maturation in response to physicochemical alterations in membrane properties
resulting from environmental or mutational stress. Specific experiments will
probe the synthetic relationship between a set of conserved bacterial genes in
whose absence lipoprotein maturation is defective. Mutations within this set
leads to altered lipoprotein localization, formation of aberrant links of the
inner membrane with the cell wall, cytoplasmic shrinkage, culminating in cell
death. The proposed experiments are based on initial findings that support the
presence of an essential molecular safety mechanism to maintain the fitness of
this process in response to alterations in membrane lipid composition/balance.
Overall, it is expected that this project will provide fundamental insights into
the molecular mechanisms of bacterial cell envelope integrity under
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.