* 2216269
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser-scanning confocal microscope for research and active learning
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jochen Nuester, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 582,025.00

An award is made to California State University, Chico to acquire a confocal
microscope system for research and training of diverse students (39.4% from
historically under-represented (HU) groups, 50.7% 1st generation college
students, 55.4% women) at this Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). This award
supports access to essential technology for competitive basic science research
in rural areas north of Sacramento. The imaging technique increases visual
resolution and contrast of a microscopic specimen through the capture of
multiple two-dimensional images at different depths, and then reconstruction of
the three-dimensional structure. Fluorescent dyes can further target specific
structures and/or molecules in a cell, tissue, or organism. This technology will
enhance undergraduate training in multiple classes within the North State
educational community, and be used by Master’s students for research projects.
Usage will increase the depth of cellular/organismal/microbial learning, enhance
technical skills, and facilitate multidisciplinary projects. Thus, students will
be better trained graduates of the CSU system and competitive for jobs or PhD
programs. The award also facilitates an increased capacity for faculty led high-
quality publications and competitive funding
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal microscopy is important to cellular
science, but also has applications in other areas of the life sciences
(microbiology, genetics, developmental biology), and in materials science
(geosciences, engineering, physics). The award enables Chico State and other
regional faculty to pursue novel approaches that investigate the role of
cellular biomechanics in spinal integrity, geobiology, and animal-microbe
interactions. On-site confocal microscopy will allow multidisciplinary
approaches to understand genes and the related cellular mechanisms responsive to
mechanical stimulation, and how the breakdown of these mechanisms leads to
reduced spinal integrity. Confocal microscopy also provides non-invasive, high-
resolution images of intact, living or minimally preserved specimens. Projects
that look at either living fish embryos or anemone larvae demonstrate the
ability to study adaptive changes during growth or symbiotic relations. The
confocal microscope will also be applied in undergraduate and graduate projects
that seek to characterize the bioavailability of marine iron regenerated by
microbial species. Results from the novel research enabled by this award will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and at local, national, and international
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.