* 2216233
* MRI: Acquisition of a modern Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) to advance materials research at Oklahoma State Univeristy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrew Yost, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2025
* USD 580,000.00

Significant advances in science and technology have been made by discovering
suitable properties of new materials. The Physical Property Measurement System
(PPMS) will allow the characterization of new materials being investigated for
potential applications in food science, biomaterials, and electronic devices,
which are essential to advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare. The
combination of several experimental techniques and automation in the PPMS
results in a powerful research tool capable of providing the high-quality data
needed to explore new classes of materials. This state-of-the-art instrument
enables the research training of students and postdoctoral associates, benefits
undergraduate and graduate engineering and science laboratory courses, and
extends education outreach programs focused on materials research that are in
place at Oklahoma State University. This project is jointly funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State University
(OSU) requests a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The Quantum Design
PPMS is an open architecture, variable temperature, and magnetic field system
designed to perform a variety of automated measurements. The instrument will
have the following technical features: a PPMS system with a 9 Tesla magnet,
DynaCool dilution refrigerator, modules for DC resistivity measurements,
vibrating sample magnetometry, ac susceptibility/dc magnetization measurements,
Van der Pauw measurements, horizontal sample rotator, heat capacity measurement
system, thermal transport measurements, and the xyz piezo and optical multi-
functional probe with a photoconductivity stage. This state-of-the-art PPMS will
be used for research into a broad range of scientific challenges, including
detection of hot electron injection across metal-semiconductor Interfaces,
thermal property measurement of biomaterials, transport at the surface of
pyroelectric materials, the impact of radiation on the electronic properties of
materials for the Large Hadron Collider, radiation-hard electronics, and
electronic properties of superconductive oxides and topological materials. Other
research areas impacted include magnetic measurements of materials hosting
skyrmions, gluten composites' thermal properties, and nanomaterials'
characterization. To promote research and teaching and maximize multi-user
access, the PPMS will have a high level of exposure and be available at a low
cost to all OSU researchers and researchers across Oklahoma. This project is
jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.