* 2216121
* Promoting Professional Behaviors among Students in Undergraduate Computing Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Amruth Kumar, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 123,450.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by promoting the development of
professional behaviors among students in undergraduate computing courses.
Traditional computing education imparts knowledge and skills, however
professional behaviors such as persistence, self-directedness, and adaptability,
are essential for success in the professional computing workforce. Employer
surveys reveal that professional behaviors, or dispositions, are as important
for success in the workplace as the knowledge and skills students develop in
their academic programs of study. Although well-known evidence-based teaching
and learning approaches for knowledge acquisition and skill development exist,
no similar approaches have been developed to foster professional dispositions in
computing education. In this project, faculty at four institutions plan to
collaboratively study how to promote these behaviors among undergraduate
computing students using exercises that ask students to explain how they have
applied these behaviors in their coursework and how others have used these
behaviors in real-life scenarios. The goal of this project is to develop,
implement, and study the use of reflection exercises and vignettes to foster ten
professional dispositions among undergraduate computing students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will build on its experiences and results
from a previous study by: (1) developing and using vignettes; (2) targeting five
additional dispositions such as meticulousness, inventiveness, and
responsibility; (3) extending the study over four semesters; (4) incorporating a
continuous cycle of improvement; and (5) given access to a larger data set,
studying how dispositions affect groups underrepresented in computing. The use
of vignettes will be evaluated in multiple contexts: public and private
institutions, as well as liberal arts and professional studies. The study will
use a mixed-methods quasi-experimental research design. During each semester of
this two-year project, pre-survey, post-survey, reflection exercises, and
vignettes will be administered online. The team will disseminate the evaluation
results, reflection exercises, a suite of fifty vignettes, and guidelines for
designing and using reflection exercises and vignettes among computing educators
and researchers through peer-reviewed venues. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.