* 2216440
* MRI: Development of Full Vector Vibrating Sample Magnetometry for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Wilhelmus Geerts, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 121,364.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award provides funding for the development
of triaxial vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) to characterize anisotropic
magnetic materials. A magnetometer is an instrument that allows one to
characterize magnetic material, for example the magnets that stick to your
refrigerator door. To fully characterize magnetic materials, it is necessary to
measure all three components of the magnetic dipole moment vector. Triaxial VSMs
however are not commercially available and less than a handful of research labs
in Europe, Japan and Russia have attempted in the past to build a triaxial VSM.
The instrument development allows for triaxial measurements to be done over a
large temperature and field range. The vector coil sets that will be developed
is extremely important for understanding the magnetic properties of anisotropic
materials that have magnetic properties that vary with field direction. The new
tools are expected to strengthen existing research and lead to new
collaborations among academia and industry and will bring full vector
magnetometry and torque capabilities to the Americas. Concrete plans are being
developed to integrate the new tool in several graduate courses in Physics,
MSEC, and Manufacturing Engineering each year and use the instrument for high
school outreach activities and apprentice summer research programs in the
College of Science and Engineering. The instrumentation development will be done
by a graduate and undergraduate student. It is expected that the impact is much
larger though once the tool is realized and tested with multiple graduate
projects at Texas State and elsewhere benefiting from this unique capability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development award is to develop triaxial
vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) to measure all three components of the
sample’s magnetic dipole moment simultaneously and allow for vector torque
magnetometry as a function of temperature. Rather than designing a completely
new instrument, the researcher will design and realize triaxial coil sets for
two existing VSMs. The approach allows for a short runway, increases the
adoptability of the new measurement tool benefitting from the existing user pool
for both tools, and results in a large measurement parameter window (0-9 tesla,
2.8-1000 K). The method will be useful for the characterization of a wide range
of materials. The project will directly enhance the research in 5 different
academic programs (Physics, Chemistry, Manufacturing Engineering, Electrical
Engineering, and MSEC). The realized vector torque magnetometer will enable
researchers to study materials that have a complex magnetic anisotropy energy
surface with multiple anisotropies originating from shape, strain, surface,
step, flow, and a magnetic field applied during deposition. Such materials
cannot be easily studied with a conventional torque magnetometer. Materials to
be studied include oblique co-deposited NiFe films to be used in novel sensors
and actuators, strained Fe doped epitaxial (InGa)2O3 films on anisotropic
vicinal substrates, Nickel-Iron hydroxides and oxides that are currently being
explored as electrode materials in lithium free batteries, and magnetic
composites deposited by Magnetic Field Assisted Additive Manufacturing (MFAAM).
MFAAM materials that are deposited by 2D (inkjet) or 3D (Fused Filament
Fabrication) printing magnetic nanocomposites under applied magnetic field
appear to have enhanced properties including a higher remanence, a larger
susceptibility, and/or a stronger magnetic anisotropy. The coil sets and methods
developed will be disseminated via the project’s website and peer-reviewed
publications to allow other research groups to implement triaxial capability for
their VSM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.