* 2216631
* RaMP: The Louisiana Graduate Network in Applied Evolution (LAGNiAppE) to strengthen regional connections and broaden the STEM workforce
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jeremy Brown, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,753.00

Racial and ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, armed service veterans,
and first-generation college graduates are critically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. To build a strong multicultural and diverse scientific research
workforce, there is an acute need to design effective interventions via the
development of training pathways that cultivate the talents of researchers from
underrepresented groups at critical training junctures, including the transition
from undergraduate student to graduate school or STEM careers. Evolutionary
thinking presents an ideal framework through which to diversify the next
generation of scientists: it is the primary unifying principle that unites all
of the biological sciences, with obvious and immediate implications in our
lives. From pandemics to climate change, extinction crises to pioneering medical
treatments, modern agricultural practices to forensics, evolutionary
perspectives and frameworks are essential to tackling many of the challenges
humans face today. Leveraging the broad importance of evolutionary biology and
the strength of research in the discipline across Louisiana, the Louisiana
Graduate Network in Applied Evolution (LAGNiAppE) will be established to
holistically train three cohorts of ten post-baccalaureate scholars interested
in advancing their knowledge and research skills in evolutionary biology.
Through LAGNiAppE, recent college graduates from underrepresented groups will
engage in a year-long research project with a mentor based at LSU and a co-
mentor from another Louisiana university. This training program will prepare
participants for a diverse array of STEM careers via a combination of research
projects that provide training in high-demand technical skills and structured
programming that provides professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LAGNiAppE training program includes a
mentoring framework that integrates high-impact educational practices and the
theories of community cultural wealth and social cognitive career theory. The
training approach includes multiple mentors, all of whom receive evidence-based
mentor training; primary research mentors are based at LSU, while co-mentors are
faculty members at other Louisiana institutions, including three Minority
Serving Institutions and five Primarily Undergraduate Institutions. This
integrated network model will strengthen the research community across an
underfunded state and establish a strong foundation through which collaborative
training and research can continue into the future. In addition to research
projects at the forefront of evolutionary biology, the LAGNiAppE program will be
interspersed with key professional development opportunities, including a
research bootcamp, a program retreat at a state park, career roundtables, and an
inclusive excellence seminar series; the scientists leading these activities
form an informal mentor network available to LAGNiAppE Scholars. Rigorous
program assessment will be conducted by social scientists with expertise in
program evaluation, and the resulting data will contribute to the larger body of
knowledge regarding effective mentoring and practices. Scientific results from
LAGNiAppE projects will shed light on pivotal questions in evolutionary biology,
including processes generating and maintaining biological diversity, and the
role of evolutionary change in shaping contemporary processes, such as disease
outbreaks and responses to climate change. Research results will be disseminated
by Scholars and their mentors via peer-reviewed publications and presentations
at SACNAS and LAGNiAppE conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.