* 2216294
* MRI: Acquisition of a Large-Scale Real-Time Digital Simulator for Cyber-Physical Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 993,643.00

This NSF MRI project aims to make the U.S. power grid resilient and cyber-secure
by acquiring a simulator that will allow researchers to realistically model how
power grids work in practice, incorporating events like natural disasters,
communication failures, and cyber-attacks. This equipment, called a real-time
digital simulator, will bring a transformative change to the field of power and
energy engineering through co-simulating different power system responses
(transient, dynamic, and steady-state) at large scale and simulating cascading
failures with actual devices via hardware-in-the-loop (HiL) capability. This
will be achieved by building a large-scale cyber-physical energy systems testbed
that will enable multi-disciplinary research, education, and training. The
intellectual merits of the project include developing 1) user-friendly
algorithms for multi-timeframe simulation of power system responses; 2)
solutions that detect and mitigate potential cyber-attacks on power grids; and
3) resilient communication systems for power grids during extreme events. The
broader impacts of the project include improving the resilience and stability of
the power supply against extreme events, strengthening the cybersecurity of
power grids, and providing training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will lead to
transformative research through testing, validating, and demonstrating the
developed solutions on large-scale simulators with cybersecurity, communication,
and HiL capabilities. Research activities to be enabled by this testbed include
1) developing solutions for proactive resource scheduling and hardening prior to
natural disasters to protect power grids from wildfires, storms, and
earthquakes; 2) developing components (technical controls and configuration
options) needed for secure exchange of information with blind processing and
privacy preservation, thereby hardening power grid cybersecurity; 3) researching
solutions for the integration of renewable energy sources, mainly by using
energy storage systems to provide grid services and synthetic inertia; 4)
developing methods to detect and isolate high-impedance faults, which are known
to cause wildfires and power system malfunctions; 5) using unmanned aerial
vehicles to assess post-disaster damages to power grids and implement the
restoration of the grid; 6) developing tools for power system operators that
raise situational awareness; and 7) raising understanding of microgrid islanding
and autonomous operation capabilities in cases of severe power
outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.