* 2216270
* BPC-AE: Widening Participation in Computing Research via Deepening Mentoring Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,585,097.00

The computing and tech fields have not seen adequate participation from people
who identify as female, Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, Native
American, Hawaiian, Alaskan, Asian Pacific Islander, and people with
disabilities. The fundamental issues the project offers potential benefits to
education, society and establishing evidence for the experience of different
demographic groups in computing. The Computing Research Association’s Committee
on Widening Participation’s (CRA-WP) mentoring programs proposed support
education and diversity of the computing workforce which ultimately benefit
society as a whole. of the computing professoriate. These activities have been
very successful at encouraging diverse undergraduate and graduate students in
the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Computing Research Association's Committee on
Widening Participation in Computing Research (CRA-WP) plans to grow its
mentoring programs with three main goals:1) Mentoring for re-entry into
computing research through non-traditional pathways; 2) Encouraging, tracking,
and evaluating mentoring pathways through their programs to improve retention;
and 3) Growing a pool of leaders through mentor mentoring to improve their scale
and reach. Alumni tracking will also help characterize medium and long term
impacts on underrepresentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.