* 2216197
* Developing as Statewide Professional Development Network for Effective Teaching of Undergraduate Quantitative Reasoning Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Lee Wayand, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This project will serve the national interest by improving instruction in
introductory quantitative literacy courses intended for undergraduates pursuing
degrees outside of STEM. Quantitative literacy improves decision making related
to health, finances, and citizenship, empowering people to make informed
decisions. This project will provide professional development for instructors of
Quantitative Reasoning (QR) courses at 2-year and 4-year institutions across
Ohio. These courses are in the process of being standardized, guaranteeing
credits can transfer between any of the state’s public institutions of higher
education. The project intends to prepare pairs of mathematics instructors to
serve as institutional leaders who will support their colleagues within a larger
network of QR educators across the state. Over a 3-year period, the network
plans to span 24 institutions and engage over 160 faculty. Like many other
states, Ohio’s mathematics teaching workforce is diverse; it includes adjuncts,
annually contracted faculty, graduate teaching assistants (GTAs), and high
school teachers who teach dual-enrollment courses. The project hopes to address
how best to prepare and support a broad instructional workforce to teach high-
quality QR at scale. The project’s network model and findings could be adapted
to additional gateway courses (e.g., College Algebra, Precalculus, Calculus,
Statistics, and Data Science) by other states or multi-institutional
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will approach the project's
professional development and research through a cycle of implementation and
revision. This iterative process is meant to strengthen the network and its
mechanisms over the life of the project. Faculty professional development will
focus on an inquiry-based learning (IBL) approach to QR instruction, placing
instructional quality front and center. The network will contribute to an Ohio
QR pathway aligned with the Ohio Department of Higher Education’s statewide
program for student transfer and success. Course content and instructional
strategies will be aligned with statewide QR requirements, helping participating
faculty weave inquiry into their teaching. Faculty will focus on designing and
introducing cognitively demanding QR assessments and offering students the
chance to engage in high-level mathematics communication. The project’s research
agenda plans to focus on instructional quality as measured by the IQA toolkit, a
tool that only recently have been applied to higher education. Classroom
observations and analysis of student work will generate new knowledge on how QR
instructors might engage their students in cognitively demanding tasks and high-
level mathematical communication. The project evaluation will be supported by an
experienced evaluator and a highly-qualified advisory board that will assess the
project’s progress towards its goals. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.