* 2216876
* Development of GNSS-Acoustic Surveying for Shallow Water
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 152,975.00

Plate tectonics, also known as continental drift, is the process where parts of
the earth’s crust that make up continents and ocean basin seafloor move slowly
around the globe at a few inches per year. On land, these motions can be
detected with precise GPS measurements. However GPS (also called GNSS for
“Global Navigation Satellite Systems”) signals cannot penetrate seawater.
Consequently an alternative means must be invoked to detect tectonic motion of
the seafloor. An established method uses a platform on the sea surface (such as
a ship or buoy) whose position is simultaneously observed with GPS and sonar.
The positions of seafloor receivers can be determined by measuring the travel
time of sonar pulses between them and the GPS-navigated surface platform. The
method has been developed with seafloor receivers designed to reside in the deep
ocean – 1000 meters or greater beneath the surface, where they are safe from
disturbance by human activity. However much of the interesting scientific
targets for detecting seafloor tectonic motion are in shallower water – a few
hundred meters deep. This research project aims to develop a protective seafloor
structure that keeps a receiver safe from trawl fishing (which would otherwise
compromise the survey). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GNSS-Acoustic method relies on
an assumption that the sound speed velocity structure in the ocean is one
dimensional, dependent only on depth. Over long times (days) this is true on
average. With this assumption, the center coordinates of an array of acoustic
transponders positioned symmetrically around a sea surface interrogator can be
determined with cm level accuracy in a global reference frame even with
imperfect knowledge of the details of the one-dimensional sound velocity
profile. In shallow water, sound velocity variations are less important because
the acoustic range is smaller. This should remove the need for an array of
transponders – just one should suffice. However the risk from trawling remains.
The project’s dual aim is to 1) determine the accuracy with which a single
transponder’s coordinates can be determined up to 300 m water depth with a
circling Wave Glider interrogator and 2) test the design of a trawl-resistant
structure that can house a single transponder, free from disturbance from
anthropogenic interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.