* 2216471
* MRI: Acquisition of a single crystal x-ray diffractometer at UC Merced
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Lu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 279,990.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of California -
Merced is acquiring a dual-source single crystal diffractometer equipped with Cu
and Mo microfocus X-ray sources, Professor Michael Findlater and colleagues
Rebeca Arevalo, Mehmet Baykara, Jennifer Lu, Yanbao Ma. In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, quantum materials, materials
chemistry, biochemistry, and catalysis. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The facility serves
as a regional XRD resource benefitting students and faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions within the Central Valley region of California with
impacts through active collaborations with researchers California Polytechnic
State University, CSU Sate East Bay, CSU State Stanislaus, and Western Oregon
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. Research enabled by the instrument is focused on the
synthesis, isolation, characterization, and reactivity of molecular compounds
with 1st-row metal elements which exhibit such redox behaviors. The
identification of novel structure and bonding has long been a central tenet of
molecular inorganic / organometallic chemistry, and SCXRD is an essential
characterization tool. More efficient access to crystallographic data helps
streamline the development of structural analogues and guide the design of
future structural modifications based on rotamer assessment. This is needed of
the development of transnitrosylation reactions from novel nitrosoreagents.
X-ray crystallography has become much more than a tool for structure
determination - it is a technique that allows the exploration of the
conformational landscapes of complex molecules in atomic detail. The instrument
helps develop new computational tools that enable "multi-conformer" or
"ensemble" modeling of crystallographic data, revealing hidden alternative
conformations of macromolecules, which is often critical for understanding their
functions. Researchers are working on single crystal selection and manipulation
for the SCXRD. For material and chemical applications, dry crystal specimen is
commonly used in the SCXRD. For biochemical and biological applications, the
specimen may stay in aqueous solutions during the SC-XRD measurements. Depending
on different applications, either acoustic or optical tweezers are utilized.
Water electrolysis is a viable option towards hydrogen production that
facilitates the transition into a decarbonized economy. The structures and
purity of catalytic materials are Confirmed by XRD results. The discovery that
the structure of 2D materials used as solid lubricants has a profound effect on
their frictional properties. In particular, MoS2 doped with Re ions exhibits an
anomalous, i.e. inverse dependence of friction on number of layers in violation
of the seemingly universal trait that friction decreases with increasing number
of layers in 2D materials. Structure determination using the instrument is of
prime importance for friction research. SCXRD is an essential characterization
tool for identifying new phases and structures of quantum materials. SCXRD is
used to identify the crystal structure of the synthesized quantum materials and
study the evolution of their lattice and phase upon the introduction of
heterogeneities. Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have had a meteoric rise in the
last decade as active materials in high-efficiency single junction solar cells.
The first and most critical step following synthesis of these materials is SCXRD
to ascertain lattice constants and crystal orientation of the MHPS. Without this
characterization, any measurement done on these samples have retain considerable
uncertainty and do not allow to establish the correlations between composition
and optoelectronic behavior. Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), consisting of
metal ions and their interlinking organic ligands, can be formed into a highly
crystalline porous structure with excellent tunability in both morphology and
functionality, which provides an attractive platform to explore unprecedented
catalytic activity and selectivity. Characterization of these materials with
SCXRD allow understanding where the catalytically active sites are located and
how the electrocatalysis occurred on those sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.