* 2216155
* MRI: Acquisition of optical access in a cryogenic scanning probe microscope for quantum sensing capabilities
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Xiaoshan Xu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,171.00

Materials science is in the midst of a second quantum revolution where quantum
phenomena on a macroscopic scale enable new forms of quantum materials and
quantum technologies with revolutionizing impact in medicine, banking, and
defense due to quantum enabled advances in information technology, sensing,
communication, computation, simulation and cryptography to name just a few
examples. This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln which hosts the Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience
(NCMN) and its NSF funded EPSCoR center on emerging quantum materials and
technologies. With this MRI award, researchers will take full advantage of the
existing cryogenic scanning probe microscope which enables atomic, magnetic and
piezo force microscopy at temperatures between 4 and 300K and magnetic fields up
to 9T, and utilize it to create a commercial high-resolution quantum sensing
platform. This versatile characterization tool is a quantum sensing application
which enables state-of-the-art characterization of novel quantum materials. The
instrument puts Nebraska on the map as a pioneer in many areas of quantum
materials science. Because the instrument is part of NCMN’s core facilities, it
becomes accessible to internal and external users. Access to this
instrumentation paves the way for Nebraska’s emerging quantum technology-based
economy, which builds on the existing high-tech industry within the Silicon
Prairie. Equally important is the fact that the access to this instrument allows
educating students and training quantum engineers for the much-needed quantum
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Track 1 Major Research
Instrumentation award is for the acquisition of a Nitrogen Vacancy (NV)-Attocube
(Atto) atomic force microscope (AFM) integrated with a confocal microscope
(CFM), which allows magnetic, optical, and quantum measurements at the nanometer
scale. The instrument will be located at the Surface and Materials
Characterization division of the Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience
(NCMN) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). The acquisition of the
module will transform the existing NSF-funded low-temperature high-magnetic-
field multifunctional scanning probe microscope into a versatile platform for NV
quantum sensing and fundamental research on quantum entanglement. The point
defect atomic nature of the NV center and its spin millisecond quantum coherence
lifetime allow measurements of a wide range of quantum materials with high
sensitivity and spatial resolution (&lt; 40 nm). Additionally, it operates at
high magnetic fields and across a wide range of temperatures. The system can
support various experiments, including magnetic imaging of solid-state materials
and biomolecules as well as mapping optical and thermal properties of low-
dimensional materials. Currently, there are five similar instruments in the U.S.
with limitations in types of materials studied (e.g., only superconductors) or
magnetic field range (only &lt; 0.5 T). In acquiring the NV-AttoAFM/CFM, the
goal is to position UNL at the forefront of quantum sensing capabilities
ushering in the age of applied quantum technologies in Nebraska and U.S.
Midwest. The infrastructure of NCMN, a user facility serving the Midwest
research community and startup companies, includes the technical support of a
PhD-trained expert in scanning probe microscopy, which ensures long-term
maintenance, sustainability, and user support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.