* 2216595
* BRC-BIO:  Morphological underpinnings of reproduction
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dara Orbach, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 06/30/2025
* USD 497,922.00

In conservation genetics, the use of assisted reproduction is becoming
widespread as a tool for preservation of genetic diversity among species whose
natural populations or biodiversity are dwindling. However, the success of this
practice is variable, due in part to poor understanding of the natural
morphological features of females that contribute to productive fertilization.
This project seeks to develop new fundamental knowledge and practical
technologies that can improve reproduction through assistive methods. The
research will focus on bottlenose dolphins in managed care facilities, where
they are routinely reared and trained. The charismatic nature of these animals
provides the project with an outstanding platform for public engagement to
increase scientific literacy. The research will also contribute to the education
and mentoring of students historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines, who
will be trained as members of the future scientific workforce. Finally, the
research has the potential to revolutionize the multi-billion-dollar livestock
breeding industry, which depends heavily on assisted reproduction. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The significance of female reproductive organ morphology in evolution
has been overlooked. Most research has focused on males. Addressing the
evolutionary function of female reproductive morphology has the potential to
improve understanding of how males and females control paternity. Cetaceans
(whales, dolphins, and porpoises) have unusual reproductive morphology, with
apparent coevolution between males and females. Certain aspects of female
reproductive morphology, found only in cetaceans, may be under selective
pressure to serve as physical barriers during reproduction. This project will
use multiple approaches, including the use of in vivo dolphins in managed care
facilities, to explore questions about the functional significance of and
evolutionary pressures behind multiple components of female reproductive
organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.