* 2216207
* MRI: Acquisition of a Calorimetry STA/TMA System for Coe College
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Caio Bragatto, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 262,022.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award, jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), will acquire a
new thermal characterization system which will allow the Physics Department at
Coe College to measure various properties that depend on temperature up to very
high values. The scientists will be able to look at the behavior of samples as
the temperature is increased up to 2000 degrees Celsius. More specifically, they
will conduct experiments on glasses that are extremely difficult to make. They
will also measure thermal properties like melting points, crystallization
temperatures, and the glass transition temperature (where the glass begins to
soften). The system will also allow for the measurement of mechanical
properties. These determine how easily a glass stretches as the temperature
increases (thermal expansion coefficient), as well as volume and density
changes. More advanced experiments that determine properties like the sintering
temperature (where glass grains coalesce into a solid) will also be possible.
These measurements are critical to understanding state-of-the-art new glasses
and ceramic materials of future importance to the US economy. The work will also
allow for the training of many undergraduate students. On top of carrying out
the research described above, they will also be exposed to the instruments in
certain advanced classes. International collaborators will also have access to
the equipment during their visits to Coe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new thermal characterization system at Coe
College will be composed of a Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer (which runs
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), differential thermal analysis (DTA),
and Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)) and a ThermoMechanical Analyzer (TMA).
This suite of tools will enable various Coe research groups to expand their
measurement capabilities into the high-temperature range, with DSC/DTA
measurements up to 2000 °C and 1600 °C for the mechanical (TMA) experiments.
Projects will span from measurements on aerolevitated samples to comparisons
between the results on invert glasses and topological constrain theory (TCT)
models. The thermal properties of ionically conducting glasses will also be
studied. The STA+TMA system will add substantive new capabilities to the
materials research groups at Coe College; allow for the training of over 70
undergraduate students, and continue the growth of Coe College as a regional
materials characterization hub. In turn, the characterization work on the system
will impact other local academic institutions and companies, domestic and
international collaborators; REU students; and high school teachers
participating in Coe’s RET program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.