* 2216423
* MRI: Acquisition of high-resolution mass spectrometry system for metal-organic environmental and biological chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Clare Reimers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 644,568.00

Metals have a major impact on the health of the ocean, soils, and watersheds.
Many metals are essential nutrients for life that often limit biological
activity, while others are harmful contaminants from human activities. The
biological uptake, toxicity, transport, and treatment of metals is largely
controlled by molecules produced by microbes and plants that bind to these
metals and keep them in solution. While it is widely recognized that many
dissolved metals are mostly present as organic-bound forms in the environment,
determining the composition, origin, and fate of metal-binding organic molecules
is an analytical challenge due to the highly complex chemistry of environmental
waters. The investigators in this study will acquire a liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry instrument to enable new research on the origin and fate of
organic molecules that govern metal distributions in the ocean, pathways for the
microbial processing of metals, the reactions between metals and organic matter
in soils, the design of improved water treatment systems that remove harmful
metals associated with organic matter, and the development of machine learning
approaches for environmental forensics. The instrument will also provide hands-
on training of the next generation of environmental analysts through workshops
and projects involving high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low concentrations of iron and other
micronutrient metals limit productivity across large sections of the ocean, but
their chemical forms are largely unknown. This high resolving power mass
spectrometry system will be used to separate and identify organic molecules and
their isotopologues encountered in ocean waters. As part of the US GEOTRACES
program, we will measure trace metal and organic speciation across the Southern
Ocean and Antarctic shelf. This work will provide mechanistic insight into the
processes that supply micronutrients to surface waters of the chronically metal
limited Southern Ocean. We will also investigate the speciation of metals and
organics sourced from coastal sediments, groundwater and microbial laboratory
cultures to establish linkages between specific organisms/genes and metal
binding metabolites that govern metal solubility and uptake across diverse
environments. Furthermore, we will determine speciation of copper and other
anthropogenic metals in river and wastewaters in order to assess toxicity and
removal strategies. Another focus of our research will be to develop machine
learning algorithms to develop markers of environmental processes based on high
resolution mass spectrometry data. Such advancements have the potential to
transform knowledge of elemental cycling from empirical descriptions to
mechanistic models that better explain and predict environmental processes by
accounting for chemical and biological diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.