* 2216026
* MRI: Acquisition of Active Holders for in-situ and in-operando Transmission Electron Microscope Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Matthew Maschmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 836,490.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of
advanced instrumentation for a user-based in-situ Transmission Electron
Microscopy (TEM) testing facility at the University of Missouri. The
instrumentation will enable dynamic testing of diverse samples while imaging.
This includes a gas-phase test cell with residual gas analyzer, a liquid-phase
test cell with electrochemical capabilities, and a vacuum cell with heating and
biasing capabilities. To eliminate the undesirable image drift that
traditionally stifles in-situ TEM experiments, the instrument will also provide
active image stabilization. The instrument suite will be installed in the
University of Missouri Electron Microscopy Center and will be accessible for
educational and industrial users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suite of
instrumentation has diverse application in biological and materials-based
research. Example activities include the following projects: The activity of Pt
electrocatalysts and carbon nanotube catalyst systems will be examined with
atomic resolution at elevated temperatures using the Protochips Atmosphere
system. The on-board residual gas analyzer will provide a quantitative
measurement of gas composition change as catalyst particles activate and de-
activate. The self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles and biomolecules will be
enabled by the Protochips Poseidon Select. Precise three-dimensional tracking of
individual particles is enabled by the Protochips Axon Synchronicity system. The
in-operando formation of interphase materials at cathode/solid electrolyte
junctions under electrical current will be examined using the Fusion Select
system. All experiments will benefit from the dynamic hardware and software-
enabled stabilization provided by the Protochips Axon
Synchronicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.