* 2216375
* MRI: Acquisition of a Femtosecond Laser/Streak Camera Fluorescence Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Heitz, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 310,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. SUNY College at Brockport is
acquiring a femtosecond laser that is coupled to a streak camera time-resolved
fluorescence spectrometer to support the research of Professor Mark Heitz and
colleagues Paschalis Alexandridis, Johsua Blose, and David McCamant. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, biochemistry, and
chemical engineering. A streak camera, when combined with a femtosecond laser,
can be used to study ultrafast dynamic processes of chemical systems. The streak
camera detector works by recording spectral data using multiple channels at very
high frame rates. Spectra can be resolved into sub-picosecond contributions to
understand excited-state decay kinetics and molecular dynamics as a function of
molecular interactions. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as
provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award for the femtosecond laser and streak camera is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels, especially in areas such as the understanding of
solvation energetics and dynamics as the driving force behind solvation in deep
eutectic solvents. In addition, other investigations include building a deeper
understanding of control variable for improved electron transfer in
nanoparticle-based solar energy production and determining structural stability
of model DNA and RNA oligomers in ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents to
improve solution viability for extraction, purification, pharmaceuticals,
nanotechnology, and long-term storage. It also aids in the determination of
variables that govern chain interactions in xanthan
gum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.