* 2216837
* BRC-BIO:Glial regulation of neural homeostasis during environmental stress in D. melanogaster
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alexis Hill, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 445,419.00

The environment around us is constantly changing, in ways both big and small.
Biological systems must utilize processes to maintain homeostasis (a
physiological equilibrium) in order to continue functioning amidst a fluctuating
environment. The electrical activity of neurons controls essential bodily
functions and behaviors that are necessary for survival. Within the nervous
system, another set of cells, called glia, regulate and support neurons. Recent
work by the PI, and others, has shown that glial cells play important roles in
helping neurons maintain homeostasis. This project will use genetic tools
available in fruit flies to elucidate novel mechanisms for how glia and neurons
interact to enable animals to survive and thrive in fluctuating environments.
The project will be integrated with inclusive educational practices, including
experiments completed by undergraduate students in the PI’s Neurobiology Lab
Course, and participation in a research based mentoring program for first year
undergraduates from historically underrepresented groups in STEM. This project
will also develop a Science Translators Program, creating resources for non-
scientists to learn about socially relevant science research, in languages other
than English. Together, the objectives of this grant will incorporate a diverse
group of students in studying biological mechanisms through which animals
respond to stress, giving students opportunities to develop a sense of belonging
in STEM, learn hands-on lab skills, and present their work at conferences and in
peer-reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much work has focused on
the cell intrinsic and neural circuit level mechanisms through which neurons
regulate their excitability, mechanisms by which glia regulate the nervous
system response to environmental stress are less well understood. Using
Drosophila melanogaster, the PI’s lab has recently identified glial homeostatic
roles for two genes, the voltage-gated potassium channel seizure and the ion
transporter ncc69, in neuropile ensheathing glia (EGN). EGN have been shown by
others to act as phagocytes in adult D. melanogaster, therefore this project
tests the hypothesis that glial phagocytosis of neurons, in processes such as
synaptic pruning, modulates the ability of the nervous system to maintain
homeostasis in response to environmental stress. Furthermore, the project will
tease apart the impact of developmental and adult glial function on nervous
system homeostasis. Ultimately, the project takes advantage of the wealth of
genetic tools, neurophysiological and behavioral assays available in D.
melanogaster to uncover basic principles of glial function in their regulation
of neural activity and animal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.