* 2216215
* MRI: Acquisition of an SEM-EDS system to further multidisciplinary scientific inquiry and discovery in Western New York
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Thomas Hegna, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,834.00

This grant will purchase for the State University of New York (SUNY) at Fredonia
a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive x-ray
spectroscopy (EDS) detector and related equipment. This integrated device will
provide students and faculty at SUNY Fredonia the ability to image very tiny
objects and to determine their chemical composition. The SEM-EDS will be
versatile and be employed on a variety of objects from fossils to rock specimens
to thin-section slides to biological specimens. The SEM-EDS system will enhance
student-faculty research and educational opportunities across multiple academic
disciplines such as anthropology/archaeology, biology, chemistry, geology,
environmental sciences, and science education. Student use of SEM-EDS will
foster analytical skills, technical experience in instrument operation and data
evaluation, and better prepare them for careers in science. In addition, the
SEM-EDS will allow for the development partnerships across our community and
region, as well as in our regional school districts, to capitalize on
experiential learning opportunities for the next generation of scientists.
Project personnel will prepare outreach programs and video modules linking SEM-
EDS investigation to New York State Next Generation Science
Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEM-EDS system will enhance regional
research opportunities by promoting new collaborations across the SUNY Fredonia
campus and with researchers at other campuses, educational institutions, and
potentially non-profit partners. Currently, this grant will allow a range of
research projects from the departments of Geology &amp; Environmental Sciences,
Biology, and Chemistry. Planned research includes: 1) using SEM-EDS to
chemically characterize minerals in representative bedrock samples to better
understand metamorphic and partial melting processes that lead to the evolution
of the Earthâ€™s crust; 2) using the SEM imaging to better understand the
evolution of fossil arthropods; 3) improving our understanding of the
fossilization processes of soft-tissues that rarely preserve in the
paleontological record; 4) chemical analysis of thin sections from an ~500-year
old archaeological semi-subterranean pit feature at a precontact Native American
village that may have been used to dispose of human latrine waste; 5) using SEM
to analyze micro-textures of sand grains to better reconstruct how certain
landforms originated (e.g., wind-blown dunes vs river transported levees); 6)
identifying diatom species, via SEM imagery, from lakes and streams to help
determine contemporary water quality conditions as well as past environmental
changes as part of broader paleolimnological studies; 7) using SEM-EDS to
chemically characterize the surface of so-called nanocluster catalysts being
studied as possible non-fossil fuel alternative energy sources; and, 8) using
SEM imaging to study rapid diversification and taxonomic importance of
microscopic features in North American tree crickets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.