* 2216746
* CNS Core: Small: CNN-Accelerator Co-Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Recently, automated co-design of machine learning (ML) models and accelerator
architectures has attracted significant attention from both the industry and
academia. However, most co-design frameworks explore a limited search space.
Furthermore, training the ML model and simulating the accelerator performance
are computationally expensive. To address these limitations, this project
proposes a convolutional neural network (CNN) and hardware-accelerator co-design
framework. It will consist of two new benchmarking sub-frameworks, CNNBench and
AccelBench, that will explore vastly expanded design spaces of CNNs and CNN
accelerators. CNNBench will use a new search technique to converge to the
optimal CNN architecture. AccelBench will perform cycle-accurate simulations for
a diverse set of accelerator architectures in a vast design space. Values for a
large number of hyperparameters need to be chosen while designing an accelerator
for a given application. They include the number and size of processing elements
and on-chip buffers, dataflow, main memory size and type, and those for many
domain-specific modules like sparsity-aware computation and reduced-precision
designs. Similarly, many hyperparameters come into play while designing a CNN as
well: the number of layers, convolution type and size, normalization type,
pooling type and size, structure of the final multi-layer perceptron head,
activation function, training recipe, and many more. At the same time, a CNN
architecture that has the highest performance may not meet resource constraints
like energy consumption and memory footprint. The proposed co-design framework
will efficiently navigate the joint CNN-accelerator design space for the target
application under given user constraints. THe project expects at least an order
of magnitude efficiency improvement in navigating this space relative to current
baselines while delivering higher performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
importance of the CNN-accelerator co-design problem to the industry, the
proposed co-design framework will likely have a transformative impact on it. To
effectively transfer research results, the project plans to continue our active
industrial engagements. The project will recruit graduate/undergraduate
female/minority students (the PI has supervised 15 female Ph.D. students so far
as well as many female/minority undergraduate and high-school students). The
project will ensure that the participants, including the broader public engaged
through outreach, experience the interdisciplinary nature of the research. The
research outcomes will be included in two undergraduate courses on Machine
Learning and Embedded Computing. Outreach to high-school students is planned
through Princeton Laboratory Learning Program. Broad dissemination to the
academic and industrial communities will be achieved through published papers,
posters, and seminars. In addition, various tools and models will be distributed
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.