* 2216551
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Quantifying behavior, nutrition, and energy balance in an ‘energetically frugal’ primate
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Andrea Baden, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 28,392.00

Organisms use diverse strategies to meet their nutritional needs and maintain a
healthy body condition so they may survive and reproduce. This doctoral
dissertation project examines the behavior, nutrition, and energetics of a wild
primate to assess how a fruit-specialist responds to environmental
unpredictability and prolonged periods of fruit scarcity, as well as how these
responses may change in response to habitat disturbance. The project facilitates
the training and dissertation data collection of a student in behavioral and
nutrition methods; implements training workshops for local research staff and
international scholars; and provides lab-based research opportunities for
several undergraduate and masters students at a minority-serving institution.
The research can promote the conservation of a critically endangered species by
monitoring the health of populations living in differentially disturbed habitats
and predicting outcomes of human-driven habitat disturbance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve our understanding primate
dietary flexibility and their subsequent responses to ecological change. Some
primates, including some lemurs, are described as being ‘energetically frugal’,
employing a combination of energy-saving traits in response to harsh, often
unpredictable environments. Several studies have examined primate behavior in
response to seasonal changes in climate and food availability, but additional
quantification of behavioral responses to nutrition or energy levels may help to
further explain the pronounced behavioral flexibility characteristic of many
lemur species, particularly in light of ongoing human-driven habitat
disturbance. The project proposes four objectives: (1) investigate the
relationships between climate, resource availability, and behavior across space
and time; (2) examine how lemurs balance nutrient intakes in response to changes
in food availability and forest quality; (3) examine the role of minerals in the
diet; and (4) elucidate variation in energy balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.