* 2216198
* MRI: Acquisition of comprehensive x-ray scattering system for in situ studies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sabyasachi Sen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 535,686.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award is for a comprehensive x-ray
scattering system, which will transform the research, educational, and outreach
activities across Californiaâ€™s Central Valley. This state-of-the-art instrument
serves as a flagship tool for the Advanced Materials Characterization and
Testing Laboratory at the University of California, Davis, addressing the needs
of a broad range of users from local community colleges, research institutions,
national laboratories, and industry. The study of the atomic structure of
advanced materials as well as their evolution upon exposure to external forces
enables these researchers to design new materials that solve pressing problems
in the information technology, renewable energy, and environment sectors.
Furthermore, access to this instrument creates opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students from underrepresented groups to participate in cutting-
edge research and will modernize the science and engineering curricula by
providing hands-on learning experiences and incorporating groundbreaking
research results into coursework. These activities are key to bolstering student
retention and promoting interest in science and technology careers, particularly
among underrepresented minorities, women, and first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major research areas enabled by this system include
quantum materials, energy conversion/storage materials, amorphous materials, and
biomaterials. This versatile system has measurement capabilities for high-
resolution x-ray diffraction, x-ray reflectivity, reciprocal space maps, and
small/wide angle x-ray scattering measurements applied to powders, thin films,
and nanomaterials. Moreover, the system hosts in situ capabilities consisting of
temperature and environment-controlled sample stages, and an enclosure large
enough to support ancillary equipment for the application of electric fields and
laser illumination. These features are directly relevant to topics such as (a)
the interplay between magnetic, electronic, and structural properties of quantum
materials, (b) synthesis, characterization, and theoretical analysis of
inorganic nanoparticles for energy conversion/storage devices, (c) structural
analysis of catalysts and establishment of structure-catalytic properties
relationships, (d) disorder, defects, and molecular structure of thin films for
biosensors, (e) materials under extreme conditions, and (f) interfacial and bio-
geo-chemical processes, which are critical to the transport of contaminants in
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.