* 2216793
* NANOGrav@UPRM: Growing and Characterizing the NANOGrav Gravitational-Wave Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Henri Radovan, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2025
* USD 520,646.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project partners the University of Puerto Rico
Mayaguez (UPRM) with the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational
Waves (NANOGrav), an international scientific collaboration comprising several
dozen institutions. The goals are (i) to increase the U.S. workforce diversity
by promoting research and education of Hispanic/Latino undergraduate students in
physics, and (ii) to advance several key NANOGrav science goals. The activities
are tailored to retain physics students, to train them in forefront physics
research, and to motivate them to enter graduate school by way of a series of
educational and closely supervised research projects. NANOGrav uses a galaxy-
sized detector of pulsars that emit radio pulses with atomic-clock precision.
The arrival times of those pulses are recorded with world-leading radio
telescopes across the U.S. and Canada. NANOGrav searches for correlated changes
in the arrival times, induced by ripples in spacetime called gravitational
waves, that are expected to be emitted by extremely massive black holes at the
cores of merging galaxies. UPRM students will be trained in a variety of data
quality and analysis methods, as well as simulation techniques and astrophysical
interpretation by several NANOGrav senior scientists. Besides nurturing the
talent and fostering the participation of minorities, NANOGrav will directly
benefit from the research by expanding and characterizing the array of pulsars.
It is this so-called pulsar timing array that will detect gravitational waves
and characterize their sources and hence contribute to our understanding of the
history of the Universe and our place in it. A holistic approach is implemented,
where the students will be immersed in remote educational programs, present
NANOGrav's research activities at local high schools, participate in workshops
organized locally and on the U.S. mainland, take part in research projects, and
spend several weeks at a NANOGrav institution contributing to daily ongoing
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award partners the Physics
Department at the Mayagüez campus of the University of Puerto Rico (UPRM) with
the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav)
Physics Frontiers Center to advance several key NANOGrav science goals and to
increase the participation and retention of minorities in the field of physics.
NANOGrav’s mission is to detect and characterize low-frequency gravitational
waves from merging supermassive black hole binaries using a pulsar timing array
as a galactic-scale detector. Low-frequency gravitational-wave detection and
characterization will provide information on galaxy merger rates, supermassive
black hole masses, and processes leading to black hole coalescence.
Characterization of individual pulsars of the array in turn yields information
on, e.g., neutron star masses, equations of state, populations, and astrometric
data; tests of general relativity; interstellar electron distributions; solar
wind properties; and pulsar emission mechanisms. Undergraduate students from
UPRM will be involved in research projects of relevance to NANOGrav's mission,
mentored at UPRM as well as remotely and onsite at several NANOGrav
institutions. The research will involve searching for new pulsars, data quality
checks, pulsar simulation development, and characterizing pulsar emission
properties. The students will participate in workshops at UPRM, the Arecibo
Observatory, and other NANOGrav sites, as well as to attend general NANOGrav and
training meetings on the mainland. The planned research activities are focused
on growing and characterizing the pulsar timing array. The sensitivity of the
array is proportional to the number of pulsars and hence finding new pulsars is
of fundamental importance. It has also been observed that some pulsars change
emission properties, which limits their timing resolution and usefulness in the
array and therefore an investigation of pulsar emission and accompanying
interstellar medium effects will provide a valuable contribution to NANOGrav
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.