* 2216396
* Improving Student Engagement and Training in Healthcare Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bill Tseng, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing instructional
materials to help engineering students learn the necessary skills for careers in
healthcare engineering. Engineering is increasingly playing an important role in
improving and advancing healthcare systems. Healthcare Engineering (HE) focuses
on applying engineering concepts, methods, and technical innovations in a
healthcare context. HE views healthcare as a complex system including the
complete network of organizations, agencies, facilities, information systems,
management systems, financing mechanisms, logistics, resources, and all trained
personnel engaged in delivering healthcare within a geographical area. The
demand for healthcare engineers is anticipated to grow, creating a need for more
instruction in engineering on HE topics as well as efforts to make students
aware of opportunities in HE, which could attract students who have not
considered an engineering career. This project will engage and train engineering
students for healthcare system innovation with digital healthcare engineering
using an Electronic Data Warehouse (EDW). An EDW is used to collect and store
big data from complex healthcare environments and can be used to support
healthcare systems innovation and operational excellence. This project plans to
provide students with opportunities to learn about EDWs so that students can
develop the necessary skills to become a healthcare data analyst in the
healthcare sector. Instructional modules and student projects will be developed
to help students learn how to access healthcare databases, create data models,
perform data analyses, and create visualizations for the results. Outreach
activities will be conducted at high schools and a local community college to
help broaden participation in healthcare engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to integrate healthcare engineering (HE) education in
an existing industrial and systems engineering program and to increase
engagement for students from underrepresented groups in the emerging HE field. A
project-based learning approach will be implemented to help students learn how
to design and develop decision support systems for healthcare systems, build
computer simulation models of healthcare systems to evaluate the impact of
system changes, and use data mining methodologies to understand the behavior of
healthcare systems. A healthcare data analytics laboratory and technical
workshop series will be developed to support student learning. The laboratory
will provide students with software and hardware resources that will help them
complete their healthcare systems projects successfully. To increase the number
of students from underrepresented groups in HE, the project will offer mini-
workshops for high school and community college students and hold interactive
forums for students and their families to improve student and family perceptions
of engineering. The research question that will be addressed in this project is:
What is the impact of project activities on student interest in current emerging
technologies among underrepresented Hispanic students as well as student
retention and progress towards degree completion? Pre- and post surveys and
institutional data will be used to collect data on participants and qualitative
and quantitative methods will be used to analyze the results. Project results
will be disseminated to the engineering education community through
presentations at the annual conference of the American Society of Engineering
Education and in publications in education related journals. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.