* 2216633
* BPC-DP: PeerSIST: Peer Support for IS Transfers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Carolyn Seaman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 294,726.00

The objective of the PeerSIST Project is to develop, implement and evaluate an
innovative, accessible, and inclusive transfer student peer mentoring program in
computing. This objective contributes to the promotion of transfer-friendly
organizational structures and practices in computing education. Transfer
students, in the context of the Information Systems (IS) Department at the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), are students who began their
higher education at a 2-year institution (e.g. a community college) and have
transferred their enrollment to a 4-year institution to complete their bachelors
degree. This project also includes major “transfers”, i.e. transfer students who
have made a second “transfer” to the IS major from another major (often computer
science). New knowledge will be gained about the impact of structured peer
mentoring on students’ academic self-perceptions, sense of belonging in the
major, and intention to remain in the major, as well as changes in faculty
members’ awareness of transfer student needs. Assessment will be assisted by a
novel data analytics framework, integrated into the learning management system.
This exploration is expected to increase the success and retention of students,
particularly underrepresented students, in computing majors. The project is also
designed to establish disciplinary collaborations between faculty and staff
interested in supporting transfer students. The PeerSIST mentoring program will
be expandable and adaptable at other institutions, aiming for widespread
national impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage the social
capital of undergraduate transfer student peers at one mid-sized public,
minority serving, research university (i.e. UMBC) by establishing structures for
mutually beneficial relationships and knowledge exchange among students. At
critical points throughout the academic year, mentoring teams comprising one
Peer Mentor matched with two Mentee Buddies, will engage in various program
activities that will focus on three key themes: academic success, community
building, and professional development. The PeerSIST program will be assessed
and evaluated for its effectiveness in increasing engagement and sense of
belonging in the major, as well as how it results in increased faculty awareness
of transfer student knowledge in the IS department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.