* 2216312
* MRI: Acquisition of a versatile pico-second laser and electroplating system for advanced device manufacturing and materials processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* John Muth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 289,039.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a class 1,
pico-second laser and a complementary reverse-pulse electroplating system for
North Carolina State University (NC State). These tools will greatly enhance the
fabrication capabilities of the university which also serves researchers from
nearby universities, colleges, high schools, and industry. The equipment will
find immediate use in a wide range of research activities led by the PI, 3 co-
PIs, and 16 senior personnel in the areas of electronics, materials engineering,
and biology. Moreover, the instruments will be located in the Nanofabrication
Facility (NNF), a shared facility and part of the Research Triangle
Nanotechnology Network (RTNN), which will ensure easy access to a rich variety
of users from NC State, local universities and industry. This will create
technological impact by enabling new strategies for processing materials,
synthesizing unconventional nano/micro materials, and fabricating devices while
stimulating new inter and intra-university research and strengthen NC Stateâ€™s
relationships with industry. The proposed instruments are uniquely suited for
training next generation researchers with a low learning curve since the tool
accepts standard computer aided design files and includes an intuitive user
interface. This creates the opportunity to involve and educate undergraduates,
graduates, and high school students, as well as teachers from nearby high
schools and community colleges through existing outreach programs. The tools
will therefore be useful for various advanced research and training purposes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pico-second laser will allow cutting/patterning of
features as small as 20 microns and can process a wide range of materials (soft,
hard, organic, inorganic, metallic) for applications ranging from energy to
inorganics, electronics, biomedical systems, and soft materials. The tool is
especially useful in processing materials that are either incompatible and/or
result in poor resolution when patterned using conventional tools such as
standard lithography, printing, or carbon dioxide lasers. The laser is
particularly useful in heterogenous fabrication crucial for realizing next-
generation devices that are not easily achievable through conventional
techniques. The PI/co-PIs and senior personnel intend to process numerous
materials such as polymers, carbon nanomaterials, metals, inorganics, glass,
silicon, paper, and textiles for 1) tissue-integrated sensors; 2) organic,
semiconducting, and self-folding electronics; 3) robotics and actuators; 4)
opto-electronic materials; and 5) microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.