* 2216352
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrasonic Atomization and Alloying Platform for Additive Manufacturing Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Berfield, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 168,700.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
metal powder production and alloying instrument to be located within the
Additive Manufacturing Institute of Science and Technology at the University of
Louisville. This instrument will enable production of custom metal powders
compatible for use in a variety of additive manufacturing technologies. The
unique ultrasonic method used by this instrument allows fabrication of metal
powders from traditional raw material forms. Even raw materials containing
extremely high melting point temperature refractory elements can be used to make
powders. This instrumentation addition will facilitate the development of new
refractory-based alloy compositions by addressing critical national supply chain
issues related to the availability of these materials for advanced manufacturing
research. Educational outreach through this project includes integration of
modules related to this instrument for industry training, undergraduate
education, and business outreach. Industry workforce training will be conducted
through short courses on metal powder production and safe material handling.
Hands-on training of undergraduate student will occur through the long-
established Speed School of Engineering co-op program. This instrument will also
benefit new campus initiatives supporting advanced manufacturing guidance for
minority-owned businesses. Instrument use will be coordinated through the
Kentucky Multi-Scale Manufacturing and NanoIntegration Node, part of the
National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI)
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex geometries of additive manufacturing
coupled with unconventional high-temperature resilient materials enabled by this
equipment has direct relevance to applications from hypersonics to energy
efficient industrial heat exchangers. Full realization of such technologies
requires fundamental studies into the discovery, processing, and subsequent
additive manufacturing of these advanced material systems. This, primary
research thrust areas enabled by this ultrasonic atomization and alloying system
will focus on current barriers to additive manufacturing of refractory high
entropy alloys. Specifically, this system will be used to (i) investigate stress
evolution during additive manufacturing deposition of refractory materials, (ii)
discover and rapidly screen powder-based additive manufactured alloys, (iii)
design lattice-based metamaterial systems, (iv) probe the high-temperature
performance behavior of refractory alloys, and (v) study the physics of
refractory metal powder particulate formation. An interdisciplinary team of
researchers, including several external collaborators, have committed to
participating in this effort, which is expected to contribute significantly to
the greater scientific body of knowledge via widespread dissemination of
research findings through conference participation, journal publications, and
publicly accessible material properties databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.