* 2216070
* Collaborative Research: Photoassisted CVD for Low Temperature Area Selective Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lisa McElwee-White, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 413,362.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Ceramics and the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry programs in the Division of Materials Research,
Professor Amy Walker of the University of Texas at Dallas and Professor Lisa
McElwee-White of the University of Florida are developing light driven chemical
synthesis methods to prepare patterns of metal on surfaces that are too heat
sensitive to withstand conventional methods for deposition of metals. This
process, called photoassisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD), enables area-
selective deposition of materials during the manufacture of electronic devices.
Professors Walker and McElwee-White are growing metal films with high precision
using a new approach: PACVD on regularly arranged regions of molecules called
self-assembled monolayers, in which the ends of the molecules can be chosen for
specific chemical reactions. By arranging regions of reactive ends and non-
reactive ends, the placement of the metal on the surface can be controlled. The
novel low-temperature deposition technique for metallic films could in the
future enable the formation of layered heterostructured materials with
interconnects on glassy or ceramic materials without damaging a carefully
tailored microstructure. Thereby advances could lead to improvements in
manufacturing for technologies ranging from sensors to energy harvesting
equipment. Other fields, like integrating organic electronics onto cloth or
plastic supports could benefit from insights gained from this project as well.
Graduate and undergraduate students working on this interdisciplinary project
learn technical and collaborative skills valuable in both academia and industry,
preparing them for a variety of careers. To communicate the excitement of
science to the general public, the PIs generate a series of 90-second “Tiny
Tech” radio modules and podcasts that feature real world applications of
materials and chemistry-based nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to develop a new class of
area selective deposition (ASD) methods in which low temperature photoassisted
chemical vapor deposition (PACVD) processes are employed for the selective
deposition of metals onto functionalized thermally sensitive materials. The
continued downscaling of device structures has led to significant challenges for
conventional top-down lithographic approaches. In contrast, ASD leads to the
deposition of materials only in a desired area – the target “growth” surface –
without as many complex lithography steps. The development of reliable low
temperature ASD of metallic thin films as part of heterostructures involving
glassy materials or tailored ceramic substrates, as well as on organic
materials, is therefore critical to many technologies including energy
harvesting, sensing, magnetoelectronics and organic electronics. The proposed
approach to ASD relies on mechanism-based design of precursors that upon
photolysis, generate intermediates that react with specific functional groups on
the growth surface, nucleating the metal deposit. The non-growth surface will be
functionalized with groups that are unreactive (or less reactive) with the
intermediates, resulting in ASD. In these studies, self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) will be used for both growth and non-growth surfaces. SAMs have highly
organized structures with a uniform density of terminal functional groups and
can be easily patterned enabling quantitative investigation of the precursor-
molecule interactions and deposition selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.