* 2216036
* Using ASSISTments for College Math: An Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Supports and Transferability of Findings
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Allison McCulloch, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 03/31/2025
* USD 134,869.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in mathematics and statistics using an online system that provides feedback to
students while solving homework problems. A common teaching challenge is how
best to support students when they are stuck on a mathematics problem in a
homework assignment. When the goal is to support productive struggle and not
just provide the correct answer, it is not always clear how much support should
be provided. An existing free web-based platform allows teachers and researchers
to author questions and solution step supports, and it makes student action data
available to instructors and researchers. Previous research results on the use
of this platform to support student learning and the use of formative feedback
in instruction in secondary school classrooms was promising. Given the potential
of the platform as a useful pedagogical tool in those settings, this project
aims to adapt the platform for use at the undergraduate level, where research
indicates the need for such supports in introductory level mathematics and
statistics courses. Understanding how the technological supports provided to
college students as they complete mathematics problems impacts student learning
and confidence will provide important insights for the design and implementation
of educational materials broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adapting prior
studies, this project seeks to determine whether the use of an existing online
platform for formative assessment of student work at the college level leads to
similar gains in mathematics learning and analogous changes in pedagogical
practices as has been reported at the middle school and high school levels. Over
100 randomized control trials have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness
of supports provided through the ASSISTments platform, but these have primarily
occurred at levels of schooling prior to the undergraduate years. This project
aims to determine whether the use of the platform at the college level leads to
similar gains in learning and analogous changes in pedagogical practices. This
will be accomplished by replicating studies at the college level which have been
shown in the literature to be “Best So Far” supports – those supports which have
significantly impacted student learning the most. To accomplish this, the
project has four main aims. First is to support scalability by adding a feature
to the platform which allows for the uploading of questions and solutions from
the learning management system Canvas, thus creating a database of at least 500
problems aligned with college algebra, precalculus, calculus, and statistics
curricula. A second aim is to design questions and feedback to improve student
understanding and help them complete math homework problems, by creating 16
classroom-ready assignments on common topics in college algebra. Third is to use
the platform in college mathematics courses and measure its impact on student
learning, and persistence in STEM majors, thus generating large and rich
datasets containing student actions within the platform. The fourth and final
project aim is to track system usage by instructors during the semester, i.e.,
while problems are assigned and immediately after the due date, and also the
persistence of system usage from semester-to-semester. Project results will be
disseminated through the Open Science Framework and the platform’s website. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.