* 2216871
* Conference: The Adjoint School: A Training Program for New Researchers in Applied Category Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Daniel Cicala, TOPOS INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,300.00

This award supports US-based participants in the Adjoint School Research Week,
held at the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK over July 11â€“15, 2022. The
Adjoint School 2022 provides mentorship and community for early-career
researchers in applied category theory, bringing them together for fortnightly
virtual collaboration from February to June, and then in person for the Adjoint
School Research Week, followed by the International Conference on Applied
Category Theory. Held annually, the Adjoint School is a student-led,
international, hands-on research training program serving 16-20 new students
each year, with previous participants returning as teaching assistants and
organizers. Adjoint School projects center on using techniques in category
theory -- a mathematical language of systems and relationships -- to solve
practical problems in science and engineering, relevant to both academic and
industry needs. At core, the school is designed around community-building,
reflecting the strongly social nature of mathematics research. As part of this,
the school is especially committed to advancing inclusivity, access, and
diversity in the applied category theory research community, and in the
mathematics community more broadly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2022, the Adjoint
School comprises the following projects and mentors: Compositional
Thermodynamics (Spencer Breiner, National Institute of Standards and
Technologies, USA), Fuzzy Type Theory for Opinion Dynamics (Paige North,
University of Pennsylvania, USA), A Compositional Theory of Timed and
Probabilistic Processes (Nicoletta Sabadini, University of Insubria, Italy), and
Algebraic Structures in Logic and Relations (Filippo Bonchi, University of Pisa,
Italy). The program combines a five-month virtual collaboration component with
an intensive in-person week, and gives students practice across all skills of
the research process, including reading and discussing papers, informal
presentations and collaboration, expository blog writing, conference talks,
writing papers, and, where relevant, programming. Further details can be found
at http://adjointschool.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.