* 2216926
* Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms and Learning (IDEAL)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Chun Liu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2027
* USD 102,000.00

The Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms, and Learning (IDEAL) will
consolidate and amplify research devoted to the foundations of data science
across all the major research-focused educational institutions in the greater
Chicago area: the University of Illinois at Chicago, Northwestern University,
the Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, the University of Chicago, and
the Illinois Institute of Technology. This transdisciplinary institute involves
over 50 researchers working on key aspects of the foundations of data science
across computer science, electrical engineering, mathematics, statistics, and
several related fields like economics, operations research, and law, and they
are complemented by members of Google’s learning theory team. Its research goals
range from the core foundations of data science to its interfaces with other
disciplines: 1) tackling important challenges related to foundations of machine
learning and optimization, 2) addressing statistical, algorithmic and
mathematical challenges in dealing with high-dimensional data, and 3) exploring
the foundations of aspects of data science that interact with society. The
institute will foster strong connections with the community and local high
schools, broaden participation in data science locally and nationally, and build
lasting research and educational infrastructure through its activities.
Institute activities will include workshops for undergraduate students, high
school teacher workshops, public lectures, and museum exhibit designs. These
will build new pathways for undergraduate students, high school students, and
the broader public from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds, to increase
participation and engagement with scientific fields related to data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts of the institute will center
around the foundations of machine learning, high-dimensional data analysis and
inference, and data science and society. Specific topics include foundations of
deep learning, reinforcement learning, machine learning and logic, network
inference, high-dimensional data analysis, trustworthiness &amp; reliability,
fairness, and data science with strategic agents. The research activities are
designed to facilitate collaboration between the different disciplines and
across the five Chicago-area institutions, and they build on the extensive
experience from previous efforts of the participating universities. The
activities include topical special programs, postdoctoral fellows, co-mentored
PhD students, workshops, coordinated graduate courses, visiting fellows,
research meetings, and brainstorming sessions. The proposed research will lead
to new theoretical frameworks, models, mathematical tools and algorithms for
analyzing high-dimensional data, inference and learning. Successful outcomes
will also lead to a better understanding of the foundations of data science and
machine learning in both strategic and non-strategic environments – including
emerging concerns like reliability, fairness, privacy and interpretability as
data science interacts with society in various ways. The institute will also
have broader impacts of strengthening research and educational infrastructure,
developing human resources, broadening participation from underrepresented
groups, and by connecting theory to science and industry. The institute will
organize activities to engage the community and a diverse group of students at
all levels, including introductory workshops for undergraduate research
participants, high school student and teacher outreach (through a partnership
with the Math Circles of Chicago), and public lectures as part of both our
research program and a partnership with the Museum of Science and Industry. The
Chicago public institutions that we engage serve a very diverse population, so
the outreach, recruitment, and training activities will broaden participation
from underrepresented groups. Finally, the institute will have direct engagement
with applications and industry through its activities involving Google, other
industry partners in the broader Chicago area, and applied data science
institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.