* 2216838
* Understanding and Controlling Rydberg States in Solid-State Platforms for Quantum Technologies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Wolfgang Ketterle, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2025
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Rydberg states are electronically excited orbitals in
atoms or molecules whose energy structure approximately follow that observed in
atomic hydrogen. Key to many breakthroughs in atomic, molecular and optical
physics, research during the last decade has also shown that much of the physics
governing Rydberg dynamics in cold atoms finds a natural extension in condensed
matter, thus hinting at novel technologies that simultaneously benefit from
Rydberg traits and a solid-state implementation. This proposal brings together
experimentalists and theorists at the City College of New York (CCNY) and the
Center for Ultracold Atoms at Harvard/MIT to advance the understanding of
Rydberg physics in novel solid-state systems comprising two-dimensional
materials and wide-bandgap semiconductors. This cross-disciplinary team is
ideally positioned to advance the scientific knowledge of this field as it
combines experts in atomic and condensed matter physics with a know-how
encompassing optical spectroscopy, materials science, nanofabrication, and
fundamental solid-state modeling. Adding to the scientific objectives, a key
goal of this PREP project is to establish a formal partnership that
simultaneously increases and enriches the participation of students and postdocs
belonging to groups that are most underrepresented in physics. To this end, the
group will capitalize on successful minority recruitment channels to reach the
broadest student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is organized around
two distinct, though closely related material systems: The first set of
activities zeroes in on the so-called “exciton-polaritons”, hybrid
quasiparticles emerging from the strong coupling between excitons and photons in
a cavity. The focus is on polaritons in transition metal dichalcogenides, whose
Rydberg states will be investigated in the presence of magnetic field, strain,
and dielectric engineering with special attention to polariton formation and
non-linear interaction. Complementing this work, the group will investigate the
formation of Rydberg states in neutral color centers in diamond, where
hydrogenic orbitals — crudely associated to a hole revolving a negatively-
charged core — emerge under resonant optical excitation. The group will
experimentally explore and theoretically model Rydberg state dynamics in these
systems, better understand the interplay between electronic spin polarization
and Rydberg state creation, and investigate Rydberg blockade effects between
adjacent color centers. The nature of the physical platforms investigated — at
the center of broad ongoing efforts yet minimally explored in their connection
with Rydberg physics — makes these activities of interest, particularly as a
route to recreate in the solid state the features that make Rydberg states so
attractive for applications in quantum information processing. In addition, an
extensive set of initiatives is envisioned aimed at advancing the career paths
of students and postdocs including a science communication bootcamp, an ethics
training course, a professional development seminar series, and an annual
research symposium. The group is committed to instilling a sense of community,
which will be realized through a close interaction between participating
students in the form of regular virtual meetings (either led by the PIs or
taking place informally) and student exchange between
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.