* 2216080
* Atomic-scale Imaging of Novel Electronic States in Kagome Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ilija Zeljkovic, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,997.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The so-called kagome material
structure is characterized by the arrangement of atoms residing in the corners
of corner-sharing triangles. This structure has emerged as a rich platform to
study novel phenomena. Due to the geometry of the kagome structure, electrons in
these systems can have distinct characteristics that are rarely found in other
materials. However, the underlying physical properties of kagome systems are
still poorly understood at a fundamental level. This project aims to understand
the exotic properties of a new family of kagome materials. To accomplish this,
the researchers employ modern experimental methods of scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy. The project focuses on studying the effects of
magnetic field, strain, and chemical composition change on the properties of
these systems. The research aims to deepen the fundamental understanding of
kagome materials, and establish the foundation for their eventual use and
applications in technology. Integrated research and education activities aim to
train and educate students via establishing outreach events in local schools,
and by giving lab tours. To motivate young students to pursue science careers,
the PI provides research opportunities for high-school students and
underrepresented groups in his lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The kagome lattice of transition metal atoms offers an
exciting platform to study electronic correlations in the presence of geometric
frustration and nontrivial band topology. The recently discovered class of
layered kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Cs or Rb), composed of a kagome net of
Vanadium atoms, has generated significant interest in the community. There has
been an avalanche of intriguing theories proposed and experimental phenomena
observed, for example the observation of anomalous Hall response, various
density waves, and a rare occurrence of superconductivity in a kagome system.
This project focuses on using variable-temperature spectroscopic-imaging
scanning tunneling microscopy to explore novel electronic phenomena in this new
class of materials. Specifically, it aims to: (1) reveal the existence of
electronic nematic phase in these materials, (2) uncover what is the
spectroscopic origin of the surprising charge stripe phase, (3) provide a
comprehensive atomic-scale insight into how the observed density waves and
superconductivity evolve as a function of chemical doping, temperature and
strain, (4) determine the effect of magnetic field on the electronic band
structure to look for signatures of orbital moments, and (5) shed light on the
nature of superconductivity and the existence of one-dimensional modes
propagating along domain walls. The combination of in situ vector magnet and
spectroscopic-imaging scanning tunneling microscopy provides a rare tool for
direct band structure mapping as a function of vector magnetic field. The PIâ€™s
integrated research and education activities aim to impact a wide range of
students via establishing outreach events in local middle and high schools, and
giving lab tours. To motivate young students to pursue science careers, the PI
provides research opportunities for high-school students and underrepresented
groups in his lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.