* 2216386
* Applying Perceptual and Adaptive Learning Technologies to Undergraduate Neuroanatomy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Philip Kellman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing
innovative instructional technologies based on well-established principles of
perceptual and adaptive learning to help undergraduates master neuroanatomy.
During a time when there has been a sustained explosion in both neuroscience
research and in undergraduate enrollment in neuroscience courses and majors,
effective neuroanatomy education is critically important in providing a common
foundation by which the brain and its functions can be understood. However,
mastering neuroanatomy involves several different forms of learning and poses
significant instructional challenges. Perceptual learning refers to improvements
in how people pick up information as they gain experience and practice in a
given domain. Prior research shows that interactive computer-based perceptual
learning interventions reliably develop students’ ability to quickly and
accurately recognize and distinguish complex structures, patterns, and
relationships, such as those that are encountered in neuroanatomy courses.
However, perceptual learning has largely been ignored in formal education
because the learning conditions that promote it most effectively are rarely
available in standard course materials and instructional formats. This project
plans to combine perceptual and adaptive learning technologies in a novel format
known as Perceptual Adaptive Courseware (PAC), in which short cycles of
expository instruction are interwoven with web-based adaptive interactive
learning, enabling students to advance and consolidate their learning. The
approach may improve learning in neuroanatomy and also provide valuable
information regarding the applications of these learning innovations to other
STEM domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to generate new
knowledge by investigating whether enhancements based on this combination of
perceptual and adaptive learning technologies produce improved instructional
outcomes for undergraduates learning neuroanatomy. The PAC intervention will be
iteratively developed, piloted, and tested across two cohorts of undergraduates
enrolled in multiple sections of an upper-level course in behavioral
neuroscience at a public university with a diverse student body. The project
will implement a controlled experimental design comparing groups that experience
the PAC intervention for a defined segment of the neuroanatomy curriculum to
groups that experience instruction in normal lecture and lab formats for the
same portion of the curriculum. Pre/post assessments will yield quantitative
data on students’ learning of the targeted content. Students, teaching
assistants, and instructors will also provide qualitative data to help design
and optimize the user experience with respect to features such as navigation,
pacing, graphics, and interactive interfaces. Perceptual Adaptive Courseware,
which runs on laptops, desktop computers, and tablets using standard browsers,
represents a model approach that can be readily extended to other STEM domains.
Findings from the project will be shared with faculty who teach neuroanatomy or
related disciplines through meetings and publications of the Society for
Neuroscience and the Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience. Results will also
be disseminated to audiences interested in applications of cognitive research to
instruction and learning technology. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.