* 2216262
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-collection Detector System for the Cameca IMS 1280 in the Northeast National Ion Microprobe Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Brian Monteleone, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,739.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program award provides funds to
upgrade the Cameca IMS 1280 ion microprobe operated by the Northeast National
Ion Microprobe Facility (NENIMF) with a multi-collection detector. Secondary ion
mass spectrometry (SIMS) is a powerful micro-analytical technique for
determining the elemental and isotopic compositions of solid materials that has
broad applications to earth, ocean, and planetary sciences. The NENIMF has
operated as a highly productive, NSF-supported National Facility for twenty-six
years and is equipped with instrumentation and personnel that are ideally suited
to help the geoscience community take full advantage of multi-collector SIMS. An
IMS 1280 upgraded with multi-collection capability would complete the NENIMF as
a cutting-edge SIMS facility serving the US geoscience community for a fraction
of the cost of purchasing a new Cameca IMS 1300-HR3 (~$7 million). The mono-
collection NENIMF IMS 1280 has established an important niche in the geoscience
community as a major source of high-quality data on volatile element
concentrations in silicate glasses, glass inclusions, and nominally anhydrous
minerals. The upgrade to multi-collection will be leveraged by combining this
existing expertise with the capability to analyze light stable isotopes on the
same spots and, thereby, allow us to provide exciting and innovative new SIMS
applications for users of the facility. The proposed upgrade would greatly
enhance studies of pre-eruptive magmatic volatiles, which represent an important
control on volcano explosivity, as well as volatiles (especially sulfur) in the
solid Earth, cosmochemistry, oxygen isotope thermometry, biogenic carbonates,
and biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cameca IMS 1280 is a double
focusing mass spectrometer with a large radius magnetic sector, and ion optics
optimized to attain a mass resolving power of 6000 without significant loss of
secondary ion intensity. Starting in 1998, an increasing number of IMS 1270/1280
ion microprobes have been equipped with the capability to measure up to five
isotopes simultaneously (multi-collection). Multi-collection has a number of
significant advantages over mono-collection. First, it increases the efficiency
of data collection and – thereby – minimizes the effect of instrumental drift.
For example, the time required to determine the isotopic composition of S in
sulfides or O in silicates is decreased from approximately 12 minutes per spot
using mono-collection to only 4 minutes per spot by multi-collection. This leads
to significant improvements in accuracy and reproducibility because instrumental
drift can be corrected for through a much higher frequency of standard analyses
between samples. Second, the ability to measure multiple isotopes simultaneously
leads to a significant increase in data quality by minimizing the effects of
instability and drift of the primary ion beam. For example, the 32S/34S
measurements on sulfide standards on the NENIMF mono-collection system have a
typical precision of 0.07-0.12 ‰ 2RSE (relative standard error) and a spot to
spot reproducibility (accuracy) of ~0.6 ‰ 2RSD (relative standard deviation).
Multi-collector analysis on the same standards have a precision of 0.02-0.03 ‰
2RSE and accuracy &lt; 0.1 ‰ 2RSD. Third – and most importantly – multi-
collection allows for high-precision in situ analysis of stable isotopes of
light elements such as H, C, O, S, and Cl.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.