* 2216061
* MRI: Acquisition of Multiscale Pore Size Analyzers for Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aria Amirbahman, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2025
* USD 331,771.00

As multiscale applications become an integral part of humanity’s challenges, it
is important for students to gain an understanding of structure-property
relationships. The measured parameters integrated into mathematical frameworks
by students and faculty mentors will facilitate a faster response and greater
resilience against health and climate crises. A subset of solutions enabled by
equipment acquisition across inter-disciplinary fields is as follows: a) design
of artificial membranes to address biomanufacturing challenges during pandemics;
b) use of artificial intelligence to identify defective biological filters; c)
paper-based assays to detect pathogens, and, d) nanoparticle characterization to
combat water pollution. Other emerging research areas include cancer diagnostics
and renewable energy. Sample acquisition times with the proposed equipment are
30 min suitable for a three-hour laboratory session, a rapid and economical
solution when compared to costly multi-session imaging-based pedagogic methods.
The proposed equipment will be integrated in several courses and laboratories
across STEM, namely in materials characterization and immunology initiatives. A
total of 200 students from a demographically diverse population will benefit
yearly from this effort. Outreach efforts will extend to West Valley Community
College and local high schools where students will be introduced to
nanotechnology through online instruction and hands-on experimentation. In the
heart of Silicon Valley, student/faculty publications will empower academic and
industrial translational opportunities, resulting in a skilled and motivated
workforce accelerating the nation’s global
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art instrumentation to
investigate surface, bulk and interphase architecture will be used to address
gaps in knowledge across multiscale applications at the biomaterials, health and
climate nexus. This will provide an understanding of structure property
relationships, specifically in terms of pore size and porosity. Both micropores
(&lt; 2nm) and macropores (&gt;50 nm) will be quantified. Porosity will be
indirectly determined by density. The generation of knowledge through
experimentation with modern equipment and a first principle-based approach to
problem-solving will enable robust scaling. In parallel, a material database
featuring collected data from characterization tests will be constructed as a
basis for statistical learning models and simulations. The data from this
project will be disseminated so that other engineers and scientists can also use
these training sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.