* 2216162
* Collaborative Research: Electrotunable and Curvature-Dependent Friction at Nanoscale Contacts Lubricated by Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2025
* USD 341,895.00

Effective friction control is crucial in manufacturing processes: in macroscale
manufacturing, minimizing friction helps lower costs; in micro-manufacturing and
ultra-high precision manufacturing, friction control often determines the
quality and functionalities of finished products. This project aims to explain
how ionic liquids lubricate single-point contacts between dielectric and
conducting surfaces, and to investigate how the friction can be tuned using
electrical potential between the surfaces. The research will be conducted by
integrating atomic force microscopy experiments and molecular modeling. The
mechanistic insight gained in this project will help improve the design of new
ionic liquid lubricants and additives. This progress will help improve the
sustainability and efficiency of manufacturing processes and thus increase U.S.
industrial productivity and competitiveness. Furthermore, the collaborative
project will help develop the workforce in the US, broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research, and positively impact engineering education
and the dissemination of research to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will determine the relationship between surface curvature, surface potential,
and friction at single-asperity contacts mediated by ionic liquids. Model
systems consisting of atomic force microscopy tips and nanoparticle-decorated
substrates coated with durable single-layer graphene will be adopted to quantify
the effects of surface roughness and potential on lubrication. Rigorous
molecular simulations, in which electrical potentials are imposed on conducting
surfaces, will resolve ionic liquids' molecular structure and dynamics in
nanoscale tribosystems to elucidate the mechanisms underlying electrotunable
friction. Molecular modeling and atomic force microscopy experiments will be
used in a complementary manner and at accessible length scales to enable the
molecular understanding of friction. The fundamental insights on the modulation
of lubrication by surface roughness and electrical potential at single-asperity
contacts will provide the theoretical underpinning for understanding how
tribological behaviors depend on choices of ionic liquids and
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.