* 2216077
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Xiang Zhang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,999.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research. The University of Louisville is acquiring an
upgraded X-band electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer to support
the research of Professor Craig Grapperhaus along with colleague Xiang Zhang.
This instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, physical
chemistry, biology, and biochemistry. An EPR spectrometer yields detailed
information on electronic structure and intermolecular interactions by detecting
paramagnetic species. Lifetimes of free radicals, which are short-lived, highly
reactive species, and transition metal ions can be identified and quantified in
a variety of materials. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in multiple departments within the
University of Louisville and at two primarily undergraduate institutions,
Indiana University Southeast and Bellarmine University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award of the EPR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as carbon-free fuels, electronic and
spintronic materials, pharmacological applications, and cellular stress caused
by diabetes. Specifically, the instrument enables a wide range of projects
including electrocatalysts with redox active ligands for small molecule
activation and studies of water-soluble catalysts for green organic synthesis.
Other investigations include structural biology studies of higher order DNA that
is essential for cell life cycles and transcription regulation elements in gene
promotor regions. It also assists in the fundamental investigations of a
mitochondrial membrane protein that exhibits catalytic activity and the study of
reactive oxygen species inducing cell processes. Additionally, it enables the
characterization of the magnetic properties of 2D magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.