* 2216148
* MRI: Acquisition of a liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometer for interdisciplinary research and education on the campus of North Carolina A&amp;T State University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bo Wang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2025
* USD 679,703.00

North Carolina A&amp;T State University is acquiring a Liquid Chromatography
with Tandem Mass Spectrometer for multidisciplinary research and education. This
instrument serves as a platform that will significantly elevate the capability
for chemical analysis at North Carolina A&amp;T State University and boost
various fields of research and education, such as environmental remediation,
analytical chemistry, nanomaterials, soil science, water resource engineering,
biochemistry, 3D printing, nutrition, animal science, protein synthesis, food
processing and fisheries. This award will engage numerous faculty members across
the campus. The chemical analysis platform enabled by this instrument will be a
catalyst for training students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM.
Annually, a large number of postdocs, graduate students, undergraduate students
and high school summer students are expected to use or be trained with the
instrument. The instrument will participate in various outreach activities that
promote a culture of scientific inquiry and reasoning in K-12 schools, community
colleges, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina A&amp;T State
University is acquiring a Liquid Chromatography with Tandem Mass Spectrometer
for multidisciplinary research and education. This instrument will have the
capability to quantify a wide variety of chemical compounds, such as new
emerging environmental contaminants, biomolecules, etc. in a wide variety of
matrices, including environmental media, plant and animal tissues, food,
nanomaterials, etc. It serves as a platform that will significantly elevate the
capability for chemical compounds separation, identification and quantification
at North Carolina A&amp;T State University and boost various fields of research
and education, such as environmental remediation and water resources, analytical
chemistry, biological science, food chemistry, protein synthesis, soil science,
nutrition, nanoplasmonic biosensor and energy harvest, food processing and
fisheries, etc. This award will engage numerous faculty members across the
campus. The chemical analysis platform enabled by this instrument will be a
catalyst for training minority and other underrepresented students. Annually, a
large number of postdocs, graduate students, undergraduate students and high
school summer students are expected to use or be trained with the instrument.
The instrument will be used in various outreach activities that promote a
culture of scientific inquiry and reasoning in K-12 schools, community colleges,
and the public. It will foster both new and currently existing research and
educational collaborations with investigators from other nearby
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.