* 2216481
* MRI: Development of an Exoplanet Imaging Spectrograph for Keck Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrew Skemer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,449,643.00

This project will build a next-generation astronomical instrument for the Keck
Observatory in Hawaii. The instrument will be designed to permit the study of
the thousands of planets known to orbit stars other than our own Sun
(“exoplanets”). The instrument will enable, for example, direct detections of
water clouds on temperate exoplanets. It will also reveal planets forming in
dusty ring systems around young stars. Beyond exoplanets, it will make new
observations of our own Solar System, supernovae, and nearby galaxies. After
commissioning, the team will demonstrate these applications and make the data
publicly available. The team will participate in STEM retention programs and
train students and postdoctoral researchers in instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will construct an instrument called CALES for
the Keck Observatory that will permit study of exoplanets using thermal infrared
(2-5 micron) imaging, which detects exoplanets at wavelengths where they are
bright, and integral-field spectroscopy, which distinguishes planets more
efficiently from residual starlight based on their spectral signatures. The
instrument will be more sensitive to studying temperate (&lt;600 K) exoplanets
with small angular separations from their host stars (&lt;1”) than previous
exoplanet imaging instruments. The instrument will utilize Keck’s adaptive
optics infrastructure. A planned Key Science Program will provide public
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.