* 2216107
* MRI: Development of A New High Temperature Source Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition System (HTS-MOCVD) for Next Generation IIIA/B-Nitrides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Asif Khan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,170.00

Abstract Title: Novel High Temperature Research Instrument to fabricate next
generation semiconductors for Power Electronics for electric vehicles and future
electric grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group III-Nitrides are
semiconductors beyond silicon that enable unique electronic and optical devices
for power chargers for laptops, cell phones and other consumer electronics, and
the electronics for hybrid and electric vehicles (HEV’s). These semiconductors
are also used to manufacture the green, blue, and white light emitting diodes
(LED’s) for high efficiency lighting and displays for which the 2014 Nobel Prize
in physics was awarded. The III-Nitride semiconductors are also at the core of
ultraviolet LEDs for disinfection and air-water purification. These unique and
important semiconductors materials are produced using a high temperature growth
process called Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) that is carried
out in a unique high temperature equipment to allow high quality crystalline
materials with a very high purity. It has been proposed that the incorporation
of transition metals, such as Titanium and Scandium can enhance the performance
of these semiconductor materials for power electronics by increasing the
piezoelectrically produced electrical charge by ~2-10 times. This higher charge
can will enable higher current levels in HEV’s. The challenge here is to produce
high quality materials, which in turn require even higher temperature growth and
chemical processes, for which there are currently no commercial tools available.
In this proposal, we will develop both the hardware tools, and the chemical
processes, and measurement techniques required to demonstrate the potential for
this new high temperature, high current, high voltage technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Track-I NSF MRI proposal aims to develop a New High Temperature
Source-Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition System (HTS-MOCVD) for depositing
the emerging IIIB-Transition- Metal Nitrides (such as ScN), and conventional
IIIA-Nitrides (GaN-AlN-InN) in a single growth reactor. The III-B nitrides have
very high piezo-pyroelectric coefficients making them ideal for high performance
sensors. Moreover, their heterojunctions with III-A nitrides can potentially
yield power electronic and UVB-C optoelectronic devices with performance level
well above those of current devices. Our system design will have several
innovative features such as a new high temperature source design, and a new
precursor injector design. This new injector design will in essence allow source
injection like in conventional MOCVD reactors very close to the growth
susceptor. This nclose injection mode, and the high temperature source, will
enable increased precursor injection efficiency and thus growth rates for ScN
compatible with those of AlxGa1-xN. The close to susceptor/substrate injection
will also lead to a significant reduction in the adduct formation thereby
simultaneously improving the growth quality with a growth rate much higher than
conventional MOCVD systems. Thus, our unique system design will allow the growth
of thicker buffer regions and the active regions (typically much thinner) of the
device structures simultaneously in the same system. It will also be ideal for
depositing AlxGa1-xN/AlySc1-yN heterojunctions and quantum wells to explore
their properties. MOCVD systems with our high temperature source and the dual
injector design are commercially not available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.