* 2216029
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed Biplanar Fluoroscopy System for Non-Invasive Quantitative Imaging of Human Movement
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Jonathan Blackburn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 10/31/2024
* USD 772,571.00

Movement is a critical to the human condition. The most common instrumentation
used for measuring functional human movement relies on tracking the position of
skin-mounted markers. Unfortunately, those systems have insurmountable
limitations in accuracy which in turn limit research and teaching efforts from
advancing our understanding of human movement. We seek to acquire a high-speed
three-dimensional x-ray system to revolutionize the quantitative imaging of
functional human movement across engineering, exercise science, biology,
orthopedics, rehabilitation, and robotics. This acquisition will fill a critical
gap in our capability to advance scientific discovery at UNC Chapel Hill (UNC-
CH) while catalyzing collaboration with five regional institutions, including
the largest historically black college (HBCU) in the country. The acquisition
will also enhance coursework and experiential learning for ~3000 undergraduates
and ~300 graduate students spanning 6 colleges and departments. We will further
serve the national interest through outreach and engagement activities,
collaborations with UNC-CH diversity and equity programs and our local HBCU, and
creation of a unique summer Research Experience for Undergraduates proposal for
the training of undergraduates historically disadvantaged in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to acquire a high-speed biplanar
fluoroscopy (HS-BF) system for the non-invasive quantitative imaging of
functional human movement across a wide range of scientific disciplines. HS-BF
systems provide cine x-ray images at up to 1000 samples/s and directly quantify
three-dimensional bone positions, orientations, and articulating surface
mechanics that are impossible to capture with even the most sophisticated of
comparable technologies. Our HS-BF system will be made broadly available to an
enthusiastic network of faculty and students at UNC-CH and our five partnering
institutions through an established Collaborative Fluoroscopy Research Core.
This acquisition will address critical limitations in our regionâ€™s ability to
objectively quantify the fundamental mechanics of human movement with
opportunities for significant impact. Specifically, our network of researchers
and collaborators, as well as the diverse student bodies we serve, will have the
capability to measure with unparalleled resolution the precise complexities of
bone motion critical to overcoming the contemporary challenges across our
research disciplines and for the benefit of society, including: (1)
understanding how musculoskeletal mechanics and function are achieved and
maintained over the mammalian lifespan, (2) developing mechanistic links between
movement biomechanics and underlying biology, (3) identifying opportunities for
surgical innovation, (4) advancing ergonomics and occupational science for a
strong and vibrant workforce, (5) developing more sophisticated bioengineered
materials/tissues, and (6) advancing next generation rehabilitation
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.