* 2216526
* 4th IFAC Workshop on Cyber-Physical-Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Sam Burden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,676.00

The International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) Workshop on Cyber-
Physical-Human Systems (CPHS) brings together researchers and practitioners to
gain understanding from a range of disciplines united in CPHS systems. This
specific workshop looks to broaden participation in CPHS in the uniquely
interdisciplinary and intersection of modeling, analysis and control of
integrated CPHS and social and societal aspects of CPHS. The workshop is in
Houston Texas, December, 2022.The CPHS community is uniquely positioned to
contribute to this goal. By centering the role of humans amidst technology, our
subcommunity lowers barriers to enter these fields for researchers with
expertise in human-centered fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cyber-Physical-
Human Systems (CPHS) workshop integrates a broad community of researchers from
the core technical fields of control, communication, networking, sensing, and
computing with sociotechnical fields including human factors, ergonomics,
accessibility, human/computer interaction, rehabilitation, neuroengineering,
healthcare, public health, agriculture, and civil infrastructure. Importantly
for the broader Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) community, research in this
workshop centers on the role of people in the creation of new knowledge and
technologies. Broadening participation in the CPS community is critical to
ensure research impacts a greater diversity of communities, technologies, and
industries than have been historically prioritized. The CPHS subcommunityâ€™s
focus on the human interface with technology provides a uniquely powerful draw
to technical fields that have marginalized non-majority researchers. This
workshop will lead by example in representing and amplifying diverse voices
through innovative programming, including the creation of a cohort of CPHS
Fellows and presentation of a plenary focused on diversity, equity, and
inclusion issues in our research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.