* 2216518
* MRI: Development of an Innovative Underwater Robot Testing Facility for the Kilo Nalu Natural Coastal Marine Observatory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Krieg, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 346,007.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the development of a
state-of-the-art underwater robotics testing instrument in a natural coastal
environment. Robotic systems are often developed in laboratory settings, where
complicating factors can be controlled or removed entirely. When those robots
are eventually utilized in a real-world setting, they must be optimized to
interact with those unpredictable complications. This is especially true for
marine robots which are heavily influenced by waves and currents in the ocean
environment. This instrument will allow designers to accurately track and
maintain communication with underwater robots while they troubleshoot
performance issues in authentic surroundings. Having such an instrument
available for public academic use at the Kilo Nalu Observatory off the coast of
O’ahu will accelerate marine robot research. More capable marine robots will in
turn lead to improvements in oceanographic and climate modeling, enable more
informative early warning systems, and enhance the resilience of coastal and
island communities. This robotic test basin will also serve as a natural
classroom, teaching students both about underwater vehicle operations and
mission planning and about the fundamentals of robotics in general. This
educational objective is especially important to the University of Hawai’i, a
minority serving institution, thus providing education and training
opportunities to multiple underrepresented groups in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility being created through this award is intended
to provide a necessary intermediary environment between laboratory feasibility
studies and full-scale oceanic implementation of marine robots. The Kilo Nalu
Observatory is a permanent cabled observatory off the coast of Oahu that
provides persistent power and high-speed data transfer to a number of
oceanographic sensors installed in a modular fashion. The robot testing
instrument will be built on this infrastructure. The requested hardware includes
a set of acoustic modems, a high-accuracy acoustic localization system, and an
expandable general-purpose autonomous underwater vehicle, to serve as a mobile
robot testing and training platform. Together with the existing hardware, the
natural laboratory will have underwater communication, tracking, docking, and
charging capabilities in order to perform sophisticated field testing and
training of novel vehicle subsystems, navigation and control algorithms,
cooperative control methodologies, and will serve as a home base for resident
underwater robots. The facility will leverage the existing University of Hawai’i
underwater observatory infrastructure to reduce the time and costs required for
deployment, operation, and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI), the Major Instrumentation Research Program (MRI), and the National
Robotics Initiative (NRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.