* 2216805
* Partnership for Research and Education on Molecules at High Pressures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Terrence Reese, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2025
* USD 746,858.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Southern University (SU) is one of the largest
historically black colleges and universities (HBCU) in the nation. SU and its
collaborating partner, the University of Rochester (UR) Center for Matter at
Atomic Pressures (CMAP), aim to establish the Partnership for Research and
Education on Molecules at High Pressures. The research partnership plan of this
PREP project is to work on two research topics: Topic 1: high pressure physical
properties of optically nonlinear superhard CO2-V and ambient recovery; and
Topic 2: the exploration of the P-T phase diagram of H2O/He/H2 and hydrides. The
partnership will enable the faculty members, researchers, and students at SU to
access the state-of-the-art research facilities at CAMP and contribute to the
exploration of these physics research frontiers in molecular physics. The
framework of the project is also to broaden the participation of faculty members
and researchers at SU in physics research frontiers, to increase the research
and education participation of underrepresented minority (URM) undergraduate and
graduate students, and to increase the number of students pursuing graduate
studies and thus future URM scientists in science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) workforce in the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is to utilize a combined computation and simulation
approach, including first-principles density functional theory computations,
metadynamics and evolutionary algorithm-based structure optimizations, ab initio
path-integral molecular dynamics simulations, and machine learning physical
property predictions, to guide in situ experimental studies of the selected
systems for new physical properties discoveries. The educational goal of the
project is to expand the pool of minority student participants in a physics
research frontier and the infusion of minority undergraduate and graduate
students in transformative research. The education framework of the project
includes the collaboration with CAMP education and diversity plan to facilitate
outreach and recruitment of under-represented minorities and women. The
educational plan of this project is to work in the following three areas: 1)
engage in precollege outreach activities; 2) enhance undergraduate student
physics research experience; and 3) expand graduate student research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.