* 2216008
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) for Materials Related Research and Education at Boston University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,900.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Boston University is acquiring
X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with low-energy inverse photoelectron
spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy
capabilities to support the research of Professor Xi Ling and colleagues Keith
Brown, Malika Jeffries-EL, and Kevin Smith. The instrument facilitates research
in the areas of chemistry, engineering, and physics. XPS spectra are produced by
irradiating a specimen with X-rays with sufficient energy to eject electrons,
and the kinetic energy of the electrons is measured and subsequently related to
their binding energy. These data can be related to the chemical elements in the
sample as well as to their bonding environment. This instrument enhances the
educational, research, and teaching efforts of students in many departments as
well as provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions. Students from
diverse backgrounds utilize the instrument in their research and research
training. Accessibility is enhanced through its integration in two
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award for the XPS is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as functional
materials and structures. This includes investigations of the electronic band
structure of two dimensional materials and heterostructures as well as the
optoelectric properties of organic semiconducting molecules relevant to solar
technology. In addition, XPS is used to determine the electronic structure of
low dimensional correlated solids to understand their optical, electrical,
magnetic, structural, and chemical properties. It is also used to probe the
surface chemistry and dynamics of nanostructured polymer
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.