* 2216359
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope for use in research and teaching in the Biology, Chemistry and Physics Departments at Grinnell College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Clark Lindgren, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,553.00

An award is made to Grinnell College to purchase a point-scanning confocal
microscope system. Grinnell College has been an active participant and leader in
efforts to improve science pedagogy by incorporating active learning techniques
into the classroom, improving access to science for women and underrepresented
groups, and integrating research experiences throughout the curriculum. This
instrument will support these efforts by providing new research possibilities
for faculty and their students, both in the research lab and in existing
laboratory courses. Beyond this, the investigators will create and teach a new
course dedicated to microscopy techniques. More specifically, they will
incorporate the proposed instrument into an existing program that provides
educational opportunities for inmates at a nearby medium security prison.
Further, the co-PIs propose the development of a workshop for regional liberal
arts colleges, to be hosted at Grinnell, the aim of which is to exchange best
practices and work together to design experiments using fluorescence microscopy
and/or confocal microscopy that are accessible to undergraduate students in a
variety of settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a range of
research and teaching/training activities in biology, biochemistry, chemistry,
and physics including: (1) studying synaptic plasticity at the neuromuscular
junction (NMJ); (2) detecting microtubule formation below the diffraction limit
of light; (3) characterizing neurovascular patterning and guidance in the
developing vertebrate heart; (4) deciphering the genetic control of Ca2+ levels
in cell migration; (5) characterizing the spatiotemporal activity of various
proteins in regulating mitotic spindle function; and (6) detecting allosteric
conformational changes in nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. This award will
enable Grinnell College faculty and students to address questions that are
beyond their current capability. The results will be disseminated in
publications in peer-reviewed journals and in presentations at scientific
conferences throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.