* 2216980
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigation of 2021 Marshall Fire Impacts on Physical Infrastructure and Decision-Making Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Erica Fischer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 21,966.00

The Marshall Fire on December 30, 2021 greatly impacted the rapidly developing
communities of Louisville, Superior, and unincorporated Boulder County. Boulder
County adopted voluntary wildfire mitigation in 2011 and spent considerable
funds on educating the public about the risks of wildfires. The fire impacted
regions with a mixture of older homes (e.g., Original town Superior) and modern
homes (built within the last 10-20 years). There is a critical gap in knowledge
on how to design, build, and maintain more resilient communities, while
balancing the demands of the present with the climate and infrastructure demands
of the future. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) collaborative
project is led by structural, geotechnical, construction, and lifeline
engineers, many of whom are cross-trained in social science and policy, to
investigate damage patterns to physical infrastructure (buildings, foundations,
and retaining structures), and the influence of that damage on decision-making
processes for planning and reconstruction. More immediately, the results of this
research will inform policies on building regulations in wildland urban
interface (WUI) communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will quantify
the impact of building characteristics (year built, building and fa√ßade
materials, foundation type and characteristics, proximity of other homes,
presence/condition of fences or decks, proximity to vegetation) on housing
survivability and re-occupancy in wildfires within grassland landscapes. Using
the damage patterns and mechanistic behavior of the homes and their various
structural components along with understanding of heat transfer and fire spread
within a community, the PIs will develop a methodology to quantify exposure
temperatures and duration. This data will be used to develop heat maps of the
City of Louisville as a method to portray fire intensity throughout the town.
These maps can be used by future research teams for benchmarking fire
simulations and empirically-designed or validated predictive models. The
research will also characterize the jurisdictional reconstruction decision-
making processes and tradeoffs in the early post-disaster reconstruction
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.