* 2216552
* Hybrid Pseudo-Resonant Switched-Capacitor Drive Circuits for Electrostatic Micro-mechanical Actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jason Stauth, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 393,558.00

Recent decades have seen the growth and proliferation of a variety of low-power,
small-size electronic devices for portable consumer, industrial, and medical
applications. In many cases these platforms desire electromechanical interfaces
for sensors and actuators, mechanized control, robotics, and human-machine
interfaces. New electrostatic (electric-field-driven) micro-electromechanical
actuators including piezoelectric devices, silicon MEMs, and dielectric
elastomers show significant potential to overcome the severe size and weight
limitations of conventional magnetic-based electric motors. However, these
technologies require new design paradigms for the associated electronic
interfaces, which must provide high driving voltages (typically 100’s of volts
to low kV) while boosting from low-voltage (single-digit volt range) supplies,
and must remain efficient at small size (&lt;&lt;~1cm3) and weight
(&lt;&lt;~1g). A unique consideration is that electrostatic devices present as
dominantly capacitive in most scenarios. Therefore key challenges include
providing high-voltage bidirectional DC-DC conversion at extremely small size,
while efficiently delivering (and recovering) reactive power at drive
frequencies in a Hz-kHz range. Addressing these challenges could have impacts in
diverse industry sectors from medical and biomedical devices, microfluidics,
imaging, optics and communications, ultrasound, and haptic tactile
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve the exploration,
design, and integration of efficient, high-voltage, mm-scale drive electronics
for electrostatic micro-mechanical actuators. A new hybrid pseudo-resonant
architecture will be developed that merges a reconfigurable series-parallel
switched capacitor (SC) converter with a low-voltage bidirectional inductor-
based DC-DC converter. The hybrid approach merges the advantages of pure SC and
inductor-based topologies while providing capabilities to recover (recycle)
energy stored in the actuator bulk dielectric. The intellectual merit of the
proposal includes circuit techniques, control, and communication concepts that
can provide significant advantages – extending the voltage conversion range,
providing stable regulation, eliminating design tradeoffs, and reducing overall
power loss by over an order of magnitude compared to conventional architectures.
The project will include the study of architecture details including optimal
segmentation of current, voltage, and power ratings of the respective portions
of the hybrid converter to maximize performance at total size &lt;100mm3 and
weight &lt; 100mg. A new, highly-scalable, level-shifting strategy will be
developed to enable chip-chip series stacking, allowing drive voltages well in
excess of the semiconductor buried-oxide (BOX) breakdown limit. An integrated
circuit (IC) prototype will be designed a 300V SOI CMOS process to demonstrate
high-voltage operation, actuator energy recovery, and chip-chip stacking to low-
kV drive voltages from 1.7-4.2 V supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.