* 2216648
* RaMP: Oklahoma Network addressing human impacts across biological processes (ON-RaMP)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Michael Reichert, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,719,700.00

Building a stronger and more diverse scientific workforce is very important to
address major societal needs. One of the greatest challenges of the 21st century
is to understand and mitigate the extensive and dramatic effects of human
activities on the natural world. To increase participation in these efforts,
this project will build a network at Oklahoma State University to mentor a
diverse group of post-baccalaureate participants, who will work on research
projects to study human effects on biological processes. The network will
connect mentees with mentors representing a broad scope of areas and research
questions in biology. It will provide a structured program to develop a
scientific community focused on professional development and fostering an
increased sense of belonging in science. The program’s focus on post-
baccalaureate trainees will address a major gap in current efforts to build an
inclusive STEM workforce. In addition to the direct impacts on mentees and their
future careers, this program will provide training on mentorship for a large
group of researchers and opportunities for collaboration among researchers
working across different fields to address the common goal of understanding
anthropogenic effects in biology. The project will also provide important data
on the effectiveness of methods to increase participation in science and the
pursuit of scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic effects are
having severe impacts on major biological processes, including disease
transmission, species extinction, ecosystem function, and biogeochemical cycles.
These impacts pose serious threats to the welfare and well-being of humans and
the environment. Because these effects are so complex and widespread, addressing
their consequences requires recruitment of large and diverse groups into
scientific careers. The objective of this project is to build a diverse network
of biologists to provide mentorship and training for post-baccalaureate students
to study anthropogenic effects on biological processes in natural systems. The
program will take place at Oklahoma State University, which has a strong group
of researchers addressing anthropogenic effects on biology and is located in a
region with high biodiversity and significant anthropogenic impacts. Individuals
who are post-baccalaureate and had limited previous opportunities for research
training will be chosen to participate in a program involving a year-long
research experience, professional development, and networking activities. The
selected network of research mentors works across multiple biological
disciplines and will specifically focus on anthropogenic effects on disease
spread, effects of toxins on physiology and ecology, behavioral and
physiological consequences of anthropogenic disturbance, and climate change
effects on biological processes. The success of the program will be evaluated in
terms of its effects on participants’ scientific knowledge, sense of belonging
in science, and career choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.