* 2216223
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Development of a Small Aperture Telescope Pathfinder to Advance Studies of the Polarized Cosmic Microwave Background
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Bock, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 962,693.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project will help answer the big question:
“how did the universe begin?” It does so by building and testing a sensitive
instrument that would measure electromagnetic emission that fills space as a
result of processes in the early universe. This emission is best measured at
microwave wavelengths, so it is referred to as the cosmic microwave background
(CMB). A small protype instrument, referred to as pSAT, will be built to
evaluate many of the technologies that have been developed for a future, large
experiment to measure the CMB far more precisely. The members of this research
team will engage with educators and the public on observing/measuring the
origins of the universe. Within the larger CMB experiment program, this project
will provide research experience for graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as training for postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finding
direct evidence for cosmic inflation is an important goal in astronomy and
physics today. Inflation models predict the existence of primordial
gravitational waves, which impart a unique “B-mode” pattern to the polarization
of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) and provide a key test of such models.
There have been an improving series of instruments to make the needed
measurements. This project will develop and test pSAT, a CMB polarimeter
integrating detectors and optics developed for the next-generation CMB-S4
project with existing field-proven BICEP Array hardware. pSAT will utilize new
95 GHz/155 GHz dual-band dual-polarization prototype detectors, with prototype
optics incorporating wide-band AR coatings, in a BICEP array receiver cryostat
that will be adapted to include a 100mK adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator.
The engineering, performance evaluation, and representative data will be
provided to the CMB-S4 project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.