* 2216780
* 2022 Meeting of the Phytochemical Society of North America
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,981.00

The Phytochemical Society of North America (PSNA) will hold its 61st meeting on
July 24-28, 2022 at The Inn and Conference Center at Virginia Tech, in
Blacksburg, VA. The goal of this annual event is to advance research on the
unique chemistry of plants and its implications for human health, sustainable
agriculture, and environmental conservation. The meeting also strives to ensure
the future of the field by actively engaging an interdisciplinary and diverse
community of next-generation scientists and providing professional development
opportunities for students and early-career researchers, including oral
presentations and participation in thematic workshops. NSF funding will
specifically support efforts to expand the participation of postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students, and students from primarily undergraduate
institutions who are members of groups underrepresented in the phytochemistry
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSNA conference is organized around
a plenary topic and nine symposia themes that emphasize areas of substantial
recent progress as well as emerging and novel areas in the field of
phytochemistry. These themes reflect the societyâ€™s long tradition in the study
of plant biochemistry, chemistry, and natural products from the molecular to the
cellular and organismal scale. The research that is showcased at the conference
has a range of long-term practical applications with significant implications
for human health, sustainable agriculture, and environmental conservation,
increasingly occurring at the intersection of disciplines across the sciences
and into engineering. The conference also highlights critical advances in
technology and data analytics that are opening new doors for this historically-
challenging field. Many of the pertinent questions and novel research directions
that will be addressed at the meeting have direct relevance for the NSF MCB
program and intersecting disciplines. The PSNA is also dedicated to fostering
the future of the phytochemistry field by promoting and supporting students and
early-career scientists, with a focus on diversity and inclusion. The success of
prior efforts and the inclusive culture of the society is reflected in the
leadership team for the 2022 conference, which comprises a wide range of
diversity with regard to career stage, gender, race, and discipline, including
female scientists serving as conference chair and co-chair. The meeting will
feature two major recognitions, the Arthur Neish Young Investigator Award and
the PSNA-Plant Journal Early Career Award, which will be presented to up-and-
coming stars at the conference awards banquet. In addition, the Frank and Mary
Loewus Student Travel Award and PSNA Presentation Awards will support and
promote participation of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers, as well as members of groups underrepresented in the phytochemistry
field. Recipients will have opportunities to present their work in oral and
poster presentations and exchange ideas with scientific colleagues and leaders
in the field and will also be recognized during the awards ceremony. The funds
provided by the NSF will specifically defray the costs of registration, travel,
and accommodations for attendees who are members of groups underrepresented in
science, including postdoctoral scholars, graduate students and students of
primarily-undergraduate institutions. This funding will thus significantly
enhance efforts to expand diversity and inclusion, doing so within the context
of the two main goals of the 2022 PSNA meeting, to share and communicate novel
developments in the phytochemical research and to ensure the future of the field
by growing a diverse and interdisciplinary community of early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.