* 2216824
* FIU-JILA Partnership for Research and Education in AMO Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Bernard Gerstman, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2025
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Atomic, Molecular, and Optical (AMO) physics studies
fundamental building blocks of functional matter, including atoms and their
constituents, molecules, and light at the quantum level. AMO physics has been a
cornerstone for modern science and technologies, particularly the emerging field
of quantum information science and technology. This project aims to form a
strategic partnership between the Department of Physics at Florida International
University (FIU) and the JILA Physics Frontier Center (JILA PFC) in the JILA
institute to promote and advance diversity and research excellence in AMO
physics at both institutions. The research goals will be achieved through two
major research thrusts (ultra-cold atomic physics and single-molecule
biophysics) that are designed to leverage the world-class experts at JILA PFC as
well as the existing research capabilities at FIU. The project will improve the
recruitment, retainment, and degree attainment of graduate students from
underrepresented groups in both institutions by implementing PREP pathway
improvement strategies. This partnership will advance research in AMO physics
and improve the diversity of graduate students in both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed FIU-JILA partnership will conduct research in
two major thrusts to advance AMO physics, particularly in understanding (1)
many-body physics in ultra-cold atom arrays and (2) single-molecule biophysics.
In thrust 1, the investigators will use femtosecond laser-based ultrafast
spectroscopy to study many-body effects including interactions, correlations,
and collective effects in atom arrays for applications in fundamental many-body
physics and quantum technologies. They will also use femtosecond pulses to
realize ultrafast manipulation of quantum states in atom arrays. In thrust 2,
state-of-the-art single-molecule imaging and measurement techniques including
confocal and total internal reflection microscopy, the integration of
nanopipette-based electrochemical techniques with the single-molecule
fluorescence techniques, the atomic force microscopy-based high-precision
single-molecule force techniques, and molecular dynamics simulations will be
developed and used to study folding kinetics and dynamics of biomolecules and
intracellular single-molecule delivery and detection. The partnership will also
improve the diversity of physics graduate students in both FIU and JILA by
implementing PREP pathway improvement strategies including faculty/student
exchange visits, engaging undergraduate students in summer research at JILA PFC,
engaging undergraduate and graduate students in proposed research activities at
FIU, student mentoring, and public lectures at the Phillip and Patricia Frost
Museum of Science in Miami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.