* 2216286
* BPC-DP IvyWorks Expansion
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Olufunmilola Olorunda, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 238,327.00

The purpose of this project is to provide women the opportunity to pursue STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) related careers with the aid of
mentoring, scholarship, employment, and internship assistance. Research suggests
women are underrepresented in STEM fields. According to the US Department of
Commerce report titled "Women in STEM: A Gender Gap to Innovation", women fill
nearly half of all jobs in the United States yet hold less than 25 percent of
STEM jobs. It has been noted that women hold a disproportionately low share of
STEM undergraduate degrees, particularly in Engineering. The IvyWorks program
aims to spark women's interest in tech fields, cultivate a sense of belonging to
retain them while pursuing their degree, and support them to fully integrate and
find mobility in a tech career. Equal representation in STEM fields provides
women the same opportunities at a high-paying job, providing a self-sustaining
career where a woman can then provide for herself and a family. Research shows
that women with STEM jobs earned 33 percent more than women not in STEM careers.
The success of the IvyWorks program model will advance knowledge and
understanding in the tech industry on how to close the computing gender gap.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the success of a small sample of a prior test
case from a team of researchers from the investigator's college, where free
mentorship and additional peer network was provided for the women in the STEM-
related degrees, it has become imperative to provide adequate support as in
addition to promoting the need for STEM education for women. By providing a peer
support network, the women of the test case program have automatic support from
other women who have completed the same courses and found success with
employment in the field of technology. This indicates that providing adequate
support engenders success. Mentors and peer networks can support students
pursuing their STEM education (Powell, Chang). This project will advocate for
(1) mentorship, (2) targeted academic advising, (3) internship placement, (4)
career advising, (5) alumni network, and (6) employment placement assistance.
With women as an untapped workforce in STEM fields, our goal is to educate,
support and mentor women as they pursue their STEM career degrees. Women make up
half the workforce but are employed in only a quarter of the high-paying STEM
jobs. With the help of a grant, additional opportunities will be provided to a
demographic of the society that has been underrepresented in the STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.