* 2216460
* MRI: Acquisition of a triple-quadrupole ICP-MS and sample introduction hardware for multidisciplinary research and teaching
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 580,393.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program award will support the
acquisition of a modern triple-quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (TQ-ICP-MS) and three dedicated sample processing and introduction
systems for research and teaching in the Institute of Marine Scienceâ€™s Marine
Analytical Laboratory at the University of California, Santa Cruz. This suite of
instruments will enable novel multidisciplinary analytical work by faculty,
researchers, and students that will contribute to a more refined understanding
of diverse processes in Earth, ocean, and planetary sciences, and environmental
toxicology. The new facility will amplify the campus commitment to student
social mobility and increased diversity in STEM by providing state-of-the-art
instrumentation for practical training in the context of undergraduate and
graduate coursework and research. Laboratory PIs actively engage with the AGU
Bridge program (Ocean Sciences), NSF-ICER GEOPAths - IMPACT (Earth and Planetary
Sciences), and the UCSC STEM Diversity Program, which fund cutting-edge research
opportunities for underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TQ-ICP-MS
systems combine the sensitivity, scan speed, and dynamic range of modern single
quadrupole ICP-MS with a quadrupole - reaction cell - quadrupole configuration
that enables unambiguous chemical and physical resolution of many of the most
challenging isobaric interferences. The three dedicated sample introductions
systems include: (1) a gas chromatograph speciation analysis of organometallics
(e.g., Hg) in the marine and terrestrial environments; (2) an ESI prepFAST IC
for high-throughput metal speciation (e.g. As, Cr, Se) and total metal analysis
for environmental toxicology research; and (3) an ESI seaFAST for automated
analysis of ultra-trace elements in seawater. The TQ-ICP-MS will be integrated
with an existing Teledyne Analyte Excite laser ablation system and Thermo
Element XR high-resolution magnetic sector ICP-MS. The laser can be operated
with either ICP-MS or with both for split-stream analysis of geological and
meteoritic materials for geochemical and petrochronologic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.