* 2216584
* RaMP: Research and Mentoring for Postbaccalaureates in Biological Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico (RaMP-UP)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Jose Garcia-Arraras, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 05/31/2026
* USD 2,516,239.00

In recent years, the COVID-19 pandemic and other natural disasters have
negatively impacted the educational journeys of many students. In particular,
undergraduate students have had limited opportunities to experience research
during their studies. This project aims to counteract this loss by providing
recent graduates with the opportunity to gain meaningful experiences in research
and receive professional development within the supportive environment of the
University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras. The Research and Mentoring for
Postbaccalaureates in Biological Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico
(RaMP-UP) program will be the first postbaccalaureate program in Puerto Rico and
will welcome the participation of individuals from groups that have been
historically excluded from the research enterprise. RaMP-UP will have a huge
impact on the life of trainees and contribute to diversifying the national
scientific workforce. Moreover, many of the program’s activities will be open to
other students and faculty, thus expanding the impact of research training to a
population beyond the program itself. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aims of RaMP-UP
will be achieved by: (1) Attracting recent graduates in the biological sciences
and related scientific disciplines to perform interdisciplinary biological
research, (2) Providing students with a “hands-on” in depth research experience,
and (3) Presenting a series of activities aimed at developing participants’
research skills, including learning about the use of bioinformatic and
computational approaches to Biology, and professional tools needed to succeed in
future science careers. Starting in the summer of 2023, 10 recent graduates will
be recruited annually to work for one year on a research project under the
guidance of one of the program mentors and co-mentors. A group of active
researchers in the College of Natural Sciences will support participants
throughout the research experiences and provide intensive mentoring. Faculty
contacts in primary teaching universities will promote the program and serve as
liaison between the program and prospective candidates. It is expected that by
the end of their internship, participants will have developed a deep
understanding of biological research and have sufficiently advanced their
projects to present their work in scientific meetings and potentially publish
their findings in a peer-reviewed journal. The program also includes
participation of a network of top institutions that are interested in recruiting
promising students to their graduate programs. Therefore, upon completion of the
program, participants should have acquired the necessary knowledge, mentoring
and skills to successfully continue their education toward advanced degrees in
scientific fields, or other research-related scientific career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.