* 2216030
* MRI: Development of PARAGON: Control Instrument for Post NISQ Quantum Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Robert Schoelkopf, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,516,000.00

This project will design and implement PARAGON, an instrument of control systems
for superconducting circuit-based quantum computers. Using an ultra-low latency,
scalable network of Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) accelerators, PARAGON
will support real-time measurement, error correction, and control of 100s of
qubits. The project will also develop the necessary systems, programming and
debugging support for realizing and evaluating new quantum hardware and
algorithms with PARAGON. PARAGON will substantially advance the Nationâ€™s
research capabilities in quantum computing, enabling operational tests of error-
corrected algorithms and accelerating the arrival of fault-tolerant quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward cost-effective scalability, PARAGON
employs a balanced, fat tree to organize the large number of building blocks and
to distribute data, clock, and time (trigger). The leaves of the tree feature
Radio Frequency System-on-Chip (RFSoC) for quantum control and the internal
nodes of the tree Multiprocessor System-on-Chip (MPSoC) for integration. PARAGON
will empower two broad research communities that tackle quantum computing from
different fronts. It will allow Physicists to investigate the theory and
realization of better qubits, and experiment with sophisticated error correction
and fault tolerance methods on real qubits, at a previously impossible scale. It
will allow Computer Scientists to experiment with novel architectures and
programming schemes for quantum control. Most importantly, it will serve as the
meeting place for both communities, fostering cross-pollination and catalyzing
collaboration. Through its open design and open-source software, PARAGON will
empower the broad community of academic and industrial researchers in
superconducting quantum computing to experiment in previously impossible ways.
While PARAGON will be implemented for quantum computers based on superconducting
circuits, its design can be adapted for those based on other technologies, which
also face similar challenges in their control systems. It will provide critical
know-how to the budding industry of quantum control systems so that the latter
can further lower the cost for wider, commercial availability. The instrument
will advance research agendas in multiple disciplines, creating opportunities in
cross pollination between applied physics, computer science and engineering. It
will create new opportunities to engage both graduate and undergraduate
students, especially underrepresented minorities and women, providing unique
training for multidisciplinary research. Source materials produced by the
project can be found at https://github.com/yale-paragon. The repositories will
be actively maintained by the project team during the award period. During the
lifetime of PARAGON, the repositories will transition into community-based
development and maintenance with the project team being one of the contributors.
The project team will ensure the repositories are available at least five years
after the lifetime of the physical testbed of PARAGON.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.