* 2216066
* MRI: Acquisition of Single-Crystal Diffractometer for Small Molecule Crystallography and Cryosystem
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Nocera, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,735.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Harvard University is acquiring a
dual-source single crystal diffractometer equipped with high-flux Cu and Mo
microfocus X-ray sources, an enhanced detector, and a cryogenic device to
support the research of Professor Theodore Betley and colleagues Jarad Mason,
Daniel Nocera, and Shao-Liang Zheng. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry, biochemistry, and catalysis. This instrument is
an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this
institution. The facility serves as a regional XRD resource benefitting students
and faculty from primarily undergraduate institutions within the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and surround New England regions with impacts through active
collaborations with researchers at Wellesley College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on organic synthesis, photoredox catalysis,
C-H bond oxidation and functionalization catalysis, organocatalysis, reactive
intermediate isolation, chemotherapeutic development, small molecule activation,
novel magnetic material synthesis, tunable metal-organic phase- change
materials, barocaloric responsive materials, and porous network materials.
Furthermore, the new diffractometer will be utilized in probing both photo
excited state and thermally driven transformation during in situ diffraction
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.