* 2216742
* SNARE function and phosphoinositide induced conformational and oligomeric changes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Rutilio Fratti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 545,750.00

Cellular communication is important for a multitude of physiological processes.
Organelles are membrane bound structures within the cell that communicate
through the transport and fusing of materials in vesicles. Many proteins control
fusion, yet the role of the membrane itself remains unclear. Membranes contain
specialized lipids, and it is known that altering these lipids will negatively
impact vesicle fusion; however, the mechanism of this is unknown. The
investigator will study how lipids affect protein function during fusion to
paint a better picture of this process. The Broader Impact activities include
training of scientists at all levels, including female and other
underrepresented students. In addition, the investigator is also a member of the
Boy Scouts of America and will serve as a merit badge counselor for Chemistry,
Nuclear Science, and Public Health where he hopes to spark a life-long curiosity
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotes rely on membrane fusion to maintain
cellular homeostasis, including processes such as exocytosis, endocytosis, and
exosome release, making it imperative to understand the processes that make
membrane fusion possible. SNARE proteins are critical in the membrane fusion
process and in this project, the investigator seeks to understand how SNARE
proteins drive membrane fusion. This project focuses on the SNARE protein Vam7,
which is known to trigger vesicle fusion; however, Vam7â€™s regulation by the
lipid environment is unclear. The investigator will use biochemical and
biophysical approaches to understand how membrane lipids interact with Vam7
domains, elucidate how lipid binding induces Vam7 conformational changes and
multimerization, and investigate how Vam7 lipid binding and multimerization can
affect different stages of macroautophagy. The completion of this project will
define the how Vam7 is regulated by the membrane to promote fusion. In parallel
to the research aims, the investigator actively recruits women and
underrepresented minorities as both graduate students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.