* 2216346
* MRI: Acquisition of an ultrahigh vacuum closed cryostat scanning probe microscope for nanoscale discoveries on surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Costel Constantin, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2025
* USD 751,625.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a Scienta Omicron Infinity Scanning Probe Microscopy Lab, with a
closed-loop cryostat, ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling and non-contact atomic
force microscope. This microscope provides images on the atomic and molecular
levels at low temperatures. The incorporation of closed helium loop technology
rids the instrument users from needing expensive, nonrenewable helium cryogen
resources, while still accessing low temperatures (&lt; 10 K) in a low noise
environment, necessary for atomic resolution. The stability of these instruments
will allow the user to keep samples at low temperatures for weeks at a time, and
enables users to conduct high impact, novel work at James Madison University
(JMU), an undergraduate institution. The installation of the Infinity microscope
at JMU will enhance the research opportunities for students by increasing the
impact of research projects spanning four departments at both JMU and the
University of Virginia (UVA): (JMU Chemistry/Biochemistry and Physics/Astronomy,
UVA Chemistry/Biochemistry and Materials Science/Engineering). Researchers at
UVA will travel to JMU to use the instrumentation to enhance their own projects
while working with JMU PIs and undergraduates. These networking opportunities
will enrich the experiences of JMU undergraduate researchers. Across the 9
research groups at JMU and UVA, undergraduate and graduate researchers will get
hands-on experience with a state-of-the-art instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Infinity microscope will provide the atomic and
nanoscale resolution, electronic structure characterization, and low temperature
transitions (molecular packing, electronic structure and conductivity
measurements, defect morphology and rearrangement, molecular binding sites) for
9 new or ongoing projects at both JMU and UVA. These cross-disciplinary projects
will involve both undergraduate and graduate students in research in 1)
intermolecular interactions and substrate effects on packing, 2) electron
transport in individual photosynthesis proteins, 3) surface characteristics of
entropy-stabilized oxides, 4) surface electronic structures of manganese-doped
indium tin oxide, 5) local electronic structures of graphene defects, 6) defect
sites of nickel-based alloys, 7) geometric and electronic structures of 2D ceria
nanosheets, 8) tip-induced dissociation of adsorbates, and 9) self-assembly of
block copolymer structures and domains. The microscope will provide nanoscale
geometric and electronic details that will further the fundamental knowledge of
each particular research project. The thermally stable, low temperature scanning
tunneling microscope will allow researchers to investigate the morphology and
electronic structure of their conductive samples, while atomic force microscopy
will highlight nanoscale intricacies on nonconductive substrates. The atomic and
molecular level insights gained by this microscope will aid the fundamental
understanding of fields including catalysis, corrosion, photosynthesis, polymer
science, surface science, and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.