* 2216033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing metabolism and physiology through analysis of transition metal isotopes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 24,670.00

Several different elements with specific chemical signatures, or isotopes, have
been measured in bones of living and fossil species to help researchers
reconstruct information regarding diet, migration, and reproduction. The
measurement of stable isotopes of transition metals such as zinc, iron, and
copper, could also be applied to the study of living or fossil primate bone to
provide additional insight into these factors. This project measures transition
metal isotopes in bone from primate individuals, and links them to information
known from these individuals during life, to better understand how these markers
might help reconstruct information about meat consumption and infant feeding
patterns from fossilized bone. The results of this project also provide
information about how individual- and sex-specific differences in metabolism
influence these measurements. This is a multi-institutional collaborative
project that includes mentoring of undergraduate students from groups
underrepresented in STEM, community outreach, and presentations to local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three main aims: 1) Are the
breastfeeding and weaning patterns of primates recorded by δ66Zn values in
enamel bioapatite and bone? 2) How does infrequent meat consumption affect the
δ66Zn values measured in bioapatite? 3) Do sex- related differences in Fe and Cu
fractionation occur in primates and does the degree of female reproductive
investment affect these values? Analytic approaches include transition isotope
analysis using mass spectrometry, and the application of a logistic regression
with a machine learning algorithm to predict diet category
(frugivorous/herbivorous or omnivorous/meat consuming) and trophic position of
the samples. Transition metals (Zn, Fe, Cu) have the potential to be indicators
of trophic position (δ66Zn), sex and reproductive state (δ56Fe and δ65Cu) in
prehistoric and even fossil skeletal elements with poor organic preservation.
This study aims to establish a reference dataset for nonhuman primates that
serves as the first application of this technique in wild primates, with the
potential to dramatically expand the use of transition metals in archaeological
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.