* 2216875
* Modulation of the Effector-Triggered Immunity response by ERAD-Mediated Degradation of Activated NLRs (EMDAN)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Peter Balint-Kurti, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 367,449.00

A plant disease resistance response can be triggered by the interaction of
nucleotide binding leucine-rich repeat proteins (known as resistance proteins)
and specific pathogen-derived proteins known as effectors. This interaction
leads to a strong defense response known as effector-triggered immunity (ETI),
often resulting in a rapid localized cell death response at the site of pathogen
infection. This response must be tightly regulated so it confers resistance, but
not excessive so that it inhibits plant growth unnecessarily. Our preliminary
evidence suggests that a component of a common protein degradation pathway in
maize, ZmCER9, controls degradation of the nucleotide binding leucine-rich
repeat proteins, after they are activated. ZmCER9 protein sequence is similar to
other proteins involved in a process called endoplasmic reticulum associated
degradation (ERAD), which degrades incorrectly-folded proteins. Although ERAD
has been characterized in yeast, it is poorly understood in plants. Thus, the
interaction of ZmCER9 and subsequent degradation of nucleotide binding leucine-
rich repeat proteins appears to be a previously undescribed mechanism that
mediates the deactivation of the effector-triggered immunity defense response
after activation. We will use a range of techniques to gain insight into how the
interaction of CER9 homologs and nucleotide binding leucine-rich repeat proteins
control a crucial defense response in plants and identify other proteins
involved in this process in plants. This study will contribute to a greater
understanding of how plants survive and thrive in the face of biotic stress.
This project will also provide training opportunities and STEM enrichment to
underserved middle and high school students from low income, rural counties in
northeastern, helping to generate the next generation of plant
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant disease resistance (R-) proteins of the
nucleotide binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) type are activated and induce a
strong defense response known as effector-triggered immunity or ETI, upon
recognition of specific pathogen-derived effector proteins. ETI’s effectiveness
depends on inactivity when the cognate pathogen is absent, rapid induction when
a pathogen is recognized and a rapid suppression after induction. The ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway, mediated by the sequential actions of E1 (ubiquitin-
activating), E2 (ubiquitin-conjugating) and E3 (ubiquitin ligase) enzymes is a
major protein modification and degradation pathway found in all eukaryotes. Our
preliminary data indicate that maize E3-ligase ZmCER9 mediates degradation of
the Rp1-D NLR R-protein, and several other NLR R-proteins, specifically after
activation. Based on homology, ZmCER9 is likely a component of the endoplasmic
reticulum associated degradation (ERAD), a fundamental eukaryotic quality-
control system that degrades incorrectly-folded proteins. ERAD in plants has
been poorly characterized and there are no reported substrates of the CER9
complex, meaning that Rp1-D may represent its first known substrate. We
hypothesize that ERAD-Mediated Degradation of Activated NLRs (EMDAN) is a
general mechanism for the deactivation of ETI in plants. We will use a range of
molecular and cell biology techniques to determine the importance of EMDAN and
related pathways in controlling ETI in plants and to characterize the role of
CER9 in ERAD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.