* 2216540
* BPC-DP: Cultivating Academic Inclusion and Career Engagement to Increase the Persistence of Minoritized Students in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Roderick Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 296,804.00

Despite efforts to broaden participation in technology majors at US
universities, classroom learning environments and career engagement
opportunities have not evolved to meet the unique needs of increasingly diverse
student bodies. The voices and experiences of women, Black and Hispanic / Latinx
students are commonly underrepresented in existing curriculum and instructional
practices, which reinforces inequities that impede their learning, engagement,
and persistence in technology majors. This demonstration project aims to create
first-year learning experiences reflective of the knowledge and skills of
minoritized students. The project team will pilot a novel approach for
overlaying inclusive teaching practices on the well-established Analyze, Design,
Develop, Implement and Evaluate (ADDIE) course design model. Instructors at Penn
State’s College of Information Sciences and Technology will participate in
Inclusive ADDIE workshops to redesign the first-year course and develop a
digital badging credential. The expected outcomes of these faculty development
activities include first-year learning experiences that foster classroom spaces
that welcome and support diverse learners, strengthen student-teacher
interactions, and incentivize and reward students’ exploration of technology
career resources and opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
participation initiatives tend to focus on recruiting new students while
overlooking current students as an essential asset in reaching diversity goals.
The proposed study uses Inclusive ADDIE, an action-oriented framework, to
reimagine a first-year course that enhances the learning experiences and career
exploration opportunities of minoritized students majoring in IST. The project
team will implement and assess two scalable and reproducible faculty development
interventions that consider intersectionality and facilitate modifications to
curriculum and instructional practices to bolster students’ persistence. The
Inclusive ADDIE framework has transformative potential concerning more
significant theorizing of race and ethnicity related to inclusive pedagogies and
course design. This project also offers a repeatable methodology and curriculum
for inclusive pedagogy and course design that supports the persistence of
minoritized students in technology majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.