* 2216667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape Mitogenomics and High Altitude Adaptation in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Christopher Schmitt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 22,681.00

Genetic diversity is important to the survival of endangered species and depends
on a speciesâ€™ ability to disperse across landscapes to share genetic variation
between groups. This doctoral dissertation project uses transformative genomic
methods to examine the population genetics and dispersal ability of a critically
endangered primate, to better understand the influence of human activities on
population structure, the status of geographically isolated groups, and
potential genetic adaptations to high-elevation environments. While conducting
field work, the doctoral student works with international research collaborators
who will also aid in initiating conservation educational programming in
communities near sampled primate habitats. The doctoral student also records
video blogs during lab and field work, to be shared as part of educational
programming focused on conservation genetics for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines dispersal ability and overall
conservation status of a rare primate using transformative genomics methods.
Fecal samples collected from several groups of wild primates are processed in
order to sequence the whole mitochondrial genome using portable genomics
technologies. Haplotype and nucleotide diversity statistics along with
phylogenomic methods are used to differentiate between populations and are
combined with GIS-based landscape quantification to assess population
connectivity and the impact of human-induced habitat fragmentation. Genome-based
assessments of selection on mitochondrial loci related to oxygen use efficiency
are used to assess potential physiological limitations to dispersal based on
altitude in this species. This project can validate the process of using non-
invasively collected fecal samples and local, portable field lab equipment to
sequence whole mitochondrial genomes for the purpose of species-wide population
genetics. The outcomes of this study may also reveal important factors of
landscape, environment and migratory behavior that impact gene flow between
populations, which can guide local conservation stakeholders regarding protected
area formation, corridor formation or maintenance for migration and gene flow,
and where community-based conservation programs may be most
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.