* 2216182
* Collaborative Research: Tropical Cyclone Variability in the Western North Pacific Over the Common Era
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Davin Wallace, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 342,439.00

Tropical cyclones, also called typhoons or hurricanes, are intense storms that
form over warm tropical oceans. They can cause damage to buildings and even loss
of life. The western North Pacific is the location of the most tropical cyclones
with an average of 40 storms per year. However, instruments that record tropical
cyclones have only existed for about 75 years. This project will acquire
sedimentary records across multiple sites that will be used to document tropical
cyclone activity for the last several thousand years in the western North
Pacific. Results will be important for understanding climate factors that
control tropical cyclone frequency and intensity. Broader impacts include
support for undergraduate and graduate students and educational outreach
activities in the U.S. and Philippines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coarse-grained
storm-induced deposits, preserved in coastal sedimentary basins, are
particularly effective proxies for intense tropical cyclone impacts at a site.
Previously published work and preliminary data show that deep coastal
depressions with rapidly accumulating sediments contain high-resolution records
of the passage of intense tropical cyclones. However, few such long-term
sedimentary records have been developed thus far in the western North Pacific.
This project will collect seismic, multibeam, and sediment core data for sites
across the Philippines, Palau, Guam, Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae in the western
North Pacific. Collected sediment cores will be analyzed using a multi-proxy
approach consisting of coarse fraction and grain-size distribution measurements,
loss on ignition analysis, radiography and elemental analysis via X-ray
fluorescence scanning, sediment petrography, microfossil and macrofossil
analysis, and computed tomography. Modern sedimentary analogs will also be
analyzed. Cores will be dated using a multi-proxy approach based on short-lived
isotopes and radiocarbon ages using a Bayesian statistical framework. These
millennial-scale reconstructions will provide a means of extending documentary
records of tropical cyclone strikes back millennia and allow for i) the
examination of climate/tropical cyclone interactions that lack modern analogs,
ii) the generation of more accurate reoccurrence rate estimates, and iii)
assessment of variations in storm activity on sub-millennial time scales. The
results of this work will provide essential data on past patterns of tropical
cyclone activity in the western North Pacific and offer broader insight into
climate factors that modulate tropical cyclone frequency, intensity, track, and
area of development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.