* 2216092
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatograph with a Tandem High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Research and Training in Basic and Applied Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ying Gao, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 252,700.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Middle Tennessee State University
is acquiring an ultra high performance liquid chromatograph with a tandem high
resolution mass spectrometer (UHPLC MS) to support the research of Professor
Mengliang Zhang and colleagues Andrienne Friedli, Ngee-Sing Chong, Tony
Johnston, and Ying Gao. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of
forensics, medicinal, organic, agricultural and materials chemistry. UHPLC MS is
an analytical instrument that combines the physical separation capabilities of
liquid chromatography with the mass analysis capabilities of mass spectrometry.
In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components are heated and flow
into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized. The ions' masses are measured
very accurately. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of
molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass
spectrometer. The various ionization sources provide added flexibility with
regard to the types of samples that are analyzed. The acquisition strengthens
the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all
levels in many departments as well as provides accessibility for use at nearby
institutions. The instrument will be used to trains a student population with
large proportions of women and people from ethnic groups that are
underrepresented in the chemical sciences. The proportion of students from low-
income backgrounds and those who are first-generation college students across
the university lend credence to the ability of the project to influence the
participation of such students in STEM. The instrument gives students experience
using vital instrumentation that they carry with them into their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this mass spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts areas
including forensics, medicinal, organic, agricultural and materials chemistry.
Research is focused on the screening of chemical profiles and determining
characteristics for chemical identification, the identification of biomarkers,
drug discovery, development of synthetic products as anti-fungal, anti-
inflammatory, and anti-cancer agents, detailed understanding of fermentation and
phytochemical transformation, and the sequencing of
peptoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.