* 2216438
* Development of Indigenous-focused Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences through STEM Faculty Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Erin Lehmer, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 227,297.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by engaging STEM faculty in
developing Indigenous-focused course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs). STEM faculty plan to develop multiple CUREs for undergraduate STEM
courses and to engage in culturally responsive teaching approaches. A key goal
of the project is to develop undergraduate STEM curriculum that has the
potential to recruit and retain more Native American Indian/Alaska Native
(AI/AN) students in STEM majors and careers. Importantly, the project team
includes scholars with expertise in both STEM and Indigenous culture. With a
dedicated Indigenous focus, the project hopes to advance understanding of
barriers to STEM and STEM careers faced by AI/AN students and their tribal
communities. Resulting Indigenous-focused CUREs will be shared broadly with
faculty and institutions across the country. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Situated in
the context of Fort Lewis College, which is a Native American, Non-Tribal
Institution, this project aims to engage STEM faculty in developing,
implementing, and assessing multiple Indigenous-focused CUREs to recruit and
retain more AI/AN undergraduates to STEM degrees and careers. Goals of this
project include creating professional development for STEM faculty in culturally
responsive pedagogy, especially for AI/AN students. The intended outcome of the
effort is for STEM faculty to develop multiple Indigenous-focused CUREs that
would be offered in STEM curricula to sophomore-year students. Indigenous-
focused CUREs developed will employ authentic and place-based research
experiences to engage students in developing evidence-based reasoning and
problem-solving skills in meaningful contexts across multiple STEM disciplines.
The involvement of STEM scholars with dual expertise in STEM research and
Indigenous culture is significant and will be key to the development and
assessment of these Indigenous-focused CURE interventions. Further, the effort
intends to build faculty skills in culturally responsive mentoring that would
extend beyond the CURE courses developed. Evaluation of the project will be
guided by an advisory board, as well as informed by scholars with education
research expertise. The developed Indigenous-focused CUREs, along with evidence
of their impact, will be disseminated to the broader undergraduate STEM
education community and could be broadly influential. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.