* 2216659
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Female reproductive ecology and energy availability in a high adiposity human population
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Richard Bribiescas, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Human reproduction requires females to invest significant amounts of caloric
energy into pregnancy, lactation, and childcare. It has been proposed that
females have evolved ways to vary how much energy they spend on reproduction in
response to energy availability, which has commonly been indexed by body fat.
Excess body fat can adversely affect reproductive hormone pathways and disrupt
menstrual cycles, and it is not clear whether this might in part be due to the
influence of body fat levels on sensitivity to stress. This research project
examines female reproductive function among women in a population with
comparatively high body fat levels who have been shown previously - in contrast
to other populations - to experience relatively low rates of irregular menstrual
cycles. In addition to contributing to a greater understanding of the diversity
of body fat-reproductive function associations, this project supports scientific
training for female graduate students and scientists in the research community,
and helps strengthen scientific partnerships with local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reproductive biologists have developed two scientific
models to describe the relationship between ovarian function and caloric energy
availability. The Lipostatic Model suggests that female reproductive function is
closely associated with body fat levels, while the Metabolic Model suggests that
female reproductive function is more strongly affected by caloric energy
deficiencies. This project tests these models among females with high body fat
levels by 1) examining the prevalence of menstrual irregularity and loss of
ovulation among a study sample of approximately 150 females of mid-reproductive
age, and 2) assessing reproductive hormone levels across the menstrual cycle in
relation to body fat levels and physical activity. By using gold-standard dual
x-ray absorptiometry to estimate subcutaneous fat together with wearable
physical activity monitors to quantify daily physical activity, the project can
address the question of whether high body fat levels protect female reproductive
function from energetic stress caused by increased caloric
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.