* 2216131
* NSF MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoscale 3D Printer for Medical Device Precision Manufacturing at Michigan State University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zhen Qiu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 589,100.00

Title: NSF MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoscale 3D Printer for Medical Device
Precision Manufacturing at Michigan State
University&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Precision manufacturing is a dominating
factor for future medical technology innovation. This project seeks to
accelerate the precision medical device research at Michigan State University
(MSU) and in Midwest Michigan by acquiring a Nanoscribe Photonic Professional
GT2. The Nanoscribe instrument is a unique cutting-edge lithography system that
allows fabricating micro/nanoscale complex structures from virtual 3D models
with low cost, fast speed (100 mm/s), extremely high resolutions (160 nm), and
large print volume. The instrument will be housed at the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Research Cleanroom (ERC), a multidisciplinary shared research
facility available to both MSU and external users. With the Nanoscribe, MSU will
become a regional hub for providing high-precision additive manufacturing
support to users from MSU as well as other institutes and local companies in
Midwest Michigan. The instrument will immediately benefit a diverse team of
investigators and their cross-disciplinary research projects from 4 different
departments and 3 colleges at MSU and other institutions including Fraunhofer
USA Center Midwest, Helen Devos Children Hospital, Washington University in St.
Louis, and Oakland University. The associated research is expected to produce
numerous patents on medical devices with huge potential to be translated into
clinical use. Besides research benefits, the instrument will serve as an
educational tool for training multidisciplinary researchers and bioengineers in
additive manufacturing, micro/nanoengineering, biotechnologies, physics,
environmental science, scientific art, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision
medical device research is one of MSU’s most rapidly growing research areas,
where cross-disciplinary collaborations leverage the combined strengths of
Colleges of Engineering, Natural Science, and Human Medicine as well as the
Institute for Quantitative Health Science &amp; Engineering to create the next
generation of micro/nanodevices for medicine and health. The capabilities of the
requested Nanoscribe will open many new avenues of research in the following
major areas: (1) Neural interface technologies: miniaturized implants for
seamless communication with the brain and the nervous systems; (2) Wearables:
flexible and/or stretchable sensors for monitoring biophysical markers of
wearers’ health; (3) Microfluidics &amp; organoid-on-chip: biomaterial-based,
micro/nanostructures to study cell/tissue properties, cell communication in
living systems, organoid development and maturation, and aerosol particles; (4)
Biomedical micro/nanorobotics: soft, intelligent robotics for adaptive and safe
interaction with human body and environments; (5) Biophotonics for ultra-thin
biomedical imaging and biosensing. The requested Nanoscribe is an essential
enabling tool that will not only address the critical need of a diverse group of
researchers to expedite their current/future research in biomedical devices, but
also promote multidisciplinary collaborations between engineers and scientists
within the department, across MSU, and beyond the institution. Besides medical
and health research, the requested Nanoscribe instrument will significantly
expand the existing micro/nanomanufacturing capabilities at MSU for serving the
needs of micro/nanoscale science, engineering, and technology. By creating
state-of-the-art nanoscale objects, the instrument will also serve as an
important tool to create scientific training and artistic works to attract
students, especially from the underresppreatnd groups, to pursue STEM education
and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.