* 2216125
* MRI: Acquisition of a Versatile Magnetic Property Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Geoffrey Strouse, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2025
* USD 385,483.00

With this award, Florida State University (FSU) will establish a Magnetic
Property Measurement System with versatile capabilities for accurate and precise
measurements of magnetic properties of molecules and materials. The system will
facilitate studies of magnetic behavior of matter at different length scales and
under broadly variable conditions. The project will impact many areas, including
inorganic and organic chemistry, condensed-matter physics, chemical physics, and
materials science. This instrument is an integral part of teaching and research
training of graduate and undergraduate students, who are involved in research on
diverse topics related to fundamental understanding and practical applications
of magnetism and magnetic materials. The resource will be also utilized by
neighboring primarily-undergraduate and minority-serving institutions, as well
as in practical hands-on exercises during the undergraduate summer school on
magnetism and magnetic materials held biennially on the FSU campus. In
particular, the project will leverage the proximity of the Florida Agricultural
and Mechanical University (FAMU) to facilitate training of students from the
joint FAMU-FSU College of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The versatility and
reliability of the requested cryogen-free system will help establish a broad
user base. The research directions pursued by the project team and other major
users include magneto-structural phase transitions that underlie energy-
conversion technologies, emergent properties of correlated magnetic materials,
synthesis of new magnetic materials in molten metal fluxes, controlled
modulation of magnetism by surface organic molecules, correlated
magnetic/plasmonic properties of quantum dots, magnetic exchange interactions in
metal-organic frameworks under high pressure, and spin-state switching in
transition metal complexes with radical anions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.