* 2216836
* PREC Track 1: Expanding the Chemical Space of Ribosomally Synthesized and Post-Translationally Modified peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Walker, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 868,617.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The University of New Mexico (UNM) is a Hispanic-
Serving Institution with 50% of its undergraduate student body identifying as
Hispanic or Latino, and a majority-minority institution with 59% of its
undergraduate student body identifying with an underrepresented group. This
Partnership for Research and Education in Chemistry between UNM and the NSF
Center for Genetically Encoded Materials (C-GEM) aims to increase the retention
of minoritized undergraduate students in chemistry. It will focus on providing
mentoring and research experiences to undergraduates to increase their sense of
belonging in chemistry and strengthen their identity as chemists. These
activities will prepare them for graduate school or careers in chemistry. The
research will focus on engineering a relatively easily manipulable bacterium to
produce chemical products of value, and using computational methods to study the
machinery these bacteria use to produce these chemicals. Through these studies,
this project endeavors to develop a route to alter and test the pathways used to
make these value-added products, for potential long term implications for hybrid
synthetic/biocatalytic routes to key molecular or materials targets. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop two synergistic approaches to study and
utilize biosynthetic machinery involved in the production of ribosomally
synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide (RiPP) class of natural
products, with the long-term goal of generating large libraries of natural
product-like compounds that can be screened for new and useful properties and
activities. In objective 1, Bacillus subtilis, a Gram-positive bacterium for
which wide array of genetic tools are available, will be developed as a flexible
heterologous host for the production of RiPPs. In objective 2, a computational
workflow utilizing two-stage multiscale molecular dynamics simulations to model
the behavior of the RiPP precursor peptide in the active sites of the
biosynthetic enzymes will be developed to gain a deeper understanding of how
these enzymes function and to guide engineering efforts. This project will
provide funding for six students annually to take part in C-GEMs summer
undergraduate research program early in their undergraduate career, providing
them with their first research experience in a collaborative and supportive
environment, and strengthening their identity as scientists. It will also
provide funding for four undergraduate students to perform research at UNM and
present their research at scientific conferences focused on minoritized
students. This project is partially supported by the Chemistry Division of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and by the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the Biological
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.