* 2216289
* MRI:Acquisition of a Multi-Purpose High-Performance Computing Infrastructure for Machine Learning and Computational Research at Temple University
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sergei Pond, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

This project will provide new research computing equipment for Temple
University. Faculty and students from disciplines such as Biology, Chemistry,
Computer and Information Sciences, Mathematics, and Physics, will benefit as
well as other disciplines, who use computation as a primary tool in their
research. The equipment consists of three components: (1) a storage device, (2)
sets of processors optimized for empowering machine learning applications, and
(3) high-performance processing units tuned for large-scale computational
calculations. This equipment will complement existing investments at Temple and
help drive undergraduate research plus educational activities across the entire
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational science, chemical physics,
evolutionary biology, materials science, biophysics, data analytics, and
genomics are major research themes in the College of Science &amp; Technology.
Various research centers and institutes reflecting these themes will be
empowered by the new high-performance computing equipment. In addition, the
equipment will broadly impact research in machine learning, computer vision, big
data, nano-scale science, neuroscience, as well as initiatives in energy and
health. The new equipment will greatly enhance current computing facilities and
enable transformational research over a broad front. Temple is Philadelphia’s
public university with an enrollment of about 35,900 graduate, professional, and
undergraduate students. It boasts a diverse student body. Temple has one of few
computing centers in the region that can go beyond minimal services and promote
and support collaboration and cooperation among K-12 and STEM education,
government agencies, and local industry. Temple addresses needs for scientific
training in business environments with its Professional Science Master’s
programs; the wide expertise in computational sciences has led to development of
programs with strong computational components, e.g., Bioinformatics and High-
Performance Computing. The new infrastructure will foster research and
educational experiences that embrace local and regional communities and empower
entrepreneurial research activities that contribute to economic growth in the
region. The new equipment will be procured, assembled, and operated by the High-
Performance Computing staff in the College of Science &amp; Technology. The
website https://www.hpc.temple.edu provides information about available
resources, how to get access, user guides, usage statistics, and usage policies.
The staff will be responsible for running the associated tutorials, workshops,
and conferences that are designed to benefit the user base not only at Temple
but also in the local and regional research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.