* 2216550
* RaMP: Training towards an Inclusive and Diverse Workforce in Microbiome Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Britt Koskella, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,999,844.00

All plants and animals on Earth continually interact with microbial organisms
(fungi, bacteria, and viruses). Although a small proportion of these microbes
are pathogens that cause disease, the vast majority are either harmless to their
hosts or are beneficial. The benefits that both plants and animals receive from
the diverse microbial communities living in and on them (their so-called
microbiomes) are broad – ranging from aiding in digestion and nutrition to
providing critical defenses against pests and disease. As such, the study of
microbiomes is a particularly exciting research avenue because it is relevant to
both basic science and understanding of biodiversity and to the development of
new applications in human health, conservation, and agricultural practice. Now,
to move from knowledge gained in research within the field, it is critical to
focus on building a diverse and broadly trained workforce in the Microbiome
Sciences. The overarching goal of this RaMP network is to offer meaningful and
leading-edge research experience in Microbiome Sciences to post-baccalaureate
participants across research labs in the San Francisco Bay Area, including
University of California, Berkeley, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco State University, and California State University, East Bay, often in
collaboration with local industry partners. The program is targeted at recently
graduated Community College transfer students, including mentees from
historically marginalized backgrounds and/or who have come into science from
less traditional paths. The training and mentoring provided will empower a new
generation of microbiome researchers who can continue on to graduate school,
enter the workforce as future industry leaders, or follow myriad other
meaningful career paths that have opened up because of the increasingly
recognized importance of microbiomes in shaping human health and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of microbial communities living
in and on plants and animals makes multidisciplinary approaches essential to
unlocking their functions and utility. Advancement in Microbiome Sciences
requires integration of efforts among researchers in four major areas:
theory/modeling, data sciences, technology development, and experimental/model
system development. Moreover, given how closely the Microbiome Sciences
interface with other sectors and with grand societal challenges, it is critical
that the workforce of researchers in this field moving forward represent the
diversity of the communities that the research impacts. The post-baccalaureate
participant will be trained in different areas of Microbiome Sciences, providing
skills to seek ample job opportunities using rich theoretical frameworks and
exciting model systems. This program will provide broad training opportunities
across academic, national lab, museum, and industry settings in the Bay Area.
This RaMP network also seeks to build a strong community of mentors to train the
next generation of diverse and ethical researchers who will be ideally placed to
make fundamental discovery and to translate such discovery into solutions. The
collective strengths and diverse approaches and systems within this growing RaMP
network holds the potential to open new avenues for comparative microbiome
research, to allow for meaningful cross-talk between theoreticians, empiricists,
and data scientists, and to generate new solutions through basic research. Post-
baccalaureate participants will spend their year undertaking novel and
independent research while fully supported by a network that is unified by its
focus on the continual pursuit of knowledge and training in mentoring best
practices. The overarching goal is to create a future scientific community in
which diversity, equity, and inclusion is inbuilt and, as a direct result, is
pushing the boundaries of our understanding of microbiome composition, function,
stability, and engineering to solve grand societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.