* 2216858
* PREC Track 1: Cal State LA - MolSSI PREC Pathway to Diversity Program
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Paul Nerenberg, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 886,474.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Cal State LA-MolSSI PREC (Partnership for Research
and Education in Chemistry) Pathway to Diversity Program is a collaboration
between California State University, Los Angeles, a comprehensive public
university and Hispanic Serving Institution, and the Molecular Software Sciences
Institute (MolSSI) at Virginia Tech to incorporate machine learning (ML)
techniques in molecular simulation research and develop innovative pedagogical
materials to train early-stage undergraduate students in computational science.
Cal State LA undergraduate and master’s students will participate year-round in
mentored research and attend an annual workshop at MolSSI. Community college
students will take part in mentored summer research experiences at Cal State LA
alongside these students. Additionally, early-stage undergraduate students from
local community colleges and Cal State LA will participate in an annual
computational workshop taught by instructors from Cal State LA and MolSSI that
emphasizes scientific programming and a variety of molecular simulation and ML
techniques, as well as professional development activities. Overall, this PREC
aims to make a significant contribution to the recruitment and training of the
next generation of molecular simulation scientists who will require a deep
understanding of both physical and chemical principles and computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning (ML) methods have transformed
the fields of chemistry and molecular sciences in recent years, and will
continue to do so in the future. The Cal State LA-MolSSI PREC (Partnership for
Research and Education in Chemistry) will be organized around three thematic
research thrusts that each use ML and physics-based simulation methods to create
new computational models applicable to a range of chemical and biochemical
phenomena. Thrust 1 will focus on developing ML approaches for computing the
relative entropies and thermodynamic stabilities of molecular crystal
polymorphs. Thrust 2 will aim to develop a hybrid physics-based and ML approach
for predicting the relative binding free energies of small protein-ligand
complexes. Thrust 3 will use ML to parametrize small molecule force fields that
include a direct polarization electrostatic model and other advanced nonbonded
potentials. The results of this research will help answer pressing questions in
chemistry, biophysics, materials science, and
pharmacology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.