* 2216150
* MRI:Acquisition of Ocean Gliders for Marine Science Research Support at the University of the Virgin Islands
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* William Wilson, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 840,647.00

The PI’s request funding to acquire two gliders with CTD and ADCP to provide the
University of the Virgin Islands (UVI) with the capability to support integrated
ocean research and education at UVI and within the Eastern Caribbean region.
Gliders provide a way to collect open ocean and near-shelf measurements without
large research vessels. UVI researchers have existing projects that would
benefit from regional offshore glider data. A glider program would create new
student educational and research opportunities for learning about physical
oceanography, ocean observing, and integrating ocean physics into marine science
and other disciplines. Gliders are excellent training tools. By learning how to
pilot the gliders, the students become both the scientist and ship captain for
planning research. Creating a hands-on glider program UVI will have a positive
impact on students’ (including minorities) education in marine
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UVI scientists have identified numerous research
projects that would benefit from glider data including spawning and behavior of
commercially important fish species; understanding of temperature and salinity
variability at the shelf break and its importance to coral health; longer-term
climatological impacts on coral reefs, internal wave variability and ecosystem
impacts at the shelf break; improved US Caribbean ROMS models; studing
energetics of the internal wave fields and their role in regional ocean
dynamics; studies of Caribbean heat and fresh water fluxes; studies of ocean
circulation and hurricane intensification; animal tracking and acoustics; and
ongoing ocean acidification and productivity research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.