* 2216575
* Collaborative Research: BPC-A: Socially Responsible Computing: Promoting Latinx student retention via community engagement in early CS courses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Manuel Perez Quinones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 293,376.00

An alliance of six campuses from the California State University (CSU) system
have united to transform the early computing experience of students historically
underrepresented in computing. This alliance brings together six CSU campuses,
each with unique strengths and local challenges: Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo; CSU
Dominguez Hills, CSU Fullerton, CSU Los Angeles, Cal Poly, Pomona, and San
Francisco State University. Together the alliance will serve over two thousand
undergraduate students in computing who identify as Hispanic/Latino (Latinx).
Each campus loses Latinx students at a higher rate than non-Latinx students,
with the largest percentage of students lost in the first two years of
computing. The alliance is committed to changing this trend by integrating
socially responsible computing curriculum in early student computing
experiences. Faculty learning communities will transform computing culture and
curriculum to better demonstrate the use of computing in addressing community
needs. Through project-based learning, these curricular changes will provide the
opportunity for students to connect computing with their communities, ultimately
increasing their sense of belonging in computing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project unites computer science educators committed to broadening participation
in computing with social scientists with expertise in evaluating inclusive STEM
education and with expertise in training faculty working at Hispanic-Serving
Institutions. This project focuses on developing and evaluating computing
curriculum and pedagogy that integrates communal goals into introductory
computing courses and promotes socially responsible computing. This cross-site
collaboration uses a collective impact model to support our shared vision while
allowing for site variances. The project includes a curricular peer review
process to align outcomes while allowing each site to leverage its local
community needs and strengths, particularly in the development of the community-
focused socially responsible computing design project intervention. The proposed
faculty learning community (FLC) uses training and ongoing meetings to orient
and support new instructors and expand the project impact beyond the grant
personnel. This project includes evaluation that examines both student and
faculty outcomes, allowing the alliance to reflect and improve throughout the
proposed work. The curricular changes and associated evaluation will ultimately
contribute to the knowledge base of computing education, while the research
focused on changing the discipline climate with faculty learning communities
also contributes to learning sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.