* 2216205
* Support of a Hybrid Format 2022 North American Membrane Society (NAMS) Meeting To Expand Access And Diversity
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Manish Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide support for the audiovisual infrastructure required to
host a hybrid, virtual and onsite, 2022 Meeting of the North American Membrane
Society (NAMS) in Tempe, Arizona. NAMS is a premier membrane conference,
providing outstanding technical sessions across the full breadth of topics
within membrane science and technology. The theme of the 2022 meeting is
"Membranes for Sustainability," where technical sessions will focus on
communicating the latest developments and trends in membrane science geared
towards improving sustainability. The meeting has a rich history as a forum for
students, early-career researchers, and leaders in the field, from both industry
and academia, to share their research and development outcomes, insights, and
future directions. The hybrid meeting format allows attendees to decide how they
wish to participate. Providing a virtual attendance option has been shown to
reduce barriers to participation, such as the burden and cost of travel, and is
expected to improve overall attendance and make the meeting globally accessible.
This support for the hybrid meeting audiovisual infrastructure will ensure a
positive, productive meeting experience for all attendees and promotes
participation by diverse members of the membranes research community. The format
also provides flexibility should pandemic-related travel restrictions
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAMS organizing committee is comprised of
diverse North American researchers, and invited speakers from academia,
industry, and government labs feature prominently in the program. The meeting
will feature 30 technical sessions, daily plenary sessions, a poster session,
and abundant unstructured discussion periods to catalyze new collaborative
relationships and research ideas. All oral presentations by onsite and online
speakers will be given through a live Zoom teleconference, with two-way
communication and online session chairs to moderate discussions. Mentorship
breakouts, sponsor sessions, and plenary talks will also be live through Zoom,
such that all attendees are participating in real-time. The 2022 NAMS meeting
will cover a variety of topics ranging from fundamental studies of membrane
material science to process systems development and applications of membrane
technology in water, bioprocessing, chemical separations, environmental systems,
and energy. Historically, more than 400 leading membranologists from around the
world participate in the NAMS meeting each year. This award will extend
opportunities to meaningfully participate in the meeting to researchers who
might, otherwise, be unable to attend in person. The effectiveness of the hybrid
meeting format will be assessed through surveys and quantitative comparison with
attendance profiles from prior meetings, and the findings will be disseminated
through the society's website and a peer-reviewed
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.