* 2216898
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Software Stack for Scalable Heterogeneous NISQ Cluster
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Mark Novotny, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2024
* USD 34,968.00

Development of large-scale and practical quantum computers is a priority for
many countries, industries, and researchers. Demonstrating quantum computers at
scale will change the computing model as it is currently known forever, enabling
scientific discoveries at an unprecedented pace. This project’s novelties are in
designing future quantum systems as a cluster of heterogeneous quantum
computers. Such an approach is significantly different from all existing
endeavors, as it will be cost effective, scalable, more usable, and more
reliable. The project’s impacts include outlining the challenges in such
systems, proposing solutions, engaging the community, and describing a plan to
build a full software stack for such heterogeneous quantum-computing-based
clusters. The project will also engage the multidisciplinary quantum computing
community through three invited workshops to inform the potential path towards
solutions for the challenges outlined. Through a backbone stakeholder committee,
the project will ensure sustainable and sustained workforce development and
broadening participation in computing objectives, outcomes, and impact at scale.
In addition, the project personnel have a strong commitment to increasing
participation of underrepresented groups (including women, racial minorities,
and persons with disabilities) in planned activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores the feasibility of designing a full software stack for a
cluster of heterogeneous Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) machines. The
project will make contributions to the: (a) Realization of cluster of
heterogeneous NISQ machines as a quantum-computing platform with large-scale
simulation and evaluation on a real platform; (b) Programming environment and
user interface to provide a visual interface to understand quantum noise; (c)
Compilation techniques to account for heterogeneity of NISQ machines and
temporal errors; (d) Runtime to enable fault-tolerance, resource management and
scheduling considering the queuing time and noise condition in real time with
the help of a resource monitoring mechanism to query the calibration information
from all available quantum computers; (e) Co-design of the stack with quantum
machine learning and quantum chemistry applications; (f) Utilization of the
system calibration data from the multiple existing quantum machines, then apply
fidelity degradation detection on each noise attributes to generate the fidelity
degradation matrix which is used to define multiple new evaluation metrics to
compare the fidelity between the qubit topology of the quantum machines; and (g)
Engagement of the multidisciplinary quantum computing community through three
invited workshops to inform the potential path towards solutions for the
challenges outlined. Education, workforce development (WFD) and broadening
participation in computing (BPC) are a major priority of this project. These
will be realized as: (a) Through a backbone stakeholder committee, the
investigators will ensure sustainable and sustained WFD and BPC objectives,
outcomes, and impact at scale. The project plan capitalizes on the breadth of
expertise of the PIs with an overall strategy organized to reach increasingly
larger stakeholder groups (starting from project members, the broader systems
community, and finally to K-12 and non-affiliated professionals); (b) In
addition, the project personnel have a strong commitment to increasing
participation of underrepresented groups (including women, racial minorities,
and persons with disabilities) in planned activities; (c) The investigators will
incorporate research outcomes in multiple courses; and (d) The project will
facilitate collaboration and synergy among systems researchers, and engage and
partner with industry for technology transfer and
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.