* 2216488
* MRI: Acquisition of Hitachi HT7800 Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Marisa Pedulla,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,988.00

An award is made to Montana Technological University to acquire, maintain, and
operate an advanced electron microscope. The project’s multifunctional electron
microscope is a highly sensitive instrument ideal for both life sciences and
materials research, and will advance interdisciplinary research, education, and
outreach in Biology, Chemistry, Geochemistry, Mechanical Engineering,
Environmental Engineering, and Geology. The project will strengthen PhD programs
(in Materials Science and Earth Science and Engineering), enable undergraduate
research, support state-wide public service and characterization performed by
the campus’s Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology, and inspire K-12 students and
teachers served by the Clark Fork Watershed Education Program (CFWEP). The
ability to capture and convey the beauty of the biological, mineral and nano-
scale worlds to K-12 students will spark interest in scientific careers,
increase science literacy, and has the potential to combat scientific
misinformation. The project will significantly benefit state-wide outreach
activities and underrepresented groups in Montana, including students from
rural, economically disadvantaged areas, and Native American communities. The
microscope’s images will engage students ranging from Kindergarten to graduate
education by visualizing and scientifically characterizing viruses, minerals,
nanomaterials, environmental damage, and restoration. Exposure to these electron
microscopy capabilities will increase student recruitment and retention,
increase entry to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
careers, and strengthen the STEM enterprise in Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will image viruses, allow microanalysis of minerals in soils, and be
used to determine where minerals are distributed in plant and animal tissues.
This capability will particularly boost research in ecological restoration
research by revealing bioaccumulation in plants, microbes, insects and fish. The
microscope will be used to study a collection of over 100 student-discovered
viruses that infect specific bacteria (Mycobacteria, Staphylococcus, and
Pseudomonas). The microscope’s advanced capabilities will probe structural and
chemical features of nanoparticles and devices fabricated using electrospinning.
The microscope will illuminate the role of synthetic nanoparticles on infection
processes of many viruses, including phages, Herpesviruses, and
papillomaviruses, by imaging the physical interactions of nanoparticles, virus,
and host cells. The microscope’s energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX)
capability will strengthen environmental characterization, such as analyzing
sediments collected from hot springs and other geothermal features, detecting
and imaging environmental metal contaminants, and analyzing metals and other
elements in virgin ores and contaminated slurries associated with a legacy of
mineral extraction, reactive metallurgy, and stream and soil restoration
activities within a local Superfund site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.