* 2216335
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Performance Computing Cluster for Research in Engineering, Science, and Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Philippe Tissot, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,166,605.00

This award funds the acquisition of a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster
for research in engineering, science, and technology (CREST) at Texas A&amp;M
University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC). CREST consists of 40 state-of-the-art
compute nodes, eight powerful GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) nodes, two large
memory nodes, and two large storage arrays connected through an InfiniBand
switch. It can handle compute-bound, memory-bound, and data-intensive jobs
efficiently. The powerful system supports state-of-the-art science and
technology research at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC) through
its five STEM departments, two research institutes, and beyond. CREST enables
solutions to research problems of national and regional significance. Further,
the project unlocks the potential of researchers and educators at TAMUCC and
other neighboring institutions, Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville and Del Mar
College, by creating a shared high-performance computing resource for
collaborations in research and educational endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CREST
immediately impacts over 16 innovative research projects, 22 graduate and 12
undergraduate courses, and facilitates regional research advances in
environmental sustainability, economic well-being, and safety of coastal
communities across the globe. New analysis of big data sources such as climate
data, genomic data, data from smart environments, coastal and marine data, and
data on coastal resiliency enables scholarly work, knowledge generation, and
innovation in varied subjects. Immediate research impact occurs in an array of
fields requiring HPC resources, including marine genomics, climate prediction,
atmospheric remote sensing, hydrodynamic modeling, sea-level rise modeling,
coastal resiliency, computational fracture mechanics, wave energy behavior
analysis, computational fluid dynamics, global air and ocean circulation
modeling, DNA analysis, and renewable energy storage. Research advances
facilitated by CREST in these fields will bring many benefits to environmental
sustainability, economic well-being, and safety of coastal communities in South
Texas as well as many other coastal communities across the globe. Broadly, CREST
creates experiences students, faculty, and research teams have never imagined.
The project directly impacts TAMUCC's strategic goal to develop critical
thinking, problem solving, and leadership skills necessary to excel in a global
economy. CREST enriches NSF’s commitment to accessibility and inclusivity for
underrepresented communities through direct access to TAMUCC’s diverse student
body consisting of approximately 50% Hispanic (mainly first generation) students
as well as students from Del Mar College where 70% are Hispanic students, Texas
A&amp;M University-Kingsville with its 69% Hispanic students, and other partner
institutions of the Computing Alliance for HSIs (CAHSI). Finally, CREST can
attract world-class researchers and recruit highly qualified, diverse students
and faculty for the university's new doctoral programs in Coastal and Marine
System Science, Marine Biology, and Geospatial Computer Science, and a
forthcoming doctoral program in Data Science. Additional information about the
CREST project, including objectives, detailed computing resources, research and
education activities, and project reports are available at
http://hpc.tamucc.edu/crest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.