* 2216201
* MRI: Development of Rydberg Tweezer Quantum Processor with Real-Time Optical Cavity Readout
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 539,000.00

Many of the technologies we use in our everyday lives employ measurement and
feedback to operate robustly. For example, sensors on airplanes feed back to the
ailerons, elevators and rudder to pilot automatically on a pre-set course. Less
tangibly, electronic circuits in computers and cell phones use feedback to
compute reliably despite imperfections in fabrication. Similarly, future
technologies based on quantum physics can be expected to rely on measurement-
based feedback. Applications of such technologies include quantum computation,
which will require quantum error correction to be performed robustly, and also
quantum sensing and communication. Inspired by such applications, physicists are
interested generally in so-called open quantum mechanical systems in which a
small fraction of the system is occasionally measured while the remainder of the
system retains quantum coherence and entanglement. There are theoretical
predictions of new types of phenomena that emerge in these systems, but few
experimental platforms exist in which to test these predictions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed program is to enable measurements of a
portion of a complex quantum system while the remainder of the system continues
to evolve coherently. This capability will be realized specifically within
arrays of optically trapped single atoms. The evolution of the internal states
of these atoms will be controlled by optical pulses either that modify the
states of single atoms, or that couple and entangle the states of atoms in
separate optical traps. Measurements amidst this programmed quantum evolution
will be performed optically, using optical resonators to achieve high-fidelity
measurement at short measurement times and without disturbing other atoms in the
array. The measurement outcome can then be used to modify the optical control
pulses, effecting feedback on a complex quantum system. Both laser-optical and
experimental-control systems will be developed to enable such operation. This
instrument will then operate as a shared user facility within the Challenge
Institute for Quantum Computation, an NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute, and
will allow experimental investigations of quantum teleportation, quantum error
correction, cluster-state generation, interactive quantum dynamics, and quantum-
state preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.