* 2216455
* MRI: Development of a Reconfigurable Radar for UAS Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Leigh Stearns, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 997,861.00

This proposal seeks to develop a highly configurable radar system designed for
integration on Unmanned Aerial Systems that can operate over a wide frequency
spectrum. The potential remote sensing applications of these technologies are
far-reaching, enabling transformative research in routine monitoring of ice
sheets, sea ice, snow cover, soil moisture, crop health, and other areas. This
project will target applications associated with ice sheets, sea ice, and snow
cover. The broader impacts of this work include increasing scientific access to
Unmanned Aerial Systems with sufficient range and payload capabilities to
conduct geophysical surveys. The flexibility and small size of the radar system
make its integration on a variety of medium unmanned aircraft possible, allowing
our pursuit of other collaborative opportunities in the polar science community
and beyond. Airborne ice-penetrating radar are a critical tool in collecting ice
thickness and basal topography data. While several large-scale airborne surveys
have been conducted over the last several decades, many regions of the major ice
sheets of Greenland and more specifically Antarctica have not been surveyed due
to their large extent and remote locations. Several recent high-profile papers
continue to point to the importance of ice thickness data and its gradient at
the grounding line for improving future sea-level rise predictions. The proposed
system will address the continued call for polar ice and snow
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed radar will operate over sub-
bands anywhere in the 10 MHz to 18 GHz spectrum and will be integrated onto the
Vanilla Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) from Platform Aerospace, which recently
set an endurance record exceeding eight days. The development of this sensor and
its integration onto the Vanilla UAS has the potential to greatly expand
airborne applications in environmental remote sensing through the superior range
and endurance allowing routine measurements in remote locations. With this
instrument, this project aims to: 1) address the remaining gaps in ice sheet
thickness, especially across the Antarctic continent, 2) improve ice-discharge
estimates, and 3) provide a means for routine monitoring of snow cover on sea
ice. This effort also includes the development of custom aerodynamic pods that
will house the radar antennas on the Vanilla UAS. This MRI project will train
several graduate and undergraduate students by the incorporation of the design
and development of the various subsystems into a wide range of engineering
courses. These projects will equip students with the skillset needed by the STEM
workforce while exposing engineering students to the environmental and societal
issues driving the need for these new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.