* 2216852
* 2022 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Catalysis: Advancing Sustainable Technologies through Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2022
* Susannah Scott, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

The project supports attendance of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers,
and early-career research scientists/engineers at the 2022 Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Catalysis, which will be held on June 19-23, 2022 at Colby-
Sawyer College in New London, NH, along with the associated Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) on Catalysis, a two-day event held immediately prior to the GRC
that provides network-building opportunities for new entrants to the field of
catalysis. Catalysis has long served as a critical industrial and environmental
technology for facilitating the efficient and targeted conversion of raw
materials to fuels and chemical products, while also remediating waste products
and pollutants. In recent years, catalysis research has shifted strongly to
opportunities for facilitating sustainable supplies of food, energy, and water,
while also mitigating emissions of greenhouse gases. To those ends, the
Catalysis GRC will bring together prominent catalysis researchers to share the
latest advances in catalysis research while also facilitating generational
transfer of knowledge and collaborative opportunities between senior leaders and
newer entrants to the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the conference
will focus on the dissemination of knowledge by a wide variety of scientists to
explore how precise synthesis of materials, advanced characterization
techniques, detailed kinetics, and advances in theory combine to create new
understanding in catalysis as applied to global challenges in energy and the
environment. The meeting goals will be met through four key approaches: (1) a
strong scientific program focused on the meeting theme, "Advancing Sustainable
Technologies through Catalysis"; (2) participation by a diverse group of
speakers, including junior investigators and senior thought-leaders,
representatives of industry, academia and national labs, as well as graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers; (3) cross-disciplinary fertilization of
ideas in catalysis and sustainability, by exploring common themes related to
alternative energy sources and renewable or sustainable feedstocks; and (4)
fostering a sense of community by promoting interactions between prominent
senior investigators in the field and young scientists, underrepresented
minority scientists, and junior faculty. The Catalysis GRC has seen steady
advances in recent years toward promoting diversity in all forms. The 2022 GRC
will continue and expand that trend with particular emphasis on promoting
opportunities for women in catalysis. That emphasis is reflected in only the
second female conference chair in the 73-year history of the Catalysis GRC,
together with women accounting for 10 of the 30 invited speakers and discussion
leaders (significantly more than typical), and a trade-marked GRC Power Hour
session: ”Power Hour: Committed to Inclusion and the Professional Development of
Women in Science.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.