* 2216622
* BPC-AE: Collaborative: Evolution of the Institute for African Americans in Computing Sciences (IAAMCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kinnis Gosha, Morehouse College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,402,924.00

Morehouse College, University of Florida, Auburn University, and the American
Institutes for Research will collaborate to extend the Institute for African-
American Mentoring in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS, pronounced "i am cs"). iAAMCS
serves as a national resource for the computing community and emphasizes
mentoring as a primary strategy for increasing the participation of African-
Americans in computing. iAAMCS seeks to build an ecosystem for African American
researchers that have connected to each other through iAAMCS activities
including: Fellowship Writing Bootcamp, Future Faculty and Research Scientist
Mentoring Program, Annual Report on the State of Blacks in Computing in Higher
Education, and the Black Student Matching Registry. iAAMCS will develop and
disseminate mentoring content resources and guidelines for African American
students in computing programs. The overarching goal of the iAAMCS is to
increase the number of African-Americans obtaining graduate computing degrees
leading to an increase in the number of African-American researchers in the
academy, government, and industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;IAAMCS will further its
role as a national resource for African Americans in computing and serve as an
information, communication, networking, and evaluation community for African
Americans who are either considering an advanced degree in computing or enrolled
in a graduate computing program. As an alliance, iAAMCS will bring together
mentors, advisors, and subject matter experts in an effort to provide support,
mentoring, information, opportunities, and networking to its members. Those
participants directly impacted by IAAMCS include African American computing
undergraduates who are interested in graduate school, African American computing
graduate students, CISE PIs, CS departments, BPC researchers, African American
CS faculty, and HBCU CS faculty. The goals for this alliance extension include:
1) Increase in African American students in graduate computing programs; 2)
Increase in African American recipients of graduate degrees in computing; 3)
Increase the number of African Americans who enter the professoriate; 4)
Increase the number of African Americans who enter careers that utilize an
advanced degree in computing; 5) Longitudinal data collection and evaluation for
national dissemination; 6) Support CISE PIs and CS Departments looking to
support BPC efforts; and 7) Support HBCU and African American computer science
faculty. iAAMCS activities will all fall in the categories of Original
Programming, Core Research, Platform Management, and Event Participation.
Through significant, creative integrations using YouTube and LinkedIn, IAAMCS
plans to expand the reach of students who can benefit from its
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.