* 2216955
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: iDigBees Network, Towards Complete Digitization of US Bee Collections to Promote Ecological and Evolutionary Research in a Keystone Clade
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2026
* Julian Dupuis, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2026
* USD 19,924.00

Bees are the most important pollinators in both managed and natural landscapes,
and concerns are quickly growing about declines in bee diversity and numbers.
Only a fraction of the ca. 4,000 known bee species in the United States have
adequate data for assessing their presence or absence in an ecosystem. The
iDigBees Thematic Collections Network addresses this problem by transcribing
specimen label information for thousands of bee specimens in US insect
collections into a shared global database. As a result, bees will become the
first major insect group to have specimen data sufficiently digitized to promote
research projects and support conservation efforts. Specifically, the iDigBees
project will (1) map distributions for thousands of bee species and quantify
patterns of bee biodiversity; (2) identify data gaps to inform future inventory
and monitoring efforts; (3) reveal changes in species distributions over time
through historic records; (4) document the impacts of a changing climate on
bees; (5) identify critical taxa and geographic areas for conservation; and (6)
establish a network of researchers, conservationists, and land managers to
rapidly utilize data for research, education, public policy, and land
management. The education program will coordinate an array of existing programs
and create a new technology-mediated learning tool, SMARTBees, to serve high
school and college students. Obtaining specimen-level data on US bee species and
communities, and integrating findings into education programs, are essential
steps toward addressing the pollinator crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iDigBees
represents an in-depth insect biodiversity digitization initiative that will
mobilize at least 350,000 bee specimen records, and 6,600 high-resolution image
suites. Obtaining specimen-level data on US bee species and communities is an
essential step toward addressing the pollinator crisis. Via the novel networks
proposed here, species distribution patterns and “extended specimen” data will
emerge, leading to testable hypotheses as to underlying mechanisms and
predictions on how bees will respond to future global changes. Integrated data
will also shed light on how particular life-history traits life-history traits
respond to environmental change. iDigBees will help to highlight candidate
pollinator restoration options for agricultural, urban, and other managed
landscapes. This project, in partnership with researchers and government
agencies, will provide open-source datasets for policy, research, and education.
The iDigBees model will be promoted throughout North America and other
continents to foster "deep global digitization”. The iDigBees network integrates
educational and public engagement initiatives to work with the Biodiversity
Literacy in Undergraduate Education (BLUE) RCN to build and implement novel
biodiversity data-centric Open Education Resources that promote student-oriented
learning. SMARTBees will serve as a digital platform featuring learning modules
designed to serve culturally diverse high school students who are transitioning
into community college as well as first year undergraduates. Building on the
extended specimen model exemplary digital bee specimens will teach students host
plant relationships, key evolutionary concepts and the important role
pollinators have in sustaining the biodiversity of our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.