* 2216790
* Conference: Coordinating the development of self-disseminating vaccines for spillover prevention
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Scott Nuismer, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 71,669.00

A workshop will be held in Portland, Oregon to consider the issues concerning
the development of a transmissible vaccine. Spillover of zoonotic pathogens has
proven difficult to control and virtually impossible to eliminate. Although
animal vaccination programs using standard methods have reduced the burden of
spillover in some cases (e.g., rabies, brucellosis), other regions endure
continued spillover because logistical and financial challenges make delivering
large quantities of vaccine to wild and domestic animal populations impractical.
A novel solution to this problem is the transformation of benign, naturally-
occurring viruses into into vaccines capable of self dissemination, i.e.,
transmissible vaccines. A growing body of theory shows that vaccine transmission
makes it possible to eliminate the risk of spillover from hard to reach and
difficult to vaccinate animal populations at a fraction of the cost that would
be required via traditional one vaccine-one host vaccination campaigns. Such
vaccines are increasingly feasible to generate in the laboratory, but many
technical challenges and unresolved questions underpin their safe and effective
implementation in natural systems. This workshop will coordinate the development
of transmissible vaccines by bringing together immunologists, vaccine engineers,
virologists, disease ecologists, evolutionary biologists, and mathematical
modelers. An important goal of the workshop will be to increase the diversity of
the community working on this emerging technology, with a specific focus on
increasing the representation of early career scientists, women, and scientists
from lower middle-income countries where the technology may have the most
immediate positive impacts on human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.