* 2216466
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zetasizer to Support Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education at Western Washington University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Rider, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2025
* USD 121,438.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This major research instrumentation project
supports the acquisition of a Zetasizer by Western Washington University (WWU)
to enrich collaborative research and curricular efforts across a range of
scientific disciplines both on and off campus. The Zetasizer uses scattered
light to measure the size and surface charge of particles suspended in liquids,
while also providing information such as particle aggregation behavior. The
instrument supports more than 10 research groups in fields including materials
chemistry, environmental science, biochemistry, engineering, and biomaterials
science. This instrument enhances the education of the students at WWU, many of
whom go on to graduate schools, industrial positions, or other professional
degree programs. Multiple undergraduate courses at WWU utilize the Zetasizer
with hundreds of students gaining hands-on experience with the instrument
annually. The Zetasizer also benefits research and educational efforts at other
regional undergraduate institution partners and is available for use by local
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This
instrument enables non-destructive, rapid characterization of surface and
physical properties of particles between approximately one nanometer and ten
micrometers in size and can assess particle distributions and aggregation
directly in solution. The instrument is versatile across broad concentration,
temperature, and pH ranges and can measure samples in volumes as small as three
microliters. Current research projects that utilize the Zetasizer include topics
such as organometallic chemistry, nanomaterial sensors, light-coupled
heterogeneous catalysis, polymer and composite synthesis and characterization,
environmental contaminant measurement and monitoring, biopolymer preparation,
and protein regulation studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.