* 2216704
* RaMP: Advancing Indigenous perspectives to address climate vulnerability in the Southwest: research training for and by diverse communities
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Catherine Propper, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,998,230.00

Southwestern landscapes are experiencing intensifying climate stress, which
threatens to damage ecosystems beyond their capacity to provide culturally
significant ecosystem services. To build the scientific workforce needed to
address this challenge, this project delivers a post-baccalaureate research
training program which will increase the participation of Indigenous and Latinx
students in STEM fields. It provides research experiences in the biological
sciences and comprehensive student mentorship. A diverse network of mentors and
collaborators, including Indigenous leaders and elders; university and tribal
college faculty and graduate students; and partners from non-profit, private,
and public sectors will develop an annual research plan. The annual plan will
focus on three to five research projects each year to be carried out by a cohort
of ten post-baccalaureate fellows. This program will have several important
broader impacts for society. 1. Thirty post-baccalaureates will be trained in
the conduct of research and allied skills to advance their careers in climate
change biology. 2. The training received by mentees and mentors will increase
cross-cultural literacy by building the capacity of scientists, conservation
leaders, and land managers to better integrate Indigenous knowledge and
perspectives. 3. The collaborative research will advance Tribal and agency
climate mitigation planning. 4. The program will launch young scientists into
careers founded on biological expertise. 5. Research findings will be shared via
outreach materials, websites, published in the peer review literature and
presented at conferences. 6. Research findings will be applicable to climate
change mitigation and aimed at protecting natural resources critical to the
culture of underserved communities in the Southwest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects will focus on integrating ecological,
evolutionary, and cultural perspectives to predict and mitigate catastrophic
ecosystem transitions. Specifically, the research will address these questions:
1. How does past evolution of tolerance in key foundation species predict limits
to their species distributions? 2. How do species interactions constrain the
boundaries of species and ecosystems? 3. How does the stability of ecosystem
functions depend on community-level responses to climate change? Working from
physiological to landscape scales across woodland, rangeland, riparian, and
agricultural systems will allow fellows to develop a wide range of skills. Skill
development will include field and laboratory experimentation, experimental
plantings, biodiversity assessment, population modeling, next generation
sequencing, chemical and isotopic analyses, geographic information systems, and
remote sensing. Integrated training and development activities for both fellows
and mentors will include (1) ecological, evolutionary, and cultural components
of climate adaptation, (2) interdisciplinary and quantitative approaches for
testing hypotheses from population to landscape ecology, (3) responsible and
safe conduct of research, and (4) cross-cultural communication, collaboration,
and leadership skills. Recruitment of fellows will be through Tribal Colleges
and Hispanic-serving institutions in the southwestern US and use local and
national networks serving populations historically underrepresented in biology
and natural resources careers. Support and training will be tailored to the
background and goals of individual fellows to ensure they are competitive for
the next step in their career whether that is entering the environmental biology
workforce or continuing to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for
this award is being provided by Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program one of
NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA supports projects that address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic, empower new research partnerships,
diversify the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal
and informal education, and integrate the co-production of knowledge where
appropriate. This award aligns with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.