* 2216325
* The Impact of Peer-Led Learning on Non-Traditional Students in Online Engineering Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kimberly Luthi, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying best practices
for improving the persistence and advancement of adult and veteran students
pursuing online engineering degrees. Through the introduction of peer leaders
and synchronous recitation sessions, students will receive additional support
beyond what is traditionally offered in online modalities. Moreover, peer-led
team learning environments create safe havens where foundational math and
engineering principles may be explored outside the instructor-student
hierarchical structure. Learning from fellow students who recently completed the
course can provide motivation, context, and example for undergraduate students,
especially those from adult and veteran populations who may not be comfortable
with online learning or perhaps have been out of the formal academic environment
for some time. The intent of the study is to inform instructional practice that
other institutions can leverage to better support non-traditional students in
online programs. The project will produce a peer leader training curriculum and
peer-led team learning activities for introductory engineering courses including
statics, aerodynamics, and digital circuits. In identifying social and academic
factors under which students’ experiences in peer-led team learning produce
better academic outcomes, this project hopes to advance pedagogical approaches
for additional underrepresented populations and contribute to the increasing
breadth of knowledge for the online education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-led team learning has proven to be
effective in face-to-face classroom settings. The scope of the current project
is to implement similar structural and pedagogical practices through development
of a sustainable online model that is transferable to other institutions. Goals
for this project include increasing commitment to online engineering pathways,
improving student persistence and advancement in online engineering programs,
and identifying and mitigating cultural and structural barriers associated with
non-traditional student populations. Evidence from the study will be collected
from students enrolled across multiple sections of introductory engineering
courses and evaluated against control sections in developing a comprehensive set
of best practices. Results will advance our understanding of peer-led team
learning activities’ ability to produce both statistically significant and
substantially greater gains in non-traditional students’ academic performance
and identity development as part of the engineering community. The EHR program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.