* 2216176
* A Course Scaffold for Integrating Science and Culture: Exploring Faculty Adaptations Across Disciplines and Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Robyn Roberts, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,967.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing
earth, environmental, and agricultural science courses that integrate human
dimensions of science using the STEM Futures framework, a 21st century model for
undergraduate education. By learning about the historical and cultural factors
that influence science, undergraduate STEM majors should develop a broader
understanding of their field and the ways in which science serves society.
Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Colorado State University, and the
University of Texas at El Paso will partner in this three-year Level 1 Engaged
Student Learning project. During a previous NSF-funded design studio workshop,
the project team created a course scaffold and examples of course materials for
an integrative course entitled “The History and Future of Water.” This project
plans to further develop and implement that course, as well as to extend the
curriculum framework to create new courses in environmental sciences and
agricultural biology. Through these courses, STEM graduates should be better
prepared to apply their knowledge and skills to solve important global
challenges that require scientific expertise. This project addresses the urgent
need to increase student interest and persistence in STEM careers to meet the
nation’s need for a skilled technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a design and development research study to gather evidence about the
promise of efficacy of the integration of humanistic perspectives into
undergraduate STEM education. Although some empirical studies have reported
benefits to this pedagogical approach, the research base is still limited. The
team plans to develop and test the STEM Futures course design scaffold, which
integrates foundational, humanistic, and meta-knowledge, in three different
institutional contexts: a public land grant university, a public regional
university, and an Hispanic-serving institution. The instructional team will
function as a community of practice, providing feedback to each other informed
by personal reflection, student outcome data and products, and digital StoryMap
portfolios. Using qualitative and quantitative methods, project researchers will
a) examine instructors’ adaptations and experience with the design framework and
b) determine course impacts on student understandings, critical thinking, self-
efficacy, and interest. The three new STEM Futures courses are intended to
support broadening participation in STEM by increasing relevance and interest
for students, which has been shown to increase overall persistence and success.
Further, women, minorities, and students with disabilities may have improved
learning outcomes with the STEM Futures course design, which will integrate a
variety of cultural perspectives, including those of historically marginalized
groups. The project will benefit society by preparing students for 21st century
STEM careers, which require the ability to apply knowledge from several domains
to solve complex, multi-dimensional problems. To ensure wide dissemination, the
course materials, assessment rubrics, and research instruments will be shared on
a website linked to a national curriculum repository. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.