* 2216225
* MRI: Acquisition of an Xradia Versa 620 to Enable National Capabilities for High-throughput, Multiscale 3D/4D Materials Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Ashley Spear, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,490,126.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
advanced x-ray microscope for examination of a broad range of natural and
engineered materials. This instrument enables small-scale examinations of
fundamental properties and mechanisms. In lightweight aerospace materials, early
stages of cracking will be studied to improve failure and reliability models. In
geological materials, fluid flow in porous media will be studied to assist in
the development of new predictive models to improve energy efficiency and reduce
environmental impacts. In biological materials, resistance to fracture in bone
and effectiveness of medical implants will be studied. The NSF-funded National
Science Data Fabric (NSDF) will be leveraged to ensure effective data storage,
networking, computing, and educational resources. Integration of the instrument
with NSDF will inherently extend the instrument as a resource to minority-
serving institutions and disadvantaged communities. This is intended to help
address the technology gap in our scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy X-ray experiments (HEXRE) enabled at
synchrotron beamline facilities have led a new frontier of 3D/4D microstructure-
sensitive investigations for a broad range of materials. However, in-situ
testing and 3D/4D imaging using resources at a synchrotron beamline facility
requires an application process to gain access and complete an abbreviated
study, which inherently restricts the impact of these exciting methods. The
primary objective of this project is to launch an Xradia Versa 620 to be
utilized as a democratized, lab-scale surrogate for beamline resources to enable
widespread adoption of microstructure-sensitive 3D/4D experimental studies and
model development for the acceleration of materials development and
qualification. Compared to synchrotron facilities, the Versa 620 improves speed
of data acquisition though the ability to scan large objects (several inches in
diameter) at lower resolutions, but with high throughput, thereby enabling large
scans to find areas of interest that can then be the focus of high-resolution
measurements. The improved scan speeds and increased accessibility will enable
increased data quantities to advance this new frontier toward data science
applications in materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.