* 2216332
* MRI: Development of a Terahertz Measurement Facility for Wireless Communications, Electronics and Materials
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Zoya Popovic, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

The Terahertz (THz) Measurement Facility, a collaboration between New York
University, University of Colorado at Boulder, University of Nebraska–Lincoln,
and Florida International University, is a laboratory to support basic
measurements of devices, circuits, materials, and radio propagation channels at
the highest reaches of the radio spectrum. While today’s cellular telephones and
wi-fi networks operate at frequencies below 100 GHz, there is great promise for
greater download speeds and vast new wireless applications by moving up to the
underexplored sub-THz and THz frequency bands – frequencies from 100 to 500 GHz.
This MRI grant provides a facility to explore wireless components and systems at
these new frequencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports three areas of
measurement: a) Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit (RFIC) measurements, b) radio
propagation and channel modeling, and c) metrology and calibration, over the
contiguous frequency range of 75 GHz to 500 GHz. A unique concept of this
facility is the loan of equipment, where institutions may borrow THz components
to conduct remote field measurements for wireless communications, propagation,
and sensing. Evolving semiconductors and integrated circuits, as well as the
next-generation electronics based on layered materials (e.g., graphene), will be
measured at THz bands using the RFIC probe station. This facility will have a
broad impact on the future of communications, materials, and devices. The
creation of new calibration and metrology approaches are vital for accurate and
repeatable measurements throughout the US research community in this
underexplored range of frequencies. The study of nanotechnology devices using
the RFIC probe station will unleash new capabilities in sensing, communications,
and computing that may have a transformative impact on society. The radio
propagation measurement systems offer vital knowledge for researchers in
industry, academia and international standard bodies who will design future
high-speed wireless networks for 6G, 7G and beyond. Students using this facility
will gain knowledge at these new frequency bands. The THz Measurement Facility
will host a robust website for the explanation of available equipment, tutorials
for learning how to use the facility, and a repository of measurement results,
metrology approaches, and recent research results. The website link is
https://engineering.nyu.edu/THzLAB and will be maintained and updated regularly.
Popular simulators, measurement studies, calibration results, student and
collaborator activities, sponsor and vendor activities, equipment user notes,
and K-12 outreach events will be placed on the
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.