* 2216191
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multifunctional Rheometer with High Temperature, Dynamic Mechanical Analysis and Tribological Testing Capabilities for Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Lowe, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,692.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
multi-drive rheometer equipped with custom, extreme-environment measurement
suites. The instrument will be one of the most comprehensive rheometer systems
in the world, with a previously unattainable range of testing capabilities. It
will enable research on fundamental material properties for a wide range of
materials used in additive manufacturing, thermochemical energy storage, drug
delivery, soft robotics, and quiet drone propulsion systems. The state-of-the-
art rheometry system will support the research, teaching, and outreach
activities of numerous faculty and undergraduate/graduate student researchers at
the University of Dayton and Central State University, a local historically
black university. The instrument will be accessible as a shared facility,
expanding the material characterization capabilities of the greater Dayton
region and supporting educational opportunities for the next generation of
scientists and engineers. Hands-on and virtual instructional modules will be
developed to explain rheometry/rheology concepts and applications to
undergraduate students in engineering courses, underrepresented minority summer
camps, high school students, and summer undergraduate researchers. Public
outreach videos and podcasts will also be made available to the Boonshoft Museum
of Discovery YouTube channel, directly educating K-12 children about the role of
rheology in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rheometer system
with custom measurement suites will provide access to state-of-the-art
measurement resolution, extreme environmental control, and an unprecedented
diversity of measurement capabilities. The instrument will be used to advance
research in three core areas. 1) Dense and dispersed particle systems: The high-
temperature shear cell and environmental chamber will lead to experimental
characterization of the relative impact of inter-particle frictional,
collisional, and agglomeration of ceramic and metallic powders for temperatures
up to 1000 Â°C, operating conditions of interest for both additive manufacturing
feedstocks and thermochemical energy storage media. 2a) Complex fluids:
Magnetorheology, microscopy, interfacial rheology, and Raman spectroscopy
modules will allow in-situ experimental studies and characterization of rheo-
structural complex fluid properties such as polymer gels or emulsions. 2b) Soft
materials: The custom dynamic mechanical analysis module will enable a
fundamental understanding of the mechanical behavior of self-healing, photo-
curable elastomers for additive manufacturing over a previously unattainable
range of loading conditions, strain rates, temperatures, and humidities. 3)
Tribology measurement and analysis: The tribology and Raman suites will support
the in-situ observation of material transfer and tribo-chemical conversions,
leading to the discovery of new interfacial sliding mechanisms used to design
novel quiet drones and hypersonic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.