* 2216654
* RaMP: On-Ramp to the Molecular Machine Shop: Postbaccalaureate Training in Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Biodesign
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Ruth Stark, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,169.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attracting talented women and men to Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields remains a priority for
STEM-focused academic departments in the United States. This imperative is
underscored by the crucial roles of STEM professionals, directly or indirectly,
in the US economy. Entry into the lucrative STEM professions requires high
degrees of skill; advancement requires a bachelor's degree, often with
additional degrees and certifications. Notably, current demographic disparities
in US STEM professionals imply that diverse human talent is being 'left on the
table.' To attract more women and men to STEM, City College of New York (CCNY)
will establish a regional research training network entitled “On-Ramp to the
Molecular Machine Shop: Postbaccalaureate Training in Biochemistry, Biophysics,
and Biodesign (RaMMMP).” The network will foster entry of a diverse cadre of
recent bachelor’s degree graduates into careers in demanding scientific fields
such as biotechnology, bioengineering, and science education, amongst others.
The network will encompass members of the CCNY faculty, external collaborators,
technology and professional training specialists, college science department
chairs, and current practitioners of diverse science-related occupations who
will act as mentors and co-mentors to three cohorts of 12 postbaccalaureate
students each. Embedded laboratory experiences, supplemented by professional
development workshops and broad-based career exploration activities, will
prepare each cohort for rewarding careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will
include: 1) mitigating gender, racial, ethnic, and economic disparities in the
STEM workforce; and 2) producing an educated citizenry with the know-how to meet
the societal challenges of technically complex energy, environmental, and health
issues. The heart of the RaMMMP program will be an immersive mentored research
experience, enriched by professional development activities and a stimulating
community. To ensure robust participation of both student mentees and their
faculty mentors in the program, a three-module plan termed 1) Getting Ready, 2)
Getting Set, and 3) Getting Going will be implemented. During the Getting Ready
phase of the plan, the faculty group will participate in a mentor training
workshop, incoming trainees will undergo a 10-session research identity
bootcamp, and mentor-mentee partnerships will begin to take shape. The Getting
Set stage of the plan will center on building technical skills of trainees,
pursuing scientific research projects, developing cohorts, and enhancing
communication skills. Finally, the Getting Going phase will focus on pathways to
STEM professions, presentations on the diversity of STEM careers, and sampling
of diverse employment sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.