* 2216582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Unraveling primate supraordinal relationships: Insights from plesiadapiform cranial morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Stephen Chester, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 27,379.00

Central to unraveling the origin of primates - the mammalian group to which
humans belong - are the fossils of plesiadapiforms, extinct members of a group
(Euarchonta) consisting of primates and closely related mammals. While some
plesiadapiforms have long been suggested to share characteristics with some
contemporary primates, additional analyses of the plesiadapiforms using newer,
state-of-the-art methodologies can further advance our understanding of primate
origins. This doctoral dissertation project uses methods such as high-resolution
X-ray micro computed tomography (μCT) to analyze and compare the cranial anatomy
of plesiadapiforms to that of extant primates and other placental mammals.
Detailed cranial comparisons are generated that can add to the evaluation of
evolutionary relationships among plesiadapiforms, extant primates, and other
euarchontan mammals, in the context of a new evolutionary tree. This project
also provides numerous opportunities for outreach through mentorship, public
science engagement events, and data sharing. Insights from this project can be
incorporated into programs that facilitate participation from groups
underrepresented in STEM. The investigators also train undergraduate and
master’s students in aspects of CT scan data processing, 3D printing, computer
coding, and basic fossil preparation. The investigators plan to make all data
generated from this project, such as CT scan data and data matrices, freely
available on public online repositories to allow for repeatability and to enable
future studies on primate evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plesiadapiform crania
have traditionally played an important role in hypotheses about primate origins
but remain poorly understood because they are unknown for a large majority of
plesiadapiform species and because many of the known cranial specimens have not
been analyzed using modern CT techniques. This study uses modern high-
resolution CT technology to document new plesiadapiform cranial anatomy,
reevaluate previously published cranial descriptions, and make thorough cranial
comparisons among primates and other placental mammals. These data are
incorporated into a new character-taxon matrix that is analyzed using both
parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic methods to assess evolutionary
relationships. Results from these analyses can allow investigators to assess (i)
which, if any, cranial features are uniquely shared among plesiadapiforms and
primates of modern aspect, (ii) interrelationships among plesiadapiform
families, and (iii) hypotheses of plesiadapiform evolutionary relationships
within Euarchonta. Ultimately, these new data can provide clarity on previously
proposed shared cranial features among plesiadapiforms and primates of modern
aspect and will promote a better understanding of the divergence of primates
from other mammals and the first steps in primate evolutionary
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.