* 2216650
* RaMP: Understanding Plant Species Rarity: Causes and Consequences from Genes to Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Lauren Eserman, Atlanta Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,980,653.00

The current plant research and conservation workforce is not adequate to meet
the major environmental challenges of the coming decades that include
biodiversity loss, climate change, food insecurity, and environmental
degradation. The United States is facing severe shortages of botanically trained
scientists, now and in the near future, as well as a decline in degree programs
and course offerings in botany and plant science in universities which also
threatens the management of our nationâ€™s resources. There is an urgent need for
major advances in broadening participation in the sciences from historically
marginalized groups, including engagement in plant research and conservation. In
order to address this major training gap, the Rare Plant RaMP Network, a
collaborative team, will be assembled from four botanical gardens: the Atlanta
Botanical Garden, California Botanic Garden, the Morton Arboretum, and the San
Diego Botanic Garden. These organizations will train postbaccalaureate mentees
in conservation, genetics, ecology, economic botany, and biogeography of rare
plants. The Rare Plant RaMP Network will consist of researchers, scientists, and
conservation professionals at each institution who will serve as mentors and co-
mentors and engage three cohorts of eight mentees each with each participating
institution serving two mentees per year. Recruitment practices will include
participants from groups underrepresented in STEM; these baccalaureates will
then engage in Broader Impacts activities that will support them during the
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five objectives of the Rare Plant RaMP
Network are to 1) provide career guidance and professional development to post-
baccalaureate mentees; 2) broaden participation in botanical sciences and
conservation; 3) empower mentees to perform independent and collaborative
research that will strengthen their ability to communicate science to other
researchers, policymakers, and the general public; 4) form a cohort of peers
whose lasting bonds/relationships will provide opportunities for collaborative
work in the years to come; and 5) improve the mentoring skills and capacities of
researchers in botanical science organizations. To improve mentee experiences,
mentors and co-mentors will be trained in inclusive mentoring practices. Mentees
and co-mentors will take part in bi-weekly meetings focusing on professional
development topics, an annual symposium at one of the participating
institutions, and one national conference per year. The network will be
collaborative, exchange ideas, and foster long-term relationships among
participants and collaborating organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.