* 2216774
* CSUN/Caltech-IQIM Partnership
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Preskill, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2025
* USD 899,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). California State University Northridge (CSUN) is one of
the largest universities in the US with annual enrollment over 40,000 students
and is classified as both a Hispanic-serving and Minority-serving institution.
Approximately 55% of the total student population is of Hispanic background.
CSUN is partnering with the Institute for Quantum Information and Matter (IQIM)
at Caltech with an intent to foster multidisciplinary and innovative research in
quantum matter and quantum information science, to educate and train students in
cutting-edge quantum research, and to increase recruitment, retention, and
degree attainment by members of groups underrepresented in research.
Multipronged strategies will be carried out to recruit students from
underrepresented groups (URGs). Both undergraduate and graduate students, mostly
from URGs, will be involved in the cutting-edge research of quantum matter and
information, mentored by the faculty, and will graduate with B.S. and M.S.
degrees, respectively. Summer schools will be offered at CSUN introducing
undergraduate and graduate students to the exciting world of quantum information
science. Research training programs provided by the Caltech IQIM will be offered
to CSUN undergraduates. A new set of courses on quantum simulations and quantum
computing will be developed. Partnership with industry and national laboratories
for student training and internships will also be developed. The integration of
research and education will enable students to make informed career choices and
improve their ability to participate in post-graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PREP award aims to address fundamental
problems in quantum materials that have vital scientific and tech nonlogical
importance as well as economical and societal impacts. A multidisciplinary team
with coordinated and complementary skills in theory, computation and experiment
is assembled into two interdisciplinary groups (IRGs): IRG1 -- Driven and
strongly interacting quantum matter, IRG2 -- Searching for novel quantum phases
in realistic materials. IRG1 will tackle fundamental problems in driven and
strongly correlated quantum matter which has potential applications in quantum
information science. This includes topological phenomena in driven quantum
systems, exotic properties of quantum spin liquids emerging from Kitaev
materials, and doping Mott insulators to discover unconventional
superconductivity for Kitaev materials. IRG2 will focus on searching for
material candidates that realize novel quantum phases, including two-dimensional
Moir√© materials based on graphene, transition-metal trihalides and phosphorous
trichalcogenides, and rare-earth tellurides, which may exhibit a plethora of
intriguing phases, including superconducting, topological, magnetic, and charge
density wave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.