* 2216047
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Materials Chemistry to Engage Anion Uptake and Release in Layered Transition Metal Oxides and Hydroxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Xiaowei Teng, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 241,756.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layered transition metal oxide and
hydroxide materials capable of hosting anions could have many energy- and
environment-related applications. However, most metal oxides and hydroxides
cannot reversibly uptake and release anions, limiting their sustainable
applications in various devices. In this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the
research team aims to understand how chloride and sulfate anions move in the
layered materials and develop a library of layered transition metal oxide and
hydroxide materials for reversible anion uptake and release. Atomic-scale
modeling and quantum theory are used to build a property database of layered
oxides, and gain fundamental insights into atomic interactions between anion and
layered materials. The close integration of theory and experiment helps
determine the underlying mechanisms of the anion insertion and extraction in the
interlayer region of the host materials and to establish the fundamental roles
of material local structures, anion, and water molecules for reversible hosting
of chloride and sulfate into layered metal hydroxides. This project enhances
education and outreach efforts by the research team to increase scientific
engagement and participation from underrepresented groups through a range of
activities aimed at the general public, high school students and teachers,
undergraduate students, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have two-
dimensional positively charged nanosheets and host negatively charged ions and
structural water molecules in the interlayer regions, offering advantages in a
wide range of energy- and environment-related applications, including
multivalent anion batteries, high-capacity desalination, and ion remediation.
However, there is a lack of fundamental understanding of how the local structure
and their atomic interaction with anions affect the reversible anion uptake and
release in LDHs. In this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the research team aims
to understand the interplay between ion-hydration, atomic transport, material
defect, and charge transfer on anion insertion and extraction in transition
metal oxide and hydroxide layered materials. The team proposes to synthesize Fe-
and Co-based LDH, [M2+1-x(M/Ni)3+x(HO−)2]x+ [(An−)n/2 · yH2O]x- (M: Fe, Co; A:
inserted anion groups such as Cl- and SO42-,), where Ni3+-doping immobilizes the
structural water in the interlayers and stabilizes the interlayer structure. The
team plans to optimize LDH local structures (e.g., disorder and site defect) and
long-range structure (e.g., interlayer distance, crystalline phase), guided by
atomic modeling, to assist the anion uptake and release. The team plans to use
neutron/X-ray total scattering and pair distribution function analysis and X-ray
absorption spectroscopy to study how metal-oxygen (M-O) octahedra of LDHs
interact with anions, water, and cation. The density functional theory
calculations, advanced sampling, and molecular dynamics simulations are used to
gain atomic-scale insights into interactions between M-O octahedra in the
proposed LDHs, anions, and water, providing guidelines for experimentally tuning
the interfacial structuring of the LDHs. The interwoven nature between the
experimental and modeling efforts provides better-resolved structural details
via experiments and simulations informing each other. The education and outreach
efforts advance the team's goals to increase participation of students from
underrepresented groups via an undergraduate researcher exchange program, hands-
on activities for high school students and teachers, and advanced research
training experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.