* 2216772
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Sensing and Normally-off Computing for Edge Imaging Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Shaahin Angizi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2025
* USD 279,334.00

Internet of Things (IoT) devices are projected to exceed $1000B by 2025, with a
web of interconnection projected to comprise approximately 75+ billion IoT
devices. The large number of IoTs consists of sensory imaging systems that
enable massive data collection from the environment and people. However,
considerable portions of the captured sensory data are redundant and
unstructured. Data conversion of such large raw data, storing in volatile
memories, transmission, and computation in on-/off-chip processors, impose high
energy consumption, latency, and a memory bottleneck at the edge. Moreover,
because renewing batteries for IoT devices is very costly and sometimes
impracticable, energy harvesting devices with ambient energy sources and low
maintenance have impacted a wide range of IoT applications such as wearable
devices, smart cities, and the intelligent industry. This project explores and
designs new high-speed, low-power, and normally-off computing architectures for
resource-limited sensory nodes by exploiting cross-layer post-CMOS approaches to
overcome these issues. Successful completion of this research will have benefits
to a variety of critical application domains, including medical monitoring,
industrial and/or environmental sensors. This project will make a strong effort
on developing undergraduate and graduate course modules, propagating
transportable and open-source models, and broadening STEM participation through
publications/presentations at conferences for knowledge
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will follow two main research
thrusts. Thrust 1 designs and analyzes a Processing-In-Sensor Unit (PISU) co-
integrating always-on sensing and processing capabilities in conjunction with a
Processing-Near-Sensor Unit (PNSU). The hybrid platform will feature real-time
programmable granularity-configurable arithmetic operations to balance the
accuracy, speed, and power-efficiency trade-offs under both continuous and
energy-harvesting-powered imaging scenarios. This platform will enable resource-
limited edge devices to locally perform data and compute-intensive applications
such as machine learning tasks while consuming much less power than present
state-of-the-art technology. The power profile of ambient energy sources imposes
fundamental constraints on processing stability and duration. To achieve high
sensing and computation parallelism under unstable power supply conditions,
Intermittent-Robust Integrated Sensing Computation (IRISC) will be designed.
During power failure, IRISC stores intermediate values in non-volatile spin-
based devices, which will ensure uninterrupted operations. To meet the hardware
constraints and mitigate the high write power of spin-based devices, they will
be selectively and efficiently inserted within the datapaths through a novel NV-
clustering methodology to create corresponding intermittent-robust IP cores that
realize intermittent computation with lower power consumption while maintaining
middleware coherence. This cross-layer devices-to-system research approach will
be assessed by developing a comprehensive evaluation framework, a transportable
energy-harvested computational workload suite, and FPGA-MRAM-based emulation
platforms for IRISC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.