* 2216814
* RCN-UBE: San Francisco Bay Research Coordination Network for Student Opportunities in Avian Research to enhance STEM education and assess human impacts on avian biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Yiwei Wang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2027
* USD 499,676.00

This project will serve the national interest by bringing together a group of
faculty, students, and volunteers to implement an experiential learning and
research program focused on the study of birds and their habitats, assessing and
monitoring the health of bird populations in the South San Francisco Bay (an
important portion of a north-south “highway in the sky” for birds that annually
migrate between the northern and southern hemispheres). The program will
introduce undergraduate students, especially those from underserved communities,
to STEM activities in both the field and laboratory, thus promoting students’
appreciation of birds and their significance for ecological and human wellbeing,
while also enhancing their career opportunities. The program will advance
biological science education through opportunities for hands-on field research
and follow-up lab activities for students who do not presently have access to
such experiential learning in outdoor settings. This program will also advance
fundamental knowledge, by revealing how humans are influencing natural
ecological systems, and how society can respond to that challenge. Exposure of
students to career paths in environmental sciences will diversify their job
prospects and teach them to be effective stewards of the national and global
resources upon which nations ultimately depend. The dramatic decline of
biodiversity, globally, and of bird populations in the country in particular,
underscores the significance of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding
for this grant will allow the new Research Coordination Network to implement
educational and research activities for The San Francisco Bay Research
Coordination Network for Student Opportunities in Avian Research (SOAR). The
network is composed of investigators from four universities (Stanford, San Jose
State, Santa Clara, and UC Santa Cruz), a community college district (West
Valley/Mission Community College District), and three non-governmental
organizations (San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory, California Academy of
Sciences/iNaturalist, and eBird – the latter based out of the Cornell
Ornithology Lab). The program will include production of new outdoor learning
modules for students and new courses aimed at attracting under-represented
groups to STEM careers; cross-institutional sharing of educational resources;
publications in research and education venues; new, consolidated, ornithological
datasets; as well as internships and other career-advancement opportunities for
participating students. The central philosophy of the program is to engage
students in the process of science “learning by doing”, while enjoying and
capitalizing the opportunity of studying science in direct contact with nature –
two critical agendas for the wellbeing of society in the nation and globally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.