* 2216699
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Costs of competing for food in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michelle Brown, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 31,062.00

Competition between species exists nearly everywhere in nature, yet its
intensity and consequences are difficult to measure. This study investigates how
changes in the presence of competitors affects access to food resources, health,
and reproduction in small primates. Results from this study will identify and
measure the wide-ranging outcomes that small primates experience because of
food-related competition. Results of this study help to explain the behavioral
variation seen among primate species that live together eating similar diets,
contributes to understanding population structure, and offers insight for
conservation efforts for nonhuman primates. This study also provides significant
training opportunities in field and laboratory methods for students from groups
historically excluded from STEM internationally and the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most primates live in highly biodiverse communities and
compete intensely with other species for access to food sources. Although
between-species interactions are likely to have substantial effects on access to
resources, primate studies have focused primarily on competitive interactions
within a species. As a result, there is an urgent need to explore how between-
species competition shapes reproduction, population dynamics, community
structure, and even social interactions. This study examines how small-bodied
red-tailed monkeys (Cercopithecus ascanius) are affected by several larger
primate species, by examining variation in competitor pressure, food
availability, and red-tailed monkey physical condition at four field sites. The
investigators will evaluate metabolic hormones from non-invasively collected
urine and fecal samples to determine when individuals are in a state of energy
gain, minor deficit, or profound tissue wasting. Reproductive effort will be
assessed by tracking births and measuring reproductive hormones. These results
will be used to determine whether the three larger, competing primate species
have similar effects on red-tailed monkey energetics and reproduction, or if
some competitors are unusually detrimental to a smaller-bodied species. This
project is funded jointly by Biological Anthropology and Build and Broaden
programs (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.