* 2216011
* RaMP: Post-Baccalaureate Training Program in Biomolecular Structure Prediction and Design
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Jeffrey Gray, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,991,747.00

Recent advances in computational methods that predict the structures of
biological molecules enable the design of equally intricately structured
polymers for their use in research, biotechnology, materials, and
nanotechnology. Emerging artificial intelligence approaches amplify the power of
the computational work and have increased demand for people with training in
biomolecular structure computations. This project will provide to the trainees
rigorous, interdisciplinary, collaborative research training in biomolecular
structure prediction and design. Activities such as a code school, laboratory
research and regular mentoring will afford training in the technical and
communication skills necessary for success in STEM. Outreach to communities
historically excluded from STEM will ensure that this growing field is
accessible to a broad demographic. The program will build a diverse STEM
workforce, which is critically needed as artificial intelligence methods
continue to dramatically impact the fields of molecular biology and
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biomolecular computational structure
research allows prediction of three-dimensional structures of proteins, nucleic
acids, and their complexes. The program will provide rigorous,
interdisciplinary, collaborative research training in biomolecular structure
prediction and design to eight post-baccalaureate trainees (“participants”) in
each of three years. It will (1) develop post-baccalaureate participants'
technical research skills and professional power skills, including communication
and perseverance, with experiences that enhance participants’ scientific
identity, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging; (2) increase post-baccalaureate
scholars’ ease of transition into graduate level academic programs, in that they
will be more prepared and supported when applying for and entering those
programs, (3) create a tight knit network of mentors and mentees within the
greater Rosetta Commons community through structured leadership training in
improved mentoring; and (4) expand the pool of biomolecular graduate program
applicants to include more individuals from backgrounds and communities
historically excluded from STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.