* 2216763
* RUI: Edge Perception in Touch: Theories, Exploratory Procedures, and Multimodality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mounia Ziat, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 445,247.00

This project at a primarly undergraduate institution will address the important,
but still little understood question of how we perceive and identify objects by
touch. More specifically, it deals with how the hand and fingertips interact
with surfaces, edges, and vibrations. Understanding how we process and interpret
the information we get from touching objects is increasingly important in many
high-tech arenas, such as improving assistive devices or virtual simulations for
training people to repair or maintain complex products, including airplanes and
heavy machinery. Results of this project will broaden our understanding of the
role of different types of touch receptors in the fingertips and the ways in
which their signals are processed and integrated, which leads to a better
understanding of grasping, sliding, and object handling. The project will
investigate touch processing by presenting computer-controlled stimuli to the
fingertips of adult human subjects and analyzing their reported sensations under
defined conditions. The investigator is on the faculty of a primarily
undergraduate institution and will provide 12 undergraduate students with
multidisciplinary experience in cognitive science, improving their research and
science skills, and allowing them opportunities to interact with a wider
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address
fundamental questions about the interpretation of mechanoreceptor and nerve
fiber activation beyond frequency thresholds using edge perception as a
practical example. This is important because humans daily touch multiple objects
that include edges and ridges. The study has three aims: 1) to compare the
responses of receptors to different frequencies of vibration in order to
understand the perceptual mechanisms behind tactile edge perception; 2) to
identify the role of motor action in an integrated approach to edge perception;
and 3) to consider the role of other senses (hearing and seeing) in tactile edge
perception. These experiments will advance our knowledge of the ways different
touch receptors respond to edges and contours, how these responses might be
processed at different levels of the peripheral and central nervous system, and
the role of active and passive movement and input from other sensory systems in
interpreting touch perception. The research also has important applications in
touch interfaces, robotics, and tools for the visually
challenged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.