* 2216666
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Skeletal Biomarkers of Indoor Air Pollution During the Agricultural Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Gideon Hartman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 28,197.00

Fire is an inextricable part of human history, and its use has resulted in
pivotal technological, cultural, and biological changes that shaped frameworks
of human experience across time and space. However, the relationships between
human biology, culture, and the byproducts of fire use – specifically those in
smoke – have remained critically understudied. This is particularly the case
during the time of the agricultural transition, when new cultural choices in
architectural design, fuel consumption, and division of labor exposed human
populations to high levels of indoor air pollution. It is a problem that has
persisted through time and still affects many populations throughout the world
today. This doctoral dissertation research project uses an experimental approach
to address how exposure to indoor air pollution shapes the mineral and protein
components of bone, and in so doing offers a new opportunity to understand how
indoor air pollution shapes bone health and to identify pulmonary disease in
skeletal remains independent of other evidence that might not always preserve,
such as soft tissue or DNA. The results of this study will inform a new
perspective regarding the development of human fire-related technologies and
associated health repercussions. This project trains undergraduate students in
laboratory techniques and science outreach within their local communities and
help in disseminating the findings of the project with the public at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic exposure to indoor air pollution damages lung
tissue and perturbs microbial communities throughout the body. The core
methodological approach of this project employs a combination of isotope
analysis and 16S ribosomal RNA genetic data. Oxygen isotopes are used to assess
how damaged lung alveoli shape oxygen isotope fractionation and contribute to
the body water pool from which bone phosphate forms. Carbon and nitrogen
isotopes, together with 16S ribosomal RNA data, are used to investigate how
changes in the oral and gut microbiomes and host-associated immune response
shape the isotopic composition of bone collagen. Results from this project
elucidate the effects of indoor air pollution on the skeleton and provide a tool
with which this and future projects can investigate the health repercussions of
indoor air pollution across time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.