* 2216293
* MRI: Acquisition of a Characterization Station for Next Generation Multifunctional Quantum Devices and Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Andrea Alu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 233,625.00

Quantum technology is poised to enable an abrupt change (or a quantum leap) in
human capability for computing, communications, and sensing. Scaling up quantum
systems, or in other words, increasing computational space, communication
distance and measurement sensitivity, is the key for the success of real
applications. Integrating quantum photonic components onto a single platform,
significantly reduces the size, weight, power, and cost (SWaP-C), while
simultaneously enhancing the power and phase stability, scalability, and
manufacturability. Photonics is viewed as an enabling technology for quantum
applications. Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) technology offers several
critical advantages and provides a versatile testbed for quantum experiments and
resources for measurement-based quantum computing, high-dimensional
entanglement, quantum communications, quantum information processing and quantum
machine learning. Many applications, such as quantum simulators, machine
learning, and graph-based computation have a natural implementation by quantum
photonics. Furthermore, photonics serves as a tool by which theoretical
predictions of topological phenomena can be tested, which has led to the rapid
development of topological phases of matter. Topology has also contributed to
the growth of photonics by enabling its robust control, even for imperfect
devices, and by promoting practical devices for applications in
telecommunications, metrology, sensing and processing. As quantum devices and
systems are transitioning from theory to practice, and there is a growing
interest from research institutions and the private sector, the shortage of
skilled scientist and engineers has been identified. Hence, it is not difficult
to overemphasize the importance of a solid background in these technologies and
the hands-on experience of future science and engineering graduates. An
increasing role of technological innovations in local and global economies, and
growing competition among technologically advanced nations, makes student
training in quantum devices and systems field vital for the US in 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this MRI is the acquisition of a unique
state-of-the-art automated photonics alignment/probe station with a high
brightness Photon-Pair source and a dual channel Ultra-low-noise Photon Counter
that will enable the characterization of quantum devices and systems. It will
enable optical and electronic measurements of multiport quantum devices and
systems, thus, addressing the needs for reliable and repeatable measurements,
while at the same time minimizing alignment related losses, which are of
critical importance in quantum experiments. The characterization of quantum
devices in the early stage of the development is critical for their further
optimization, as it provides important feedback that allow for device
improvements. The characterization station will enable unique measurement
capabilities to faculty, researchers, and students at CCNY and will complement
fabrication facilities and modeling and simulation capabilities available to the
CCNY community. The project will provide opportunities for training to the
diverse graduate and undergraduate student body at CCNY, where many of the
students are from underrepresented groups. The students will gain experience on
the entire spectrum of design-fabrication-testing and characterization of
integrated quantum photonic devices. We anticipate that the facility will
attract researchers beyond CCNY and will foster further collaborations, which
can lead to more scientific interaction and exchange of ideas among the
participating researchers. Finally, small/medium size businesses may benefit in
the development of their products, by getting access to the proposed system and
through collaborative efforts. This will enable the generation of important
knowhow and transfer of knowledge from/to CCNY, training of students and
development of new scientific knowledge and products that will benefit the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.