* 2216629
* BPC-A: Data Alliance on Persistence and Perception in Computing (DAPPIC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Burcin Tamer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,322,991.00

Northeastern University’s Center for Inclusive Computing (the CIC), the
Computing Research Association’s (CRA) Center for Evaluating the Research
Pipeline (CERP) and 28 individual universities collaborate to improve the
availability and use of quantitative and qualitative data to support the efforts
of individual schools and the sector overall in broadening participation
inundergraduate computing education. University leaders are highly motivated to
increase the representation of populations historically minoritized in
computing. However, while best practices for broadening participation in
computing (BPC) have been developed and evaluated, it is not always clear which
practices align with an institution’s particular challenges. To accurately
diagnose barriers to inclusion and to assess the impact of interventions,
leaders need reliable access to detailed enrollment, retention and graduation
data as well as qualitative data on the experience of students of different
identities. The collaboration addresses the need to improve the availability and
use of quantitative and qualitative data to support individual schools and the
sector as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIC collects term by term, class by
class data on student enrollment, retention, and graduation, disaggregated by
demographics. At present the CIC does this work with 57 schools. This data is
then visualized in dashboards that allow the user to compare between different
intersections of identities, compare changes and trends across terms, and
benchmark against an average of the 57 partner schools. CRA’s CERP collects and
disseminates data from 150+ computing departments that participate in the Data
Buddies Survey (DBS). At the undergraduate level, DBS gathers information about
the academic and demographic background of learners, career pathways, as well as
various indicators related to the recruitment, retention, and persistence in
computing. The Alliance will integrate the two datasets and set a new standard
for the usage of data in BPC. Additionally, the Alliance will work with the
National Student Clearinghouse’s (NCS) Post-secondary Data Partnership (PDP),
which offers in-depth dashboards that allow institutions to visualize student
outcomes in aggregated and disaggregated forms. We see a point-in-time
opportunity with the PDP’s priority in 2022 to develop discipline-specific
dashboards to bring our collective experience working with BPC data as well as a
robust “voice of the client” perspective. The specific activities are: 1) add
new functionality to CIC dashboards (ability to compare across intersectional
identities, to benchmark against different peer groups, and to connect to
outside data sources such as NCES’ IPEDS); 2) integrate CIC/DBS data; 3)
evaluate the integration and disseminate learnings; 4) explore potential
integration with NSC; and 5) plan for achieving a model that provides long-term
sustainability and scale. We will evaluate the efficacy of the approach with 28
schools, all of which participate in both the CIC’s data collection and CERP’s
DBS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.