* 2216872
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Reflecting, Assessing, and Improving Intersectional Equitable Practices with STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Marni Brown, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 11/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to assess equity among STEM faculty at Georgia Gwinnett
College (GGC), a relatively young institution founded in 2006, which has a
large, diverse STEM faculty who have worked at the institution since its early
days. It has a significant percentage of faculty who identify as women (~50%)
and with historically excluded (HE) racial/ethnic groups (~18%). GGC has several
unique characteristics as compared to traditional institutions of higher
education. This Catalyst Project offers a unique opportunity to understand the
rapid evolution of a diverse faculty body over a short period; investigate the
factors that attracted and retained a large number of HE faculty; and
investigate any barriers that may have impeded their professional growth. GGCâ€™s
large number of HE STEM faculty provides a large sample size for data analysis
that can provide statistically significant results. This has the potential of
making significant contributions to the research on diversity and equity in STEM
and ensuring equity in the long term for the GGC
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, Georgia Gwinnett College
(GGC) aims to take a data-driven approach to assess equity among its STEM
faculty, particularly among faculty identifying with historically excluded (HE)
groups, such as those who identify as women and/or as belonging to specific
racial/ethnic groups. This study will help identify the factors that contribute
to the recruitment, retention, and advancement of HE faculty at a diverse,
minority-serving, open-access institution. By collecting and analyzing data from
multiple sources (such as demographic data, salary data, time at rank, surveys,
focus groups, interviews, official policies and guidelines, annual evaluations,
etc.), the study will identify the policies and practices that lead to
recruitment, retention, and advancement of faculty identifying with HE groups in
STEM disciplines. This data analysis will also help identify any inequities that
might affect STEM faculty at the college. In collaboration with key
administrators at GGC through an internal advisory board, the project aims to
create a five-year strategic plan to address any inequities that are discovered
during this self-assessment. This strategic plan will also identify existing
practices that need to be retained to maintain an equitable workplace for STEM
faculty at GGC and can be shared with the wider academic community for broader
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.