* 2216888
* SBIR Phase I:  User-generated real time qualitative data processing for climate impacted model validation, integration, and augmentation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Julia Drapkin, ISEECHANGE, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 274,381.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is the development of an
integrated methodology to use resident’s experiences about flood (and other
climate change) events to validate modeling in real time, inform policy, and
provide design insights for infrastructure development. It provides an
integrated solution for capturing the valuable information captured by people’s
direct experiences (photos, stories, and data) with climate change that are
otherwise underutilized. The team will develop a community knowledge platform
that can process a mix of text and photo data submitted by residents and process
it into formats usable for understanding on-the-ground impacts, flood occurrence
and severity, and deliver that data to planners and modelers developing ways to
better manage floods. Data processing occurs behind the scenes and allows
residents to engage with the planning processes impacting their communities in
new ways, increase the access of underrepresented communities, and improve
equity in decision-making. The project will stimulate research in data sciences,
generate new types of jobs in civic data systems, and improve the efficiency of
public infrastructure investments. User’s cell phones will become powerful local
data collection tools allowing a direct line of communications and building
trust between government decision makers, scientists, and residents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in data science allows the
analysis of heterogeneous qualitative and image data to incorporate user
generated posts into large scale infrastructure planning around climate
resilience. Currently, descriptive data and photos submitted by users are
manually analyzed for content. Through novel use of natural language processing
(NLP), spatial data analysis, artificial intelligent (AI) and computer vision of
flood event photos, and development of an application programming interface
(API) to curate data for hydrological model developers, this project automates
the process of extracting the full value of community generated posts of flood
events. When successful, hyperlocal user generated posts will be processed in
real time to deliver detailed on-the-ground data on flood events to planners,
for model validation, and community members themselves. The product builds
innovative technologies to permit processing at scale so that any community
experiencing flood events can generate real time flood data and monitor the
impact of infrastructure as hydrological baselines continue to shift. The
project develops new machine learning NLP to automate the analysis of
qualitative text data, keyword detection for sentiment analysis and impact, AI
to extract flood characteristics from photos, and API for protecting model IP
while allowing integration with external data for validation
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.