* 2216721
* RaMP: Understanding Nature and Los Angeles Biodiversity (UNLAB) through Museum Collections and Field-based Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Kayce Bell, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,982,873.00

The postbaccalaureate mentoring program Understanding Nature and Los Angeles
Biodiversity through Museum Collections and Field-based Research (UNLAB) will
facilitate biodiversity research, mentorship, professional development, and
educational enrichment for mentees. The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
County will host and mentor UNLAB mentees in research projects focused on
Southern California biodiversity in the context of a changing planet. Research
will investigate this theme within three related tracks: biodiversity before
humans; biodiversity introduced, removed, or geographically changed by humans;
and biodiversity responses to humans. Projects will include modern species and
fossils, those on land and in the ocean, and both animals and plants, providing
broad-ranging insights and varied experiences for mentees. Results from mentees'
guided research will have implications for local conservation and management as
well as for understanding how humans shape biodiversity more broadly. Mentors
and UNLAB’s extended network of professionals at the Natural History Museum and
throughout the greater Los Angeles area will foster mentee confidence and
competence in a number of different STEM career opportunities. Basing UNLAB in a
public museum setting will allow mentees to develop a broad range of scientific
and communication skills that they can apply to continuing their formal
education or the career of their choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive
understanding of the consequences of anthropogenic change on Earth’s
biodiversity requires research that spans paleontological, historical, and
modern timescales. UNLAB mentee research projects are taxonomically diverse,
collections-based, and purposefully varied. They address biotic responses to
anthropogenic disturbances using genetics and genomics, morphometrics, community
science as well as behavioral, morphological, faunal, and spatial analyses.
Research outcomes are relevant to land use decisions as well as to understanding
the phenomena of biotic homogenization and species introduction, floral and
faunal community change, extinction, species fragmentation, and urban evolution.
The variety and interconnected nature of UNLAB mentee projects will allow for
within-cohort collaboration and broadly relevant results. UNLAB will provide
mentorship under an inclusion, diversity, equity, and access framework, and will
keenly focus on developing professional skills that complement traditionally
emphasized research skills. Thus, UNLAB and its theme of biodiversity in a time
of anthropogenic change will prepare mentees - as scientists, analysts, and
educators - for a STEM workforce that must contend with the consequences of a
changing planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.