* 2216175
* MRI: Acquisition of High Power and Resolution X-ray Microscopy System for Advanced Characterization, Non-Destructive Evaluation, and Cross-Disciplinary Research &amp; Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jocelyn Sessa, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,228,025.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art, high-resolution X-ray computed tomography instrument. This
will enable a broad spectrum of research relying on accurate three-dimensional
digitization and characterization of the internal structure of materials.
Research projects utilizing this instrument involve novel additive manufactured
materials critical for aerospace, automotive, defense and medical applications;
cell structures and tissues used in immune system, tissue repair and
bioengineering research; pharmaceutical materials; materials for energy
applications including novel batteries and energy storage devices; as well as
natural materials and organisms used in climate and earth sciences research.
Similar to medical CAT Scans, X-ray computed tomography technology provides
unprecedented capabilities for research, training, education, outreach and
recruitment in STEM. It will promote regional and national collaborations with
other universities and industry, while further enabling extensions to emerging
technologies such as Industry 4.0. The instrument will be housed in and managed
by the Materials Characterization Core, an established multiuser facility at
Drexel University. This facility will be leveraged in recruiting events as well
as outreach programs to increase the exposure of underrepresented minority
students to cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system
offers: (a) submicron true spatial resolution and nanometer-sized voxels
achieved by industry-leading dual stage magnification optics, (b) contrast
enhancement enabled by detectors that are optimized to maximize data collection
of contrast forming low energy X-ray photons, (c) the ability to evaluate larger
specimens at high resolution using an associated extension and the included
data-processing software, (d) an X-ray source with voltage and power output
suitable for a wide range of materials, and (e) the ability to accommodate an
array of in situ testing stages, including mechanical and thermal, without
compromising performance. These capabilities that represent the state-of-the-art
among all commercial systems available today, will enhance research on non-
destructive evaluation, advanced material characterization and digitization of
complex geometries. Specifically, there are four research foci that will be
enhanced by this acquisition, including: 1) evaluation of the internal geometry
at multiple length scales of a range of advanced materials; 2) enhanced property
and behavior characterization of novel materials and devices via in situ
testing; 3) data-driven computational material modeling assisted by data-
processing and machine learning; and 4) digitization of flora and fauna,
including delicate, rare and historic (150-year-old collections)
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.