* 2216826
* Community of Neighboring and National Entrepreneurial Centers and Trainees (CONNECT) Network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Maarten Rotman, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building a vibrant and
diverse network of educators, innovators, entrepreneurs, and other stakeholders
to incorporate biosciences entrepreneurship into undergraduate biology
curricula. There is a special focus on the inclusion of women and entrepreneurs
of color, as these groups of professionals are still underrepresented in both
input and outcomes of entrepreneurial activities in general and in the
biosciences in particular, despite having reached parity in science and
engineering bachelorâ€™s degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through three project
objectives, each with objective-specific activities, the CONNECT network creates
its vibrant, inclusive community space where educators, students, and
entrepreneurs of color collaborate, and share resources and best practices for
incorporating the emerging field of biosciences entrepreneurship into
undergraduate biology education. First the network will be established by
offering multiple opportunities for in-person and virtual gatherings, such as
CONNECTions (CONNECT - Innovation Online Networks), and cross-institutional and
multidisciplinary journal clubs focused on bioscientific entrepreneurship.
Second, a sharable database, and the foundation for a strong data-driven follow-
up project, will be established by performing a survey-based needs assessment
among the CONNECT participants. This will form the initial directive for the
ideal future state of undergraduate biology education in relation to biosciences
entrepreneurship. And thirdly, the project will host the first annual workshop
called CONNECT-ED, which will allow the CONNECT participants to actively share
data and insights. The incubator network will collaborate in future years to
launch a biosciences entrepreneurship curriculum to fill this gap. By teaching
undergraduate STEM students to see their ideas as innovations and giving them
the tools to commercialize their ideas, we will not only train future
biosciences entrepreneurs but also develop strategic thinkers. It is expected
that students who think more strategically about their career paths will be more
likely to ask critical questions, be comfortable with failures, iterations, and
course-corrections, and more likely to persist in the STEM pipeline through
their improved navigation skills. Until we can change the current macro-systems
that disadvantage BIPOC women in STEM and devalue their innovations, we aim to
build micro-systems and communities of practice that lift up and learn from
these leaders. &lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.