* 2216227
* Using Behavioral Nudges in Peer Review to Improve Critical Analysis in STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Alon Friedman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 10/31/2025
* USD 297,604.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the quality of
peer reviews given by students. Peer reviews, in which students have the
opportunity to analyze and evaluate projects made by their classroom peers, are
a widely acknowledged pedagogical method for engaging students and have become a
standard practice in undergraduate education. Peer review is most often used in
classes with large number of students to provide timely feedback on student
assignments. However, peer review has benefits far beyond scalability. Peer
review gathers diverse feedback, raises students’ comfort level with having
their work evaluated in a professional setting, and most importantly, the action
of giving a peer review is often more valuable than receiving a peer review. The
software platforms in current use that support peer review have seen limited
innovation in recent decades, and potential improvements to enhance student
outcomes have not been thoroughly evaluated. This project plans to develop and
study an innovative peer review system that uses behavioral nudges, a method of
subtlety reinforcing positive habits, to improve the evaluation skills of
students and the quality of the feedback they provide in peer
reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to 1) create a software
system supporting peer review that includes behavioral nudges for guiding the
peer review process to hone students’ evaluation and critical analysis skills
and 2) study how the use of behavioral nudges improves student engagement. The
approach will be evaluated using four different visualization courses that serve
approximately 800 students per year. Two groups of students will be studied. The
control group will utilize peer review with additional feedback modalities but
no nudges, while the test group will use peer review with the same feedback
modalities but also include nudges. Common statistical tests such as, ANOVA,
t-tests, and correlations, will be used to validate the results. The resulting
system could provide a significant and measurable improvement in outcomes in
courses that utilize peer review across different STEM disciplines. The
resulting technologies will be disseminated as open source to enable widespread
adoption. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.