* 2216486
* Enhancing Access to STEM Careers by Facilitating Transitions from Course-based to Internship-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Cheryl Van Buskirk, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jugan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 222,380.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring a novel approach
to supporting undergraduate biology students as they transition from course-
based research experiences (CUREs) to internship-based research experiences.
CUREs offer the advantage of involving many students in undergraduate research.
However, mentored internships in faculty research laboratories provide more
opportunities for students to engage with the scientific community. Since
faculty research laboratories have limited capacity, internship-based research
experiences are often constrained to small number of well-connected students.
This project plans to explore a flexible, two-semester undergraduate research
experience that aims to provide an inclusive, supportive transition to
internship-based research while also expanding faculty research laboratory
capacity to deliver high-quality, mentored student research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are multi-pronged, and project
activities will be developed in the context of California State University
Northridge, a Hispanic Serving Institution. First, the project will develop
2-semester courses that serve as a bridge between CUREs and internship-based
research experiences within biology faculty laboratories. Additionally, the
project aspires to introduce undergraduate biology students to a variety of
research areas by incorporating short internships within the courses, as well as
provide post-CURE supplemental mentoring through academic credit for students
engaged in internship-based research experiences. Further, the project will
conduct systematic assessment of this transitional undergraduate research
experience, investigating its impact on student perceptions of research and
career intentions and comparing this to outcomes from standard CUREs. This fully
immersive research experience is a potential model for other campuses to
increase the capacity of biology departments to involve more undergraduates in
authentic research experiences. The assessment outcomes from the project have
the potential to advance understanding of strategies that enhance student
interest in and preparation for research-related careers. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE: HSI
program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM
education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of
students pursuing associateâ€™s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.