* 2216585
* CAS: Nanocellulose-Enabled Nanocomposites for Sustainable Water Remediation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 501,538.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocellulose can be
extracted from all lignocellulose plants (woody and non-woody) - the largest
natural polymer sources on Earth. Nanocelluloses have been shown to be excellent
building block materials to form low-cost and effective water purification
media, such as anionic bio-adsorbents and membrane barrier layers. The
incorporation of functional metal oxide nanoparticles in the nanocellulose
scaffold can create new types of sustainable cationic bioadsorbents and
photocatalysts for water purification while also eliminating typical adverse
effects of using nanoparticles in environmental remediation. However, there are
some fundamental knowledge gaps in fully understanding the structure-property-
process/synthesis relationships during the creation of hierarchically structured
nanocellulose-metal oxide nanocomposites that can maintain stability and
effectiveness in the aqueous environment. This project aims to investigate
several fundamental issues of and provide new insights into the subject and fill
those knowledge gaps. The benefits of using such nanocomposites for water
purification have only begun to be realized, demonstrating particular importance
as climate change has increased the frequency and severity of clean-water
shortage. In additiopn to the research, a range of educational activities will
be developed to engage post-doc, graduate, undergraduate (especially minority
and women scientists) and high school students, in focusing on access to safe
drinking water as an issue of global sustainability while learning about the
fundamental concepts of sustainability and water
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
understand and control the incorporation of model cationic metal oxide
nanoparticles into anionic cellulose nanofiber scaffolds of different charge
density and degree of fibrillation, aiming to create new functional
nanocomposites from renewable and sustainable sources for water purification.
The specific aims of this project are two. (1) Understand the effects of
nanocellulose structure and functionality on the transport and interactions of
metal oxide nanoparticles during mixing and in-situ synthesis processes in the
formation of nanocomposites. Two model nanoparticle (NP) systems are chosen: (i)
aluminium oxide (Al2O3) NPs with sizes in the range of nanocellulose scaffold
pore sizes to explore effective and anomalous diffusion processes through the
mixing approach to form stable and homogeneous composite frameworks, and (ii)
“white” and “black” (low-band gap) titanium oxide (TiO2) NPs that will be formed
in-situ through synthesis, and nucleation/growth processes to understand
critical factors that can control the structure and properties of
nanocomposites. The NP transport and formation mechanisms, as well as the
resulting dynamics behavior will be evaluated against the morphology, degree of
fibrillation, and electrostatic properties of the nanocellulose scaffolds. (2)
Develop advanced characterization and modeling techniques that can reveal the
structure-property-processing relationships during nanocomposite formation. The
primary processing-structure characterization methods will include shear-free
mixing combined with in-situ scanning small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), X-ray
photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS), and other spectroscopic techniques using
synchrotron radiations, while the performance evaluation will be focused on
adsorption of anionic contaminants (e.g., fluorides and nitrates) and
photocatalytic degradation by solar
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.