* 2216273
* MRI:  Acquisition of 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Chemistry Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Leslie Lyons, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,990.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research. Grinnell College is acquiring an upgraded
console for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with a
diffusion probe to support the research of Professor Andrew Mobley and
colleagues Erick Leggans, Leslie Lyons, Molly MacInnes, and Stephen Sieck. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of organic chemistry,
organometallic chemistry, natural products, and material science. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of
students at all levels in many departments at Grinnell College as well as
provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument also
enables the research groups to work actively to recruit students from a diverse
background and broaden the representation of minoritized groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing the research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as
organic chemistry, organometallic chemistry, natural products, and material
science. The instrument impacts research focused on advancing the understanding
of heterobimetallic complexes and ion transport in electrolytes and graphitic
networks. Specifically, the instrument will be used in a wide spectrum of
projects such as: 1) heteronuclear NOE and NMR-relaxation studies of Sn hydride
complexes of W and Pt, 2) detailed variable temperature structural studies of
the conformational behavior of the natural product lugdunin, 3) structural
determination of the interaction between solvent and metal ions in electrolytes
for Li-ion and Na batteries, 4) self-diffusion studies of Li, Na, and Ln ions in
graphitic suspensions, and 5) J-coupling studies to determine the configuration
and solution state conformation of novel chalcones. The research projects to be
enabled by the 400MHz NMR spectrometer could lead to impacts in the fields such
as energy storage and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.