* 2216843
* Scalable Synthesis of Ultrathin 2D Covalent Organic Framework Membranes with Sub-1 nm Pores for Molecular Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2025
* USD 452,000.00

Industrial processes for producing fuels, chemicals, and clean water rely upon
separations technologies to isolate one or more chemical species from another.
The ability to separate chemicals using energy-efficient membranes reduces the
environmental burden of these industrial processes. However, robust, high-
performance membranes must be developed for many relevant applications. Covalent
organic frameworks (COFs) are stable, crystalline polymers with highly ordered
porous structures that can provide fast and selective transport pathways for
small molecules. These characteristics make COFs ideal separation materials from
which to construct next-generation membranes. Previous studies on COF-based
membranes have been limited to using large-pore COFs (mostly &gt;1 nm) obtained
by synthesis methods that are difficult to scale up. This research project will
enable the rational design and scalable synthesis of ultrathin microporous COF
membranes with sub-1 nm pores that are suitable for the molecular separation of
various gas/vapor mixtures such as carbon dioxide/nitrogen and xylene isomers.
The fundamental knowledge gained from this research will accelerate the
deployment of two-dimensional (2D) COF membranes in applications including
chemical separations, carbon capture, desalination, catalysis, and sensing, thus
addressing societal challenges ranging from energy availability, to global
warming, to freshwater scarcity. The project also entails research-related
education and outreach efforts, including the development of education-oriented
online videos on membrane separations and the creation of a new undergraduate-
level laboratory course module on membrane synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to study the synthesis of 2D COF membranes with sub-1 nm
pores by a more easily scalable method, i.e., filtration coating of exfoliated
2D COF nanosheets, and understand the molecular transport in the synthesized
microporous 2D COF membranes. High-quality (i.e., large size and molecularly
thin) exfoliated microporous 2D COF nanosheets will be synthesized using two
complementary approaches: modulated solvothermal growth and post-synthesis ionic
functionalization. Vacuum-assisted filtration coating of these fully exfoliated
2D COF nanosheets on commercial macroporous/mesoporous supports will be
systematically conducted to obtain defect-free ultrathin (~100 nm) microporous
2D COF membranes with sub-1 nm pores. The interlayer interactions between the
exfoliated 2D COF nanosheets will be precisely controlled to modulate their
stacking geometry and d spacing, which in turn dictates the pore topology and
crystallinity of the resulting COF membranes. Finally, molecular transport and
separation measurements will be conducted using small gas and hydrocarbon
molecules &lt;1 nm in size (e.g., carbon dioxide/nitrogen, carbon
dioxide/methane, xylene isomers, and propylene/propane) to establish the
fundamental pore structure−molecular transport−separation performance relations
in these microporous 2D COF membranes. The team will create education-oriented
TikTok/YouTube content on membranes and their applications to introduce membrane
technologies to the broader community and promote student recruiting. The
research results will be integrated into a Modern Separations
undergraduate/graduate course, and a new laboratory module on polymer membrane
synthesis will be developed to train hundreds of students in the next-generation
STEM workforce. Projects such as dye rejection will be designed through the
SCience and ENgineering Experience (SCENE) program to expose local K-12 students
to a research environment and stimulate their interest in separation
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.