* 2216564
* Variable Behaviors of 3D Subducted Slabs and Their Influence On The Thermal and Chemical Heterogeneities In Earths lowermost Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Mingming Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 275,007.00

The Earth’s outermost shell comprises several coherent pieces ("tectonic
plates") that continually collide, pull apart, or slide past each other. Denser
plates may dive below other plates (or "subduct") rather than colliding head on,
and we can see these subducted "slabs" in images of the deep Earth made with
seismic waves (analogous to a hospital CT scan). These seismic images show that
subducted slabs have a variety of shapes, and near the bottom of the mantle they
are associated with piles of anomalous material that is likely hotter and
compositionally different from either the slabs or the surrounding mantle. Li
and his team will perform many state-of-the art computations using
supercomputers to simulate the behavior of subducted slabs and their
interactions with their surroundings. This project will lead to a comprehensive
understanding of why slabs have different shapes and how they influence the
chemistry, structure, and temperatures of the deep mantle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic studies have revealed a variety of morphologies of
subducted slabs in the deep mantle. The subduction of slabs to the lowermost
mantle and the resulted thermal/chemical heterogeneities at this depth are often
thought to be responsible for the wide-spread seismic anomalies (e.g., ultra-low
velocity zones, scatterers) outside the two large low velocity provinces
(LLVPs). However, it remains unclear what controls slab morphology and how
subducted slabs with different morphology control the formation and distribution
of thermal/chemical heterogeneities in the relatively cold regions of the
lowermost mantle outside the LLVPs. This project aims to address these questions
using 3-dimensional (3D) models with Earth-like single-sided subduction. The
team will first exhaustively explore the parameter space in 3D purely thermal
models to build a library of models that show different scenarios of slab
dynamics and morphology in the lowermost mantle. After that, the team will
select representative models for different slab scenarios and introduce multiple
compositional components (e.g., oceanic crust, depleted lithosphere, LLVP
materials) to the model domain, and perform 3D high-resolution (up to a few km)
thermochemical models, to study how subducted slabs with different dynamics and
morphology affect the formation of hot thermal anomalies, and the segregation,
accumulation, and distribution of subducted oceanic crust in the relatively cold
regions of the lowermost mantle outside the LLVPs. This project will
fundamentally advance our understanding of the long-term temporal variation of
fine-scale 3D slab morphology and dynamics, and their contributions to the
thermal and chemical heterogeneities and thus seismic heterogeneities in Earth’s
lowermost mantle, especially outside the LLVPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.