* 2216355
* MRI: Acquisition of a Pulsed Electron and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 327,044.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. New York University is upgrading
the electronics of a X-band Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectrometer
to include pulsed EPR equipped with Overhauser Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
(ODNP) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) detection to support the research of
Professor Claudia Avalos and colleagues Bart E. Kahr and Stephanie Lee. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of biochemistry, biophysics, and
material science. The proposed instrument combines three techniques: electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and Overhauser
dynamic nuclear polarization (ODNP). An EPR spectrometer yields detailed
information on the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and solid
state materials. It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes
of short-lived, highly reactive species involved in important chemical and
biochemical processes. NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. In general, ODNP uses
microwave radiation to increase NMR detection sensitivity by up to two orders of
magnitude. This combined instrument allows simultaneous detection of EPR and
amplified NMR signals for the thorough characterization of the properties of
molecular systems. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in multiple departments at New York
University as well as regional institutions in the surrounding
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the EPR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially to investigate
molecular mechanisms of proteins, cells, and inorganic samples. The instrument
impacts research focused on studying optically generated spin polarization in
chromophore radical systems, charge transport in twisted organic semiconductor
crystals, and understanding impurity doping in semiconductor nanocrystals. It
also assists in the in situ characterization of paramagnetic intermediates in
nickel-catalyzed reactions. Other investigations include the determination of
mechanisms of membrane protein transporters, structural characterization of
protein and protein assemblies, and to detect conformational changes in
disordered proteins. The instrument further impacts the study of radical species
on block copolymers, nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond for quantum information
sensing and spin hyperpolarization, and optically generated spin polarization
for magnetic resonance imaging. The research projects to be enabled by the
instrument could lead to impacts in the fields of quantum science and energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.