* 2216710
* MRI: Acquisition of a Direct Detection Electron Camera for an Existing Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Low-Dose and Phase-Sensitive Imaging of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shannon Boettcher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,733.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this major research
instrumentation project is to acquire a direct electron detection camera for a
transmission electron microscope at the University of Oregon. The shared-use
electron microscopy facility in the Center for Advanced Materials
Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR) serves as a regional resource for
researchers interested in analyzing the structure and properties of a variety of
natural and engineered materials and devices. Electron microscopy is an
important tool for imaging and measuring the atomic structure and composition of
materials, but some materials are quickly damaged by exposure to an electron
beam. Furthermore, many structures and processes are difficult to image using
conventional cameras because of low contrast. The higher efficiency and speed of
this new camera delivers large improvements in image detail and contrast,
enabling imaging of dose-sensitive samples and providing videos of fast
processes at the nanometer scale, all of which are important to the
characterization of advanced materials. As part of an existing infrastructure
supporting numerous outreach and educational opportunities, the direct electron
detector is also used for an array of curriculum and professional development
opportunities for users across age, disciplines, and academic stages across the
Northwest. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers obtain hands-on
experience learning transferrable skills in electron microscope operation and
analysis, and in the generation, handling, and processing of large image
datasets. This detector strengthens an existing summer research course designed
to engage undergraduates in nanoscience and physics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The native
ability of the direct electron detector to record high-resolution electron
images at rapid speeds is applied to observations of low-contrast dynamic
processes, such as oxidation catalysis in a liquid cell sample holder for a
transmission electron microscope, the evolving cathode material structure
throughout charge/discharge cycles in lithium-ion batteries, and crystallization
kinetics of materials at the nanoscale. The high detection efficiency of the new
detector is also used to develop electron interferometry techniques. Electrons
in a coherent superposition of paths combine to form an interference pattern,
providing enhanced sensitivity to specimens. The detector's ability to record
single-electron events at the output of an electron interferometer enables
quantum-inspired measurement protocols such as interaction-free measurements and
enhanced phase imaging. In this way, the direct electron detector provides
researchers with a greater opportunity to study and understand a wider variety
of material systems and processes as well as to perform quantum mechanical
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.