* 2216614
* BPC-A: Systemic Change for Broadening Participation in K12 CS Education Pathways, The CSforALL Alliance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,866,878.00

The CSforALL organization will launch a new Broadening Participation in
Computing (BPC) Alliance focused on bringing together the full ecosystem of K-12
organizations supporting computer science (CS) education across the United
States. CSforALL has a current membership of over 800 school districts, charter
schools, private schools, curriculum providers, non profit organizations, and
researchers. As a part of this new alliance, CSforALL will create a shared
movement to increase the capacity of these members to offer access to high
quality CS instruction and ensure that all students are provided fundamental
learning opportunities which support increased enrollment of women, Black, and
Hispanic students in elective and AP classes in preparation for college and
career. Barriers to participation exist not only in isolated pockets across the
US, but pervade the very fabric of education system and data shows gaps exist in
almost every community and institution across the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to leverage the CSforALL organization and membership to
raise awareness of the need for CS education, build the capacity of
organizations working to advance K-12 CS BPC goals and use data to landscape
opportunities and progress to BPC goals. By working at scale with the national
membership, while at the same time producing tools and resources for local
implementation, CSforALL can create opportunities to identify, address, and
eventually close BPC gaps in K-12 CS. CSforALL will leverage community and
communications mechanisms such as newsletters, the annual CSforALL summit, and
data opportunities such as the CSforALL commitments process and annual member
survey to monitor progress towards BPC goals. CSforALL, together with its
evaluation partner WestEd, will seek to answer the research question: how do the
mechanisms in an alliance committed to equity and justice in CS education,
composed of leaders and institutions serving students and teachers in diverse
ways, drive impacts resulting in broadened participation in computing throughout
the K-12 space and into college and career. CSforALL researchers will leverage
both qualitative and quantitative data in order to identify mechanisms for
change and alliance activities aligned with BPC goals and activities. At the
same time, CSforALL will use national and partner data in order to measure
change in community participation in CS and use statistical analysis to identify
correlations between BPC goals and activities and progress on BPC
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.