* 2216074
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Pressure, High-Temperature Small Angle X-Ray Scattering Instrument for Oklahoma
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Erin Iski, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 461,162.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) instrument that will enable fundamental and
applied research in the state of Oklahoma and surrounding region. The instrument
will allow scientists and engineers to study the nano-scale structure of a wide
variety of materials. These include polymers, fibers, composites, thin-films,
liquid crystals, nanoparticles, detergents, emulsions, and biological materials.
This instrument will also enable study of these materials under flow, and at
elevated pressures and temperatures which are relevant to industrial processes.
The research projects enabled by this instrument include those related to
plastic recycling, drug delivery, and water treatment. Beyond state-of-the-art
science, the award will also enhance the educational and training opportunities
for students in Oklahoma by providing instrument access in an annual, two-day,
hands-on training workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A SAXS instrument will be a
valuable complement to existing instrument infrastructure in Oklahoma and will
complement the electron microscopy instrumentation available in the state. SAXS
is a valuable addition because the results obtained from SAXS are representative
of the bulk material and not just the local portion(s) observed in electron
micrographs. Micrographs, however, are much easier to interpret and do not rely
on fitting the measured data to complex mathematical models, as SAXS does. By
having access to both techniques, researchers can draw much stronger conclusions
about their materials than would be possible with only one type of measurement.
Importantly, SAXS is also non-destructive and analyzes the material’s structure
in its original state without any specialized additional equipment or sample
preparation. The instrument’s 2D detector will be valuable for anisotropic
samples with aligned nano-scale structures, such as liquid crystals or flow-
deformed particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major
Instrumentation Research Program (MRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.