* 2216130
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Sediment Description, SIO Geological Core Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 404,529.00

The Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) Geological Collections is one of
the largest marine geological repositories in the US and provides the research
community access to deep sea samples as well as tools for sedimentary analysis.
The project will support the SIO Geological Collections to buy an Avaatech Core
scanner that produces non-destructive chemical information of deep sea samples.
The scanner inexpensively provides rapid information on sediment age and the
climatological significance of sediment cores as a first step in the research
process. The Core Scanner will enable repository staff to distribute data to
researchers that will help them get the most value from the thousands of cores
in the SIO Geological Collections. In addition, researchers will be able to have
their own cores scanned, allowing investigators to determine where to focus
their research attention. Geochemical data produced by the Avaatech XRF core
scanner will help university students understand everything from the historical
record of climate and ecosystems to the archaeological and tectonic history
preserved in the deep-sea sedimentary record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray
Fluorescence imaging is the most frequently requested service to the
international research community that is provided by the SIO Geological
Collections repository. The Aavatech Core Scanner will significantly improve
data collection on marine sediment cores held in the SIO collection. New data
sets provided by the instrument include magnetic susceptibility, UV imaging, and
z-axis x-ray florescence scanning at angles off the long axis of a core. The
capability to process three cores at once will enhance throughput significantly.
The user-base for the SIO Geological Collections includes researchers in climate
research, sedimentology, tectonics, geoscience education, marine archaeology,
and conservation biology. One of the research projects enabled by this
instrument is a study of Antarctic Ice Sheet history and Southern Ocean dynamics
from marine sediment cores. Another funded project investigates oceanographic
changes at the northern margin of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and climate
variability on the South American continent using samples collected during a
JOIDES Resolution 100 Cruise. Researchers at the US Geological Survey propose to
use the Aavatech Core Scanner to analyze records of earthquakes predating the
historic record in Coastal California and California lakes. Lake records will
also be used to reconstruct past droughts, floods, and fire in California over
the past 100,000 years. XRF data will also reveal the environmental history of
Mediterranean sediment cores by locating chronologically-important features like
dated volcanic ashes that can be used in tephra chronology. Finally, the
instrument will be used in a wide variety of public outreach, high school, and
university-level education tours, modules and student research projects. For
instance, the Aavatech instrument will be a central tool for an on-going
GeoPaths training project. The SIO GeoPaths program uses at-sea experiences to
introduce undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to the whole cycle of
geoscience research, ranging from cruise planning to post-cruise work at SIO on
the collected material. The new instrument will maintain the SIO Geological
Collection as not only a premier West Coast archive of marine geological
samples, but also as education center for marine geology and environmental
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.