* 2216541
* SBIR Phase I:  A Decision-Support Tool for Identifying Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Capture Opportunities for the Nation’s Energy Transition
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Michael Ford, CARBON SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in providing much-needed decision-support
tool to progress the United States towards a net-zero carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions economy. The Princeton Net Zero America study suggests that a of
minimum 0.9 gigatons /year of CO2 sequestration is required to transition the
country to a net-zero economy, which is 1.3 times larger than the country’s oil
production on a volume-equivalent basis. One of the many substantial challenges
to achieving this feat is identifying and profiling capturable CO2 streams from
emitters across the United States. Software that could robustly address this
challenge would provide benefits to society and the country. For example,
climate change is recognized as the largest threat facing humanity and the
security of the United States; Transitioning the US economy to net-zero CO2
emissions is one of the largest wealth creation opportunities of our generation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CO2 National Capture Opportunities and
Readiness Data software will enable users to identify sources of CO2 (e.g.,
cement manufacturers and ethanol refineries) that could be profitably turned
into carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) projects. The database would provide
the break-even CO2 capture cost, technology readiness level (TRL), and lifecycle
CO2 emissions of any prospective CCS project across the country by integrating
the latest public data and scientific research into a single end-user platform.
A novel integration of advances in multiple disciplines is required for
successful project completion: 1) big data fusion, 2) CO2 capture stream
characterization, 3) lifecycle assessment, 4) advanced techno-economic
assessments, and 5) software engineering. Additionally, this project will also
advance the status-quo by creating dynamic results that can be easily re-
generated as needed (e.g., with new technologies deployed or policies
enacted).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.