* 2216151
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Brilliance Dual-Source X-ray Diffractometer for Advanced Materials Research, Education, and Training in Western New York
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jason Benedict, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,358.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The State University of New York -
Buffalo is acquiring a diffractometer with a high brilliance microfocus Cu
source and a hybrid photon counting detector to support the research of
Professor Jason Benedict and colleagues Timothy Cook, David Lacy, Janet Morrow,
and Mark Swihart. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
catalysis, and materials chemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The reach of the
instrumentation will include existing research and teaching programs at UB and
some collaborative efforts with nearby institutions (Dâ€™Youville College, Saint
Bonaventure University, and Buffalo State College).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on the study and characterization of a wide
variety of substances including photoactive crystalline materials especially in
metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and in pharmaceutical co-crystals, determining
the structure of self-assembled co-facial porphyrin catalysts and photoactive
metallocages, characterization of new MOFs containing antibiotic linkers and
high entropy metal oxides prepared by flame-based aerosol reactors. Researchers
will also explore the structures of paramagnetic transition metal complexes used
as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) probes, the structures of air sensitive
organometallic catalysts, especially Mn and Ru
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.