* 2216001
* MRI: Acquisition of a desktop scanning electron microscope (SEM) for research and education in STEM fields at a primarily undergraduate institution.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ben Jang, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 144,300.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a table-
top Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) system at Texas A&amp;M University-
Commerce (A&amp;M-Commerce) for research and education. The SEM system allows us
to characterize various sample systems by nano-size imaging and element
analysis. The instrument greatly impacts on-campus research activities, leading
to increased student involvement in faculty research projects. A&amp;M-Commerce
is a public, primarily undergraduate university. Educating the next generation
of engineers and scientists is the primary goal of all faculty members of
Science and Engineering. Meaningful research experience is provided with state-
of-the-art scientific instruments. The SEM is used as an excellent training tool
for students who want to pursue a career in STEM fields. In addition, the SEM is
used for university outreach activities for community college students in summer
research and local high school students with demonstration of nano
imaging.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SEM is capable of imaging objects below 10 nm
resolution with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). The instrument is used in
four major research areas: Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Construction
Engineering. (1) Interface morphology in multilayer organic semiconductor films
is investigated for basic research in optoelectronic applications in an organic
semiconductor physics lab. SEM imaging reveals the interfacial contact
properties of films of perylene diimide derivatives on inorganic indium tin
oxide substrates. (2) Hydrochars from hydrothermal conversion of contaminated
reeds are activated as supports of Pd-Ni/Cu bimetallic catalysts for selective
hydrogenation of alkynes to alkenes which are intermediates to manufacture
critical chemicals/medicine. SEM is used to relate the surface properties of
hydrochars to the activity, selectivity, and stability of hydrogenation
reactions. (3) Biomass quality for pyrolytic conversion is determined by total
cellular lipid content. Photosynthetic efficiency upgrade coupled with
Carbon/Nitrogen balance disruption is a major strategy for an effective
photosynthetic biomass production; with a conceptual basis of lipid storage
being an intracellular carbon and energy. SEM imaging provides an important
innovative mechanism of monitoring cellular contents and composition changes of
storage molecules. (4) The microstructure of concrete with cementitious
materials is studied by SEM imaging. Fracture surfaces are analyzed to determine
the mode and mechanism of failure of concrete with different components such as
fly ashes, slag cement, silica fume, rubber, fibers, and recycled aggregates.
The SEM also yields complementary information via its EDS capability, enabling
sub-micrometer investigation of the material’s structure and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.