* 2216747
* THE EXTRAORDINARY CONNECTIONS BETWEEN FLAVONOL AND BENZOATE METABOLISM
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Gilles Basset, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 818,368.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate how plants and some bacteria degrade
certain chemicals, called flavonols, and use the corresponding breakdown
products to make crucial molecules. Such molecules include antioxidants and
antimicrobial compounds as well as compounds required for photosynthesis,
respiration, vitamin biosynthesis and biopolymer assembly. The project will also
pioneer synthetic biology strategies that aim to manipulate flavonol chemistry
in plants. The gained knowledge will benefit the engineering and breeding of
crops for biotic and abiotic stress resistance, improved photosynthetic
efficiency and carbon sequestration in chemically inert biopolymers. Since the
research rests on a multidisciplinary expertise, combining computing, genetics,
and chemistry, the project will provide opportunities to students and
postdoctoral researchers to further their career development in a broad range of
skills currently in high demand in the biotech industry and academia. This
project also includes an outreach program aimed at raising nutritional awareness
in children of middle school age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research shows
that the peroxidation of flavonols generates a variety of benzoates, and that
plants –and likely some bacteria– have captured this chemistry to create
metabolic nodes towards the biosynthesis of vital aromatic precursors.
Converging evidence from comparative genomics, gene network modeling and
biochemical genetics indicates that peroxidases, glycosyltransferases,
β-glycosidases, and previously uncharacterized soluble metabolite carriers are
central to these processes. The project aims to identify such enzymes and
carriers, determine what their substrates and subcellular localizations are, and
how plants use the corresponding steps to control the biosynthetic output of
some aromatic metabolites. The project will combine the cross examination of
transcriptomes and genomes of distant phylogenetic lineages with metabolic
reconstructions, reverse genetics, heavy isotope labeling of target metabolites,
enzymological characterization, and confocal microscopy to: 1) Uncover the
metabolic nodes that connect flavonols to the biosynthetic pathways of aromatic
compounds in plants and prokaryotes. 2) Identify and characterize the enzymes
that control the peroxidation of flavonols. 3) Elucidate how the products of
flavonol catabolism are transported inside plant
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.