* 2216525
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecological influences on coming to the ground in tree-dwelling primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Andrew Marshall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,918.00

Tree-dwelling (also known as arboreal) primates are masterfully adapted to life
in the trees and should have little need to descend to the ground, yet arboreal
primates have been observed using the ground more frequently than expected.
Indirect observations of ground use (or, terrestrial behavior) among arboreal
primates are becoming more common due to the increasing popularity of motion-
activated cameras traps in wildlife research. This doctoral dissertation
research project combines state-of-the-art remote sensing surveys, utilizes an
extensive network of camera traps, and uses existing long-term data concerning
food availability and weather to identify the influence of these aspects of
ecology on the terrestrial behavior of arboreal primates. The research
investigates where, when, which, and why primates descend from the trees to use
the forest floor. The project also supports public science outreach and public
data access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines novel data with over 5
years of existing ecological data sets. Novel data to be collected include
measures of forest structure and connectivity from detailed 3D LiDAR (Light
Detection and Ranging) imagery. Existing data sets include camera trap videos of
primates on the ground, camera trap videos of predators, estimates of fruit
availability, and weather metrics such as temperature and rainfall. The research
focuses on multiple species in an arboreal primate community at an established
field site. Primate terrestrial behavior is modeled using occupancy models,
examining combinations of the data described above to determine the influence of
these ecological variables on primate ground use. The results of this research
have relevance for understanding the specific ecological conditions under which
otherwise arboreal primates resort to using the ground. Additionally, this
research can yield critical data for conservation science of arboreal primates.
With primate habitats rapidly changing across the globe, having a better
understanding of what factors influence primate ecological and behavioral
flexibility, at both the species and community level, is crucial for successful
conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.