* 2216625
* BPC-DP: Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups Through the Computational Core Initiative
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Joshua Weese, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As of 2020, only 27% of Kansas
high schools offered a computer science course. To address this dearth of
access, The Cyber Pipeline Initiative led by the Kansas State University
Department of Computer Science (KSUCS) provides computer science curriculum and
teacher professional development, certification, and support across the state.
Currently, the Cyber Pipeline reaches 7 schools. With this demonstration
project, KSUCS aims to expand the Cyber Pipeline Initiative’s coverage
statewide. With 207 of the state’s 286 school districts located in rural areas,
the project will consider the unique challenges faced by rural students and
their schools. In addition, the project will work to modify the Cyber Pipeline
curriculum to be relevant to students with intersecting identities, including
women, African American/ Black, and Hispanic/Latinx students in rural areas. The
project will also increase understanding around how rural students engage with
computer science and what strategies may attract more to the discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will leverage the Cyber Pipeline Initiative’s
Computing Core Initiative (CCI) curriculum and instructional approaches to
increase the number of students seeking and succeeding in CS by identifying and
addressing immediate barriers faced by rural students. Over the two-year grant
duration, at least 20 schools in Kansas will receive at least one Computing Core
Initiative (CCI) course with associated instructor support to demonstrate that
the use of CCI courses in rural high school settings leads to more women,
Latinx, and Black/African American students entering pathways toward CS and
computing-embedded degrees. Changes in students' attitudes toward learning CS,
the effects of sharing information about local CS career pathways, the impact of
offering one or more CS courses in high schools, and the degree to which
students' social identities influence their interest in CS careers will be
analyzed. To get a broader picture of the perceptions of computer science
throughout the community this information will come from students, teachers, and
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.