* 2216548
* High-altitude environments and spleen function in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Trevor Day, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2025
* USD 424,998.00

Some humans living in mountainous regions of the world are adapted to the low
oxygen conditions of high-altitude, particularly notable during mountaineering
activity. The main goal of this project is to examine the role of the human
spleen in exercise tolerance at altitude, and to assess the ways in which this
pressure has shaped the function of the spleen in populations who have lived and
exercised at altitude for thousands of years. The spleen regulates circulating
red blood cells and thus the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood; in other
species (e.g., diving mammals, racehorses) research has shown that the spleen
plays a critical role in individuals engaging in activity with high metabolic
demand when oxygen is a limiting factor. This could also be true for humans, as
prior work has documented larger spleens and significantly enhanced spleen
function in some high-altitude populations compared to those living closer to
sea level. The current project will measure spleen function during exercise in
high- and low-altitude living populations over a length of time in which both
groups are exercising at increasingly high altitudes. This project is linked to
a study-abroad course which offers research opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students, and the research also directly engages local community
members and implementing partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highland native
populations have been exposed to hypobaric hypoxia for millennia. In some such
populations, natural selection has acted on genes which are associated with
lower circulating hemoglobin concentration [Hb]. In hypoxia tolerant species
like diving mammals, circulating [Hb] is dynamically regulated by contraction of
the spleen to elevate circulating red blood cells (RBCs) during high metabolic
demand. Splenic contraction also occurs in humans with exercise and hypoxia
exposure. The researchers have documented that some high-altitude adapted
populations have 19-35% larger resting spleen volume and 5-fold greater splenic
contraction compared to controls. This is similar to the 35% larger spleen
volume documented in breath-hold diving marine hunter-gatherer populations;
genomic analysis of breath-hold diving populations suggest positive selection on
spleen volume and/or the human diving response. This study tests the hypothesis
that natural selection has modified spleen size and splenic contraction to
optimize aerobic performance at altitude in the context of an incremental 7-day
ascent to altitude from 1,440 to 4,370 meters where spleen volume, splenic
contraction, changes in [Hb], and other features of the hemodynamic system
during this time period will be assessed. Whole genome sequence data will be
used to explore selection at loci of a priori interest and across the genome
broadly. The approach will be to conduct association analyses of splenic and
hematological phenotypes with previously identified candidate genes as well as
the top selection-nominated genes identified via population genetic statistical
tests used to identify genomic signatures of directional selection. Positive
research findings could be transformative and would open avenues for future
physiological and genomic work on the adaptive response of highland native
populations around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.