* 2216492
* Using Machine Learning to Provide Students with Rapid Feedback during Hands-on Cybersecurity Exercises
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Richard Weiss, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 161,427.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using machine learning to
provide students with timely feedback while completing hands-on cybersecurity
exercises. A cyber informed citizenry is a vital part of our national defense
strategy. Cybercrime is becoming increasingly sophisticated, and the systems and
devices that need security are becoming ever more complex and interconnected.
These issues highlight the need to develop programs that enable students to
quickly obtain the fundamental skills and knowledge considered essential by
cybersecurity experts. Hands-on cybersecurity exercises are known to provide
students with basic cybersecurity knowledge, skills, and abilities. To be
effective these exercises need to provide students with rapid feedback to
prevent them from getting stuck and frustrated. The goal of this project is to
use machine learning to monitor students as they work through hands-on
cybersecurity exercises and automatically identify when they are getting stuck
and frustrated. The students will then be given suggestions to help them to
successfully complete the exercise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to
use reinforcement learning to create, test, and deploy a semi-automated rapid
hint system. The project intends to develop tools to collect hints directly from
student-teacher interactions, which will then be used to teach the system which
hints to apply and when. The system will interact with both the teacher and the
student by suggesting hints as the system becomes more proficient. The hint
system will be integrated into the EDURange platform but will be compatible with
other cyberrange platforms such as DeterLab and KYPO. The PI team intends to
offer workshops for faculty on how to use EDURange and the hint system. The hint
system will collect data that will be analyzed to determine the efficacy of the
tool, and to develop new hints and strategies for helping students. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.