* 2216344
* Personalizing motor learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Nicolas Schweighofer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 707,000.00

This project aims to improve motor learning by customizing the practice schedule
for each learner. The investigators propose a novel algorithm that will generate
practice schedules. The schedules will depend on the learner’s unique
attributes, data from other learners, and the possible limits on the total
amount of training. Using an online motor learning task, the investigators will
test the algorithm with adults across the lifespan recruited from the community.
In future applications, the algorithm has the strong potential to improve
learning in sports, technical training, and surgical technique training. This
work is also relevant for treating motor symptoms in conditions such as stroke,
spinal cord injury, traumatic brain injury, and Parkinson’s disease. The
proposed research will provide educational opportunities for students from high
school to Ph.D. across disciplines such as artificial intelligence, brain
science, and psychology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose a
novel, theoretically sound, and self-improving algorithm to personalize motor
adaptation training. The algorithm will select the daily dose and schedule of
training that maximizes the long-term performance predicted by a dynamical model
of motor memory, given the learner’s unique characteristics, data from other
learners, and constraints on both total and daily doses of practice. The
investigators will compare the predictive abilities of models with different
memory time scales via cross-validation. The investigators will then pilot the
training algorithm with college students (ages 18-30) who will learn an online
motor adaptation task over 3 days, followed by a 1-month post-training retention
test. Then, the investigators will test the efficacy of personalized learning by
deploying the online task to the community. Sex, age, baseline movement
variance, genetic factors (BDNF, APOE genes), time of day, and spatial memory
covariates will be incorporated into the model to improve predictions. Because
the algorithm is self-improving, the investigators will compare the performance
in the 1-month post-training test of each new sub-group of 30 participants to
that of the preceding sub-group. Furthermore, to test the efficacy of the
adaptive schedule relative to a “one-size-fits-all” schedule, the investigators
will compare the performance of the last group to that of an additional sub-
group of matched participants (n=30) who will receive three days of equally-
dosed practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.