* 2216145
* MRI: Acquisition of Automated Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for Biophysical Research at Texas State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sean Kerwin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 265,280.00

An award is made to Texas State University to acquire an automated MicroCal PEAQ
isothermal titration calorimeter for the analysis of interactions between
biological macromolecules. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) measures the
heat generated by chemical reactions or processes. The relationships between
heat and the fundamental thermodynamic parameters (free energy, enthalpy,
entropy, and heat capacity) enables ITC to measure directly those properties
that describe a system’s ability to perform work – a key concept for
understanding biological life. Because of this, ITC is a classical method that
is widely used to characterize the interactions between macromolecules,
especially including nucleic acids and proteins. As the first calorimetric
instrumentation for the analysis of biological macromolecules at Texas State
University, the Automated PEAQ-ITC significantly expands the biophysical
research capacity of the institution. Texas State University is a Hispanic-
Serving Institution with a large population of first-generation and non-
traditional students, and this ITC system provides invaluable training and
education opportunities. The instrumentation will afford experience to
undergraduate and graduate students in both biophysical methodology and
contemporary high-throughput automation. In addition, this ITC will support
ongoing efforts in research and education to integrate the disciplines of
physics, chemistry, and biology for the precise and quantitative
characterization of interactions between biological macromolecules that underpin
all mechanisms of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas State Automated PEAQ-ITC
will be used to analyze the energetics associated with a wide range of
biomolecular interactions. In particular, we will use ITC to study protein-
protein interactions that are part of protein-folding pathways, phase-separation
events, cellular signaling pathways, and DNA repair complexes. Protein-nucleic
acid interactions that drive the formation of complexes regulating DNA repair
processes, mRNA trafficking, and protein translation will also be studied. Small
molecule-DNA binding assays, monitored by ITC, will identify how the formation
of noncanonical DNA structures (e.g., quadruplexes and triplexes) can be
modulated by ligands. Finally, the automated feature of the ITC is especially
beneficial for fragment-based ligand discovery and characterization, which will
be used to find new reagents that allosterically control cell signaling
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.