* 2216387
* MRI: Development of a High-Pressure Laser Floating Zone Furnace
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephen Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 547,758.00

Advances in information technology, energy, and many other fields rely upon the
development and characterization of materials with desirable mechanical,
electrical, magnetic, and thermal properties. Investigators who first synthesize
high-quality, bulk single crystals of novel materials are in an optimal position
to conduct definitive studies of their fundamental properties. Moreover, these
investigators are also well positioned to facilitate further development of
these materials toward applications in advanced technologies. This project
develops a high-pressure laser floating zone furnace, not commercially
available, capable of growing single crystals of novel materials that cannot be
grown any other way. The high-pressure laser floating zone furnace will be a
part of Rice’s Shared Equipment Authority and therefore have a broad user base
from Rice University and the extended research community in and around Houston,
Texas. In addition to training undergraduate and graduate students in the art of
growing single crystals using the furnace, the successful execution of this
project will open areas of research currently not possible for faculty and
students. These activities will broaden the avenues of research in solid-state
science and will provide new opportunities for discoveries of novel phenomena in
single crystals of quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional laser
floating zone furnaces are powerful tools used to grow high-quality single
crystals of oxides, intermetallics, carbides, and silicides, as long as the
melting temperature is below ~2,800°C, but the growth chamber is limited up to
300 bar gas pressure. Growing single crystals of more complex materials,
however, requires special capabilities, particularly the use of high pressure in
the growth chamber. This is because the boiling point of a liquid is the
temperature at which its vapor pressure is equal to the pressure of the gas
around it. Increasing the gas pressure to 1000 bar inside the chamber will
dramatically enhance the opportunities to stabilize the melt, and therefore
allowing growth of single crystals not possible with conventional laser floating
zone furnace. Recently, the investigator at the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB), developed a novel design for a high-pressure laser floating zone
furnace for operational pressures up to 1000 bars of gas pressure. The objective
of this project is to continue this innovation through the design and
construction of a next-generation high-pressure laser floating zone furnace at
Rice University; it will be the first of its kind in Texas and the southern U.S.
and will represent a continued advance in high-pressure floating zone technology
for advanced crystal growth. With the development of an improved high-pressure
laser floating zone furnace under 1000 bars of gas pressure, the investigators
will be able to obtain entire new phase parameter regimes and grow single
crystals not possible with a commercial instrument. The proposed furnace will be
operated and maintained by Rice University’s Shared Equipment Authority, where
it will be easily accessible not only to Rice researchers but also to
researchers throughout Texas and the southern U.S., thereby significantly
broadening the capacity to advance research in materials
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.