* 2216019
* Developing a Measure of College Student Buy-In to Evidence-Based Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Graham, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,846.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by conducting pilot research to
measure student buy-in, an emergent concept that may lead college STEM students
toward desired student outcomes. Evidence-based teaching (EBT) practices, such
as inclusive teaching and active learning, are widely shown to increase key
student outcomes such as final course grade, engagement, and intent to persist
in the sciences — all of which are important to attaining longer-term outcomes
such as completing a STEM degree and pursuing a STEM career. Recent studies have
shown that when students “buy in” – i.e., personally identify and commit to –
EBT practices, they are even more likely to attain positive student outcomes.
Therefore, student buy-in has become an increasingly relevant concept in the
college STEM education literature, and researchers have not only developed a
reliable way to measure it but have also modeled a student buy-in framework that
links the concept with its associated positive outcomes. While these results are
promising, two aspects of student buy-in can be improved upon. First, a greater
understanding of the variables that influence student buy-in is needed.
Leveraging the existing student buy-in framework, the project seeks to identify
and test the variables that influence students’ achievement of buy-in. Second,
while the statistical evidence of student buy-in is encouraging, the existing
student buy-in measure (i.e., survey tool) needs improvement – the measure is
too long and not completely aligned with the theoretical underpinnings of
student buy-in. With these two considerations in mind, this project plans to
identify additional influencing variables and to develop a more conceptually
aligned, user-friendly student buy-in measure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three aims: 1) Improve the student buy-in framework by exploring key
moderating variables of buy-in via a literature review and consultation with
diverse expert reviewer groups; 2) Revise the buy-in measure to increase
widespread applicability by making it more concise, understandable, and
reliable; and 3) Conduct a pilot study by distributing the unified buy-in
framework measures in classrooms where evidence-based teaching practices are in
place. After completing these aims, the project anticipates producing a revised
buy-in measure that remains statistically robust and can be deployed more
broadly and effectively in its simplified form. Additionally, the project has
potential to contribute to a better understanding of how buy-in is achieved.
Currently, the EPIC model of buy-in posits that students must be exposed to an
EBT practice (“E”), be persuaded that practice is good (“P”), identify with that
practice (“I”), and then commit to that practice (“C”) in order to buy in. What
has yet to be revealed are the moderating relationships within the pathways of
the EPIC model (e.g., P to I or I to C) that influence students’ achievement of
buy-in. In summary, this project seeks to develop, test, and disseminate a more
accurate and concise measure of student buy-in while also considering additional
variables that can enhance the predictive power of the buy-in framework. In
doing so, it will serve the STEM education community’s ongoing emphasis on
finding ways to increase students’ final course grade, engagement, and intent to
persist in the sciences in student-centered classrooms. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.