* 2216133
* MRI: Acquisition of a Frequency Quadrupled Titanium Sapphire laser for Ion, Atom and Molecule Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Carl Faust, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,909.00

High quality laser systems make possible the control and investigation of atoms
and molecules with exquisite precision. This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award supports the acquisition of a broadly tunable laser system which
will open up large swathes of the periodic table for study. Combining the light
with different elements, the PIs will conduct experiments ranging from searching
for new force carrying bosons, to studying nuclear structure, and investigating
molecular collisions. The instrument will enrich laboratory instruction, as
undergraduate student researchers at Bucknell University and Susquehanna
University will gain first-hand experience working with state-of-the art
instrumentation in atomic and molecular physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
continuous wave (CW) frequency quadrupled titanium sapphire laser covering
significant sections of the 250 to 1000 nm spectral window will be acquired and
integrated into the atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physics lab at Bucknell
University. The laser system will be used for experiments in precision isotope
shift measurements motivated by searches of physics beyond the standard model,
as well as molecular spectroscopy of alkali diatomic molecules with the aim of
characterizing interaction strengths, collisions rates, and electronic potential
energy curves. Undergraduate students from both institutions will be involved in
all aspects of the experiments, gaining experience in atom, ion, and molecular
spectroscopy, laser cooling, ion trapping and other skills which are central to
contemporary work in AMO physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.