* 2216298
* MRI: Development of Multi-Material Printing and Multi-Modal Sensing Capabilities for Directed Energy Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jian Cao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2026
* USD 410,900.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the development of an
open-architecture, high-throughput, and modular additive manufacturing
instrument. This instrument is based on directed energy deposition to enable new
research capabilities in revolutionary material design, large-scale data
collection, and process artificial intelligence. The new capabilities will set
this instrument apart, as the first of its kind. It will have a unique range of
functionalities to address the current and future technical challenges in
additive manufacturing. It will also serve as a unique tool to probe into the
process design and physics of additive manufacturing. The project will enable
undergraduate and graduate students to gain exposure to the growing
multidisciplinary nature of advanced manufacturing and its adaption of big data
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing the capability for rigorous
process monitoring, the instrument will enable the real-time study of the
influence and consequences of processing methods on defects and ultimate part
quality (at length scales that are orders of magnitude smaller than standard
instruments today). The research will couple multi-material synthesis
capabilities (multi-material printing) with high-precision sensors (acoustic
emission sensing, hyperspectral imaging, and multi-wavelength pyrometry) and an
in-process metrology vision system to enable closed-loop process modification
and data collection. The envisioned hardware and software design will enable an
instrument that is not only capable of detecting defects in real-time but can
also make the necessary processing adjustments (may they be compositional or
processing modifications) to correct these errors. This instrument will
substantially outpace the current capabilities of commercial metal additive
instruments, thus providing broad opportunities for multidisciplinary research
and development of manufacturing processes, methods, and
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.