* 2216592
* Catalyzing virtuous cycles of climate action: an empirical model of polycentric climate governance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Angel Hsu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2025
* USD 447,152.00

Nations and international governing bodies are traditionally viewed as the
primary actors working to mitigate global climate change. Yet subnational
jurisdictions, such as states and cities, and non-state entities, such as
businesses and civic organizations, have become increasingly important actors in
efforts to reduce climate-warming greenhouse gas emissions and stem climate
impacts. This research project uses new data science methods to answer essential
questions about this emerging diverse climate landscape, analyzing which
subnational government climate policies and strategies translate to measurable
emissions reductions; determining where and how these policies and initiatives
perform regarding emissions; isolating the conditions that allow urban climate
actions to create virtuous cycles of interaction and raise ambition nationally
and internationally. This research also creates new data science methodologies
and informational frameworks that strengthen the scientific basis of non-state
and subnational contributions to global climate governance and help answer
fundamental questions regarding the efficacy of current frameworks to address
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subnational (i.e., cities and states) and
private actors’ engagement in international processes and frameworks devoted to
mitigate climate change (e.g., the 2015 Paris Agreement) represents a shift in
the global climate governance paradigm from a predominantly top-down, nation-
state centric approach to a polycentric network of actors. Subnational and non-
state actors’ ability to catalyze and enhance climate actions towards global
goals is unknown, largely due to a lack of relevant empirical data. This
research project produces new evidence describing subnational actors’
contributions to global climate mitigation and governance, lending empirical
bases for multi-level, polycentric climate governance theories that are so far
untested. Three broad questions are examined: what subnational government
climate policies and strategies translate to measurable emissions reductions?
Where and how are these policies and initiatives performing, considering the
total value (i.e., upstream and downstream) and embedded carbon chains? What
conditions enhance urban climate actions’ ability to create virtuous cycles of
interaction and raise ambition nationally and internationally? The project
develops large-scale, spatially-explicit, open datasets using innovative Machine
Language techniques to collect policy data and earth observation (EO)—the
practice of collecting data on Earth's biological, physical and chemical
processes typically through the use of satellite remote sensing technologies.
The new data on climate change policies and practices and emission reductions
used to estimate the effect of subnational governments and organizations seeking
to mitigate the climate effects of emissions; only limited similar data
currently exists, and that which does tends to neglect the Global South. Special
considerations are given so that methods and models are scalable, reproducible,
and adaptable to various locales and political contexts. Each research component
incorporates equity and justice considerations, with continuing evaluation of
where each dataset, case study, and model may not be attuned to policy
inclusiveness and promoting equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.