* 2216453
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR for Expanding Research and Training in the Wichita Region
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Bann, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 606,305.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs in the Division of Chemistry.
Wichita State University is acquiring a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectrometer equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled probe to support the
research of Professor James Bann and colleagues Moriah R. Beck, William C.
Groutas, Katie Mitchell-Koch, and Haifan Wu. This instrument facilitates
research in the areas of drug design, cancer therapeutics, nanomaterials, and
polymer chemistry. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The nitrogen-cooled probe provides a significant
increase in sensitivity relative to standard NMR probes. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all
levels in many departments at Wichita State University and in the broader region
including 29 rural colleges and universities as well as local chemical, biotech,
and aviation industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as structure, dynamics and interactions of proteins,
peptides, and macromolecular architectures, and advancing a theoretical
understanding of fluorine and phosphorous chemical shifts. This instrument
enables research focused on the structure-function of bacterial pore forming
proteins, conformational dynamics involved in actin binding and regulation of
cellular motility by Ig domains of palladin, and designing novel constrained
peptides to target protein-protein interfaces. It also assists in the structure-
guided design of a novel class of spiro macrocyclic inhibitors of viral serine
and cysteine proteases and the design and synthesis of advanced polymeric
materials. Other investigations include the computationally guided
interpretation of phosphorus NMR spectra and fluorine NMR studies of
biomolecules, and the structure and electronic properties of metal complexes of
novel cyanoscorpionate ligands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.