* 2216231
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual Transmission X-ray Diffractometer (DTXRD) for Studying the Local and Bulk Structure of Soft and Hard Materials under In situ and Operando Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Timothy Long, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 557,841.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
dual transmission X-ray diffractometer (DTXRD) that allows researchers to study
how materials form, how their atoms are arranged, and how they can be
manipulated and engineered. The arrangement of these sub-nanometer (&lt; 1
billionth of a meter) building blocks determines the materials properties and
behavior in varying environments. Consequentially, understanding their structure
is a powerful tool for materials discovery and design to unlock next-generation
batteries, sensors, magnets, electronics, catalysts, polymers, and quantum
materials. The instrument benefits researchers across a wide range of
disciplines (chemistry, biochemistry, earth/planetary and materials science,
physics, mechanical, chemical, and electrical engineering) at Arizona State
University (ASU). The DTXRD further enables fundamental insights into how the
local and long-range arrangement of atoms evolve in response to external
parameters (different temperatures, gas, electrical/electrochemical fields) and
reveals synthetic formation mechanisms of novel materials. Hence, the instrument
allows for crucial materials research that is key for innovation and leads to
future technology development. This has an impact not only across multiple
disciplines but also transcending further to US-wide academic institutions,
including universities with limited research opportunities for students, and
industrial partners. The DTXRD provides a unique and powerful learning
experience for students through hands-on training and research activities, as
well as online courses on crystallography and materials synthesis, creating a
workforce that enriches many different industrial sectors ranging from energy
and information technology to packaging and waste management. Additionally,
public outreach in the form of workshops, lectures, and accessible social media
content promote the broad area of materials science and facilitate science
communication and networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DTXRD combines two
independent and simultaneously operable systems to enable: (i) X-ray diffraction
measurements with copper (Cu) or molybdenum (Mo) radiation in transmission
geometry (maximizing data quality, especially for layered and 2D materials) that
can be performed in capillaries (ideal for air-sensitive compounds) and in an
automated way (up to 30 samples), and (ii) Total scattering experiments and pair
distribution function analysis using high energy (silver (Ag) radiation) for
local structure information of crystalline as well as low- and non-crystalline
species, including a reaction chamber and variable temperature capabilities (40
- 1,800 K and gas atmosphere). The high energy radiation also enables operando
transmission diffraction measurements of electrochemical devices with coin and
pouch cell holders. The DTXRD is used for research projects in three general
areas: (1) Understanding the local structure and developing new synthetic
reaction pathways for layered, low crystalline, non-crystalline or amorphous,
and low-dimensional materials; (2) Mechanistic understanding of materials for
renewable energy/catalysis applications; (3) Discovery of new quantum phases in
quantum sciences and engineering. The overarching goal within these broad
research fields is to develop a deep understanding of the structure of diverse
species (ranging from solid-state battery and magnetic materials to minerals and
organics/polymers), their formation mechanisms, and their behavior in response
to external stimuli (including their potential degradation and failure). This
knowledge is crucial for the understanding and design of next generation
materials for electrochemical energy, semiconductor, catalysis, and quantum
computing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.