* 2216807
* PREC Track 2: Partnership for Research and Education in Chemistry-Sustainable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Eric Mintz, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,794,981.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Plastics derived from petroleum are ubiquitous in our
society, comprising affordable packaging, components of automobiles, computers,
building materials, medical devices, etc. However, because of their durability
and stability, and their low level of recycling, plastic pollution in the
environment and oceans has become a major societal, worldwide problem. The NSF
Partnership for Research and Education in Chemistry‒Sustainable Polymers (PREC-
SP) will embrace a holistic approach to developing fundamental knowledge and
applications of sustainable polymers to meet societal needs. Successful
implementation of the proposed work will result in he PREC-SP faculty and
students conducting collaborative research with faculty and students of the
existing NSF Center for Sustainable Polymers (CSP), as Phase II Center for
Chemical Innovation (CCI), supported by the Division of Chemistry (CHE). This
partnership has the potential to synergistically combine their transformative
work of how plastics are made, unmade, and remade through innovative research
and engaging education. The multi-institutional, collaborative research projects
that will be the backbone of this PREC-SP/CSP partnership include: (1)
development and study of porous crystalline framework catalysts for sustainable
biomass valorization to polymer feedstocks; (2) preparation, characterization,
processing, and biodegradation of PLA (polylactic acid) and PHB
(polyhydroxybutyrate) nanocomposite material that are reinforced with cellulose
nanocrystals; (3) synthesis of sustainable block copolymers, functional
polymers, and hairy nanoparticles via novel polymerization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PREC-SP has the potential to expand the
diversity of researchers supporting the development of sustainable polymers.
Successful implementation will increase education and research opportunities
through research experiences for undergraduates, faculty and student exchanges,
joint PREC-SP/CSP workshops &amp; seminars, research group meetings, and other
practices for professional growth. These opportunities could significantly
increase the recruitment, retention, degree completion, of African Americans who
enroll in and complete graduate degrees in the chemical sciences, key elements
of viable pipeline. A successful partnership will build a sustainable pathway
for underrepresented minority students into the professional workforce and
higher education research and development positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.