* 2216089
* MRI: Acquisition of a Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometer Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (TIMS-QTOF) with MALDI for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Robert Linhardt, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,099,000.00

This proposal seeks to acquire a state-of-the-art Trapped Ion Mobility
Spectrometry (TIMS) Time of Flight (TOF) fleX with Matrix Assisted Laser
Desorption/Ionization (MALDI). This instrument offers several unique
capabilities: 1) TIM separation allows separating isomeric compounds. These
compounds have the same molecular formula, but different chemical properties; 2)
TOF enables full mass-spectrum analysis and is able to separate species that
differ in mass by as little as 0.001 atomic mass unit; and 3) Mass Spectrometry
Imaging is label free, provides untargeted analysis of thousands of molecular
species simultaneously, offers extremely low limits of detection, and provides
spatial mapping. The capability of this instrument will allow the project team
to fill knowledge gaps and tackle pressing challenges in a wide range of
scientific fields: environmental monitoring and remediation, biological,
chemical, biochemical, and biomedical sciences. Access to this instrument will
strengthen research at three Institutions and the Wadsworth Center at the
Capital Region of New York and beyond. Besides benefiting the society through
new discoveries and deep scientific endeavors, this instrument will be used for
educating and training undergraduate and graduate students and outreach to the
general public, and K-12 educators and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrument will address critical challenges faced by at least ten
researchers in multiple fields of research. This is enabled by the instrument’s
revolutionary capabilities in visualizing molecules in chemically complex
microenvironments and providing quantitative compositional and structural
analyses. These capabilities will bring game-changing discoveries in research
related to oral microbial community, dental biofilm, fungal metabolome and
proteome, RNA modifications, and epitranscriptome. In environmental impact
analysis and remediation, this instrument will be used to detect and quantify
isomers of per- and polyfluorinated substances (PFAS) and perform targeted
screening and non-target analysis of these compounds in different environmental
matrices. In the field of glycomics, the full structural characterization of
carbohydrates is a standing analytical need in the characterization of
structure-function relationships as well as biomedical applications. The
proposed equipment permits confident isomer differentiation and structure
elucidation and provides a sensitive and rapid overview of glycan profiles for
complex glycoprotein mixtures. With respect to the Drosophila -parasitoid wasp
interaction, the immune response of the host fly to another insect, the
infecting wasp is largely unknown. The acquired instrument would enable deep
understanding of changes at protein levels and localizing the cellular immune
response through MALDI imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.