* 2216239
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Near-Field Optical Microscope (neaSNOM) with Combined Nano-Infrared/Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for Research &amp; Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Kathleen Cerqua-Richardson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 468,564.00

This award supports the acquisition of a custom next-generation Near-Field
Scanning Optical Microscope Instrument, capable of performing combined Atomic
Force Microscopy as well as the complementary spectroscopic techniques of
infrared and Tip-Enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Compared to existing systems, this
instrument provides extremely high detection sensitivity and resolution on
sample volume approximately a billion times smaller than that of traditional
microscopic tools using wavelengths in the visible to mid-infrared. This results
in approximately a one-billion-fold increase in sensitivity while the spatial
resolution is improved by a factor of 100 to 10000 of magnitude. Housed at the
University of Central Florida, the instrument will provide multi-disciplinary
researchers within the region access to novel in-depth analyses of materials,
components, and devices critical to expanding the understanding of material
performance in a range of cutting-edge research and educational programs. The
instrument synergistically complements research strengths and collaborations
across UCF science and engineering by offering unprecedented access to new
spatial, spectral, and temporal domains, supporting a diverse range of research
areas including biological studies, plasmonic surface interactions,
photovoltaics, polymers, inorganic optical materials, semiconductor devices,
sensors, and more. UCF is federally recognized as a Hispanic serving
institution, and with over 70,000 students, UCF is among the largest R1
universities in the United States. This instrument will enable unique training,
research, and mentoring opportunities that give students hands-on experience and
cutting-edge skills. Several classes currently offered at UCF on surface
science, nanotechnology, optical materials science, spectroscopy, and even
astrobiology will directly benefit by incorporating content-specific material
from this state-of-the-art instrument. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
enables the acquisition of a next-generation Near-Field Scanning Optical
Microscope (neaSNOM), configured by the team and custom-built by Neaspec to
perform simultaneous Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and nanoscale (10 nm spatial
resolution) Fourier Transform infrared (nanoFTIR) and Tip-Enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (nanoTERS). Uniquely, the neaSNOM instrument can analyze the same
10-nm spot with nanoFTIR and nanoTERS, enabling simultaneous hyperspectral
mapping via two complementary techniques. The system is modular and easily
reconfigured to accommodate user-defined light-sources, detectors, pump-probe
studies from THz to near-UV wavelengths, and photoluminescence studies. The
instrument synergistically complements research strengths and collaborations
across UCF science and engineering by offering unprecedented access to new
spatial, spectral, and temporal domains, supporting a diverse range of research
areas including planetary science, biological studies, plasmonic surface
interactions, photovoltaics, polymers, inorganic optical materials,
semiconductor devices, sensors, ultrafast spectroscopy, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.