* 2217661
* Collaborative Research: Mapping protein-membrane interactions from molecules to cell-level dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Charles Wolgemuth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 383,799.00

Biological membranes that surround the cell, and organelles within the cell, are
complex mixtures of proteins and phospholipids, distinct classes of biological
molecules which combine to seal off the cell and its compartments. How proteins
and phospholipids work together to enable the processes that must work across
these barriers is not well understood. The project will investigate the
interwoven dynamics coupling cellular membrane shape with embedded protein
orientations and aggregation. The research will explore the role of membrane-
mediated protein aggregations in the clustering of viral coat proteins that
facilitates the entry and exit of viral particles (e.g., Covid and influenza)
from cells, the activation of membrane channels in processes like touch
sensation, and the involvement of membrane proteins in the creation of
mitochondrial membrane shape, which aids in maximizing cellular energy
production. Answers to these questions can lead to novel therapeutics for
viruses and to a deeper understanding of cell physiology. The project will
specifically lead to a mapping from the structure and composition of individual
proteins to the large-scale motions of the membranes in which they are embedded,
providing a general physics-based understanding of cellular membrane processes.
The research will form a foundation for interdisciplinary graduate student
training and as a foundation for outreach to STEM undergraduates and K12
students in the Tucson and San Francisco areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constructing models that properly describe how atomic
level interactions lead to mesoscale membrane distortions poses a grand
challenge. The research proposed here meets this challenge using a multiscale
approach to develop chemically accurate descriptions of the interaction between
integral membrane proteins and the surrounding membrane that is then feed
upwards to create a realistic continuum model of protein-driven membrane
morphology at the cell level. The project will use molecular dynamics
simulations to determine the interaction of a single protein with a membrane and
how small groups of proteins interact and deform membranes. These simulations
will be carried out on a set of proteins with distinct geometric and chemical
properties. The results from these simulations will then be used to parameterize
a continuum level model of protein-membrane interactions that will be used to
explore the cell-level membrane dynamics involved in viral pathogenesis,
mitochondrial morphogenesis, and PIEZO channels in mechanosensation. The
algorithms that are developed will be applicable to a range of problems in the
dynamics of surfaces, thereby impacting research in biology, biomedical science,
physics, and engineering and will be made freely-available to the community. The
training that is proposed will support students and postdocs in a broadly
interdisciplinary research plan that crosses multiple length scales and spans
molecular biology and cellular biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.