* 2217431
* BRC-BIO Interactive effects of warming and drought on physiological and growth responses of boreal and temperate tree seedlings: A PUI Research Initiative
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kerrie Sendall, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 07/31/2025
* USD 503,000.00

Drought negatively affects the growth and survival of forests worldwide. In
particular, in areas where air and soil temperatures are increasing, water
becomes particularly limiting due to excess evaporation of water from plants and
soil. In this project, the combined effect of warming and drought on tree
seedling growth and physiological processes such as rates of photosynthesis will
be investigated using both the existing Boreal Forest Warming at an Ecotone in
Danger (B4WarmED) experiment in northern Minnesota, as well as new common garden
and laboratory-based experiments at Rider University in central New Jersey. This
research will allow for more precise quantification and understanding of how
soil moisture affects the sensitivity of plants to warming, which could have
significant societal benefits related to forest management and habitat
restoration. This project will also implement a course-based undergraduate
research experience plant biology class at Rider University, a primarily
undergraduate institution. This course will enhance the research skills and
professional development of undergraduate students by using structured, inquiry-
based projects addressing novel questions about mechanisms that control plant
growth and development. Encouraging scientists from underrepresented groups will
be a main focus of undergraduate education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will expand the knowledge and
tools needed to predict how forest species will respond to climate change; in
particular, how tree seedling growth, survival, and underlying physiological
traits will be affected by the interaction between climate warming and changes
in water availability. Few manipulative studies have directly assessed the
interactive effects of varying temperature and precipitation regimes on plant
communities, despite a variety of model analyses suggesting that these two
factors will interact and affect species in ways that are unpredictable from
single-factor experiments. We will utilize an ongoing climate change experiment
in northern Minnesota (B4WarmED), while also expanding aspects of this long-term
experiment to the Rider University campus in New Jersey. While prior research at
the B4WarmED experiment has observed positive effects of warming on plant
physiology and growth of some species (e.g., sugar maple, bur oak), it is
predicted that a reduced water supply will offset these positive effects and
lead to more negative plant responses. The proposed project will quantify leaf
physiological traits (e.g., photosynthesis, water potential) using both in situ
and laboratory-grown seedlings, which have been shown in prior studies to be
highly predictive of plant growth strategies and/or mortality responses in
different environments. Results from this project will be published in scholarly
journals, disseminated at regional and international conferences, and integrated
into undergraduate courses at Rider University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.