* 2217189
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Integrating Bio-inspired Innovation into Life Science Education Through Interdisciplinary Communities of Practice
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Douglas Williams, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 74,991.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
biological education through inclusion of biologically inspired design and
innovation principles and learning experiences. Bio-inspired design incorporates
our knowledge of biological systems into research and development to solve
problems and develop technical inventions and innovations. Bio-inspired
innovation, which has been responsible for the development of new materials,
medicines, and other materials that benefit society, has become an increasingly
important component of the biological field. However, understanding and applying
biologically inspired solutions may be underutilized in educational contexts.
The question this project will address is, how might undergraduate science
education include the understanding and application of bio-inspired design and
innovation in higher education coursework? This question will be addressed
through the creation and collaboration of a research network focused on
developing and sharing pedagogical practices for infusing bio-inspired
innovation in undergraduate biology. This RCN-UBE incubator network brings
together an interdisciplinary team of experts from across biology, engineering,
and education to address the challenges and opportunities of integrating
biologically inspired innovation into undergraduate biology and STEM teacher
preparation programs by identify key challenges and opportunities followed by
the development of preliminary pedagogical materials and a 5-year plan for
growth of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching project goal is to
improve undergraduate biological education through the infusion of bio-inspired
innovation in undergraduate biology programs and undergraduate teacher
preparation programs. This will be accomplished through the creation of an RCN-
UBE incubator network of experts from biology, engineering and education to (1)
Identify challenges, opportunities, and existing / desired resources for
integrating bio-inspired innovation in undergraduate biology education, (2)
Identify challenges and opportunities for improving diversity and inclusion of
educators and students in bio-inspired innovation in education, (3) Develop a
set of case studies, a synthesis of best pedagogical practices, and sample
resources for integration of bio-inspired design into post-secondary education,
and (4) Develop a 5-year plan for growth of the network and its work. By
strengthening the human and intellectual capital for integrating bio-inspired
innovation into undergraduate biology, this networking initiative will: 1)
Facilitate efforts by faculty to emphasize the connections between biology and
engineering design with their students; 2) Improve the overall representation
and practice of modern biology as interdisciplinary in nature; 3) Result in
enriched educational experiences for a more diverse and inclusive group of
undergraduates through pro-active focused outreach and network expansion of
faculty working with students from underrepresented groups; 4) Improve the life
science training of undergraduate students in pre-service teacher programs and
improve educational outcomes across the K-16 STEM pipeline; and 5) Catalyze new
efforts and opportunities for biology students and professionals to work with
others in adjacent STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.