* 2217478
* Perspective-Taking in Conversation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2025
* USD 381,911.00

Imagine taking your seat in an airplane and after exchanging pleasantries, your
seatmate tells you that they are a pilot. At this point, you might ask the
person something about what it's like to fly a plane or perhaps about where they
learned to fly. But where would that conversation have gone if your seatmate
instead told you she is a stay-at-home mom? In that case, you might ask how many
children she has, their ages, etc. That is, we can change the course of a
conversation “on-the-fly” in an informed and principled way, making inferences
and calculations about what other people might know and believe. Yet we know
little about the cognitive mechanisms that guide interactive conversation. To
date, most of the literature on conversational interaction focuses on the
information that the conversational partners know they share, also called the
"common ground." But how do we discover what information we share with a
conversational partner? And how do we figure out what information we probably
don't share? In this project, the investigator uses behavioral experiments to
determine how people form detailed, probabilistic representations of what their
conversational partner might know, as compared with what they themselves know.
Findings will provide insight into how these representations are used during
conversational interactions and how they influence memory for conversation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research probes the cognitive mechanisms that allow
people to engage in everyday conversation by exploring the idea that
conversational partners represent their own perspective in a situation, form a
representation of their partner's perspective, and compare the two, in order to
determine the differences and similarities. Twelve proposed experiments test
predictions of this perspective-comparison hypothesis and will provide insights
into how conversational partners ask and answer questions and how memory for
conversation is shaped. Broader impacts of the work include research training
for graduate students and a large cohort of undergraduates. In addition, several
high school students will participate in the research process from start to
finish. Students from under-represented and minoritized groups are recruited
locally and nationally. De-identified data and code will be made publicly
available along with study pre-registrations. Findings will advance
understanding of psychological and linguistic processes, advance the design of
computerized dialog systems, and offer insights into pedagogical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.