* 2217456
* Enhancing Synthetic Data Techniques for Practical Applications
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Yajuan Si, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This research project will advance statistical and computational methods for
releasing high quality synthetic data as public use files. In the face of high
and expanding risks of unintended and/or illegal disclosures, many data stewards
are considering synthetic public use files. These comprise simulated records,
with values generated from statistical models estimated with the confidential
data. This can reduce disclosure risks, since it can be difficult to re-identify
individuals and their sensitive attributes when the released values are
simulated. Despite growing interest in synthetic data solutions for data
dissemination, there are significant gaps in the theory and methods of synthetic
data that complicate and hinder practical implementations. This project will
address three critical yet unresolved topics in synthetic data, namely (1)
assessing data subjects' disclosure risks, (2) facilitating data analysts'
evaluation of their synthetic data inferences, and (3) generating synthetic
datasets in surveys with complex designs. The results of this research will
offer federal agencies, survey organizations, research centers, and other data
producers the means to create safer and more analytically useful synthetic data
products. In turn, this will help data stewards to better meet the challenges of
public use data dissemination. The project will train Ph.D. and undergraduate
students to become researchers in data privacy protection methods, thereby
contributing to the pipeline of experts in data privacy and in statistics and
data science more broadly. The project also will develop and disseminate
software code that implements the various approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will address three main questions. First, the project will
develop computational techniques for estimating Bayesian posterior probabilities
of disclosures; that is, probabilities that sensitive values can be learned from
the synthetic data releases. These techniques facilitate disclosure risk
assessment on datasets with many observations and many variables, thereby
allowing agencies to replace current ad hoc assessments with principled and
quantifiable measures of disclosure risk. Second, the project will develop novel
verification measures that data stewards can use to provide feedback to
secondary data analysts on the quality of their particular inferences without
leaking too much information about the confidential data. The new measures will
enable formally private verification of common survey-weighted estimation tasks.
Third, the project will develop new synthesis and inferential methods and
recommend best practices for incorporating complex survey designs in synthetic
data. These new methods will adapt Bayesian bootstraps, multiple imputation, and
multilevel regression and poststratification for data synthesis, while also
enabling the use of popular techniques from machine learning for generating
synthetic data in complex samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.