* 2217803
* 2022 Oceanographic Instrumentation R/V Atlantic Explorer
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 170,204.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on R/V Atlantic
Explorer, a 168â€™ general purpose research vessel owned and operated by Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS) as part of the United States Academic Research
Fleet (ARF). BIOS is a U.S. 501 (c) 3 and 509 (a) not-for-profit research and
educational institution incorporated in the state of New York, and
geographically located on the Island of Bermuda. The mission of the ship is to
support funded science research throughout the Central Atlantic but specifically
work in support of the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series (BATS) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, BIOS provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following
Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) LNP20 - Liquid Nitrogen Plant
$70,880&lt;br/&gt;2) WindSonic - Option 2, 2 x Multifunctional TFT Displays
$5,432&lt;br/&gt;3) SBE 32 Pylon, SBE43, SBE 38. $34,871&lt;br/&gt;4) WET Labs
C-Star Transmissometer (CST-25-PR), Flow Tube $7,446&lt;br/&gt;5) Teledyne RDI
Sentinel V100 300 Khz Real-Time ADCP $31,001&lt;br/&gt;6) 2 x MXO-4-Subconn-BIOS
Rotocon Rotary Electrical Connectors $4,800&lt;br/&gt;7) Dragonfish, various
cables and dummys $5,364&lt;br/&gt;8) 2 x Peplink Balance 580 Mid-sized Business
Router $17,350&lt;br/&gt; $177,144&lt;br/&gt; IDC $31,526&lt;br/&gt;
$208,670&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.