* 2217545
* Center: Track 4: Creating a Teaching Engineering Equity Center
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Lisa Lattuca, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,904.00

Engineering, as a discipline that seeks to improve the common good, should be
inclusive and equitable in its outcomes, education, and practice. Engineering,
however, doesn’t happen in a vacuum. The biases known to exist in society are
baked into the application of technologies and systems. One example is the
design of computer algorithms that benefit one group over another, whether it’s
the accuracy of facial recognition or decisions about job opportunities. When
engineers represent a small percentage of races, genders, abilities, ethnicities
and backgrounds, the needs of the population are not adequately considered. In
addition, the environments in which those engineers do their work are less
likely to be inclusive and free from behaviors that inhibit everyone’s ability
to do their best work. While engineering schools must provide the technical
training needed to convert the knowledge of nature into technology, engineering
education is incomplete without incorporating how the work integrates with other
fields such as ethics, social science, the humanities, and matters associated
with diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI). Michigan Engineering is taking a
people-first approach to engineering, preparing engineers to be socio-technical
experts who have a well-honed ability and desire to evaluate their work and its
impact on the world from multiple perspectives. This project will create the
Teaching Engineering Equity Center to improve inclusion and equity in
Engineering disciplines. The goal is to create teaching environments where
equity-centered values are present in both technical content and teaching style,
leading to engineering education where students from a variety of backgrounds
will experience inclusion and belonging, and engineering solutions that help to
close critical gaps and elevate all people. This work aligns with the NSF’s
Broadening Participation in Engineering Program objective to foster
collaboration that supports the professional development of a diverse and
prepared engineering workforce as well as innovative, if not revolutionary,
approaches to building capacity through inclusivity and equity within the
engineering academic experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
three specific objectives to address these challenges. The project team
will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Design an evidence-based framework for creating an equity in
engineering centered curriculum. The framework will center on the integration of
equity-based pedagogies and concepts from other disciplines and incorporate
inclusive teaching philosophies. It will include approaches to overcome the
cultural barriers to DEI in engineering, including the erroneous assumptions
that engineering is a purely rational endeavor, that technical considerations
have more value than social concerns, and that advancement in the field is based
on merit.&lt;br/&gt;2) Generate a library of DEI learning activities within
specific engineering contexts and disciplines. These modules will be designed to
integrate into discipline-specific technical courses. Such integration avoids
the "add-on" approach that makes DEI content seem less relevant. The modules
will allow instructors to demonstrate how social concerns and issues of equity
result in more effective technical designs.&lt;br/&gt;3) Develop a replicable
and adaptive training and implementation infrastructure to enable engineering
instructors and mentors to use the learning activities. Instructor training will
build on the Center for Research on Learning and Teaching in Engineering’s
modules created specifically for incorporating DEI concepts. The approach will
include the highly successful Teaching Circles for faculty peer mentoring on
effectively using the modules from the library.&lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation
will be centered on testing the hypothesis that our approach, embedding DEI
content directly into the engineering curriculum, both equips students and
instructors with strategies for equitable engineering practice and improves the
engineering climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.