* 2217953
* A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Mobility and Infectious Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Anne Stone, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,000.00

Tuberculosis is second only to COVID-19 as a worldwide cause of death by a
single pathogen. Its history reflects extraordinary resiliency, which involves a
remarkable number of nonhuman hosts in its global spread. This project, which
uses molecular and biogeochemical methods, extends knowledge of the history and
spread of tuberculosis in relationship to human mobility across ancient
communities from a diverse landscape. Studying humankind’s past experience with
epidemic disease over time encourages attention to the factors responsible for
disease spread and importance of viewing disease in the broadest possible
landscape—one that includes the environment and all microbes and potential
hosts. This study reaches the public through active websites, presentations,
publicly available YouTube videos in both English and Spanish, as well as in-
person presentations. The project fosters international research collaborations
and provides research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students and
professionals in molecular techniques, biogeochemical analyses, and data
analysis that will help them be competitive in the job market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study explores the spread of a form of tuberculosis
that severely affected communities throughout the Americas long before European
contact. In so doing, it considers intersecting identities and mobility
patterns, along with human interactions with other species (pinnipeds, bacteria)
in contrastive environmental settings. The database reflects a comprehensive
survey of a region with extensive evidence of ancient tuberculosis. By combining
molecular and skeletal evidence with biogeochemical indicators of paleomobility,
this research can characterize the complex cycles of tuberculosis introduction
and spread from a pinniped source along the coast to inland communities where it
apparently became a human disease. The study considers the complex routes by
which tuberculosis can spread across communities. Hypotheses specifically
address expected outcomes of ongoing introductions from sea mammals and humans
as novel primary hosts and disease spreaders. An important part of this project
is to characterize the mobility and interaction patterns of individuals and
communities that present evidence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex
diseases. Such evidence is crucial to developing nuanced models for disease
spread across time and space. The data generated and results are to be published
in peer-reviewed articles and formats accessible to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.