* 2217836
* Collaborative Research: Experimental deformation of monazite and titanite: Implications for interpretation of petrochronologic data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 368,315.00

The deformation behavior of rocks controls the strength of the lithosphere, the
location and intensity of earthquakes, the response of Earth to impact events,
and the concentration and deposition of ore minerals. To understand the
conditions and duration under which rocks deformed in the geologic past, and to
improve understanding of earthquake processes, mineral resource identification,
and crustal strength modelling, we will conduct a series of experiments on
minerals important for geologic age dating. These deformation experiments will
be conducted at conditions which simulate environments deep within the Earth’s
crust. The principal investigators will fabricate synthetic rock samples
embedded with natural mineral grains and use a rock deformation apparatus to
impose high stress and strain conditions typical of deep Earth shear zones. The
experiments will focus on the deformation behavior of accessory phase minerals
titanite and monazite, which are routinely used for petrochronology, a technique
which uses radiometric age dating to determine the timing of ancient metamorphic
reactions and deformation events. The deformation behavior of the major rock-
forming minerals (e.g., quartz, feldspar, olivine) has been well-studied, but
our experiments will be among the first to investigate the deformation behavior
of accessory phase minerals. Accessory phase minerals, such as monazite, are
reservoirs for Rare Earth Elements (REEs) and the results of our experiments
will provide better understanding of REE mobilization within fault zones.
Societal benefits of the project include direct training of graduate and
undergraduate students and a postdoctoral researcher in experimental and
analytical skills that are valuable in many high-level government, defense, and
industrial laboratories. Outreach efforts will involve developing earth science
curricula for Providence, RI elementary school. The Department of Earth,
Environmental and Planetary Sciences at Brown has an active outreach program
known as the Science-Teaching and Education Program (STEP), which partners with
local teachers to develop earth science modules in their classes. The project
will also contribute to the broadening of underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to experimentally deform a
selection of accessory phase minerals and use multiple advanced microanalytical
techniques to examine how various deformation and recrystallization mechanisms
affect the distribution of elements and isotopes important for geochronology.
The researchers will conduct a multi-step experimental protocol consisting of
deformation in a Griggs-rig solid medium deformation apparatus followed by high
temperature static annealing of a subset of samples. Accessory phases monazite
and titanite with well-characterized trace element contents will be embedded as
porphyroclasts in a matrix of quartz, synthetic quartz, or feldspar and deformed
under prescribed temperatures, pressures, and strain rate conditions. Multiple
advanced analytical techniques will allow us to investigate the composition and
structure of deformed samples from the aggregate to atomic scale. The principal
investigators will quantify the influence of lattice defects on the mobility of
impurity elements and consequences of recrystallization for interpreting the
geochemistry of deformed minerals. Our results will provide fundamental
constraints on the rheological behavior of accessory phase minerals and enable
more confident applications of accessory phase geochronology and geothermometry
to deformed rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.