* 2217434
* BRC-BIO: Neuroendocrinology of flying squirrel social behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Angela Freeman, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2025
* USD 480,233.00

The southern flying squirrel is a common native species in the eastern half of
the United States. These squirrels selectively nest with un-related individuals
throughout the year. It has been assumed that these squirrels co-nest because
when they huddle together, they can keep warm and save energy. However, research
has shown that these squirrels continue to group in warm latitudes and during
summer months. Instead, it appears that these squirrels form selective
‘friendships’ and choose specific squirrels to huddle in the nest with
throughout the year. This project will examine how hormones and the brain affect
this nesting behavior, using the flying squirrel as a model of friendship in
non-kin. The aims of this research are to quantify the effects of specific
hormones in the brain (oxytocin and vasopressin) on this behavior and to
characterize how sensitivity to these hormones in the brain changes, including
seasonaly, to facilitate co-nesting in flying squirrels. These data will help
determine how the brain functions to support non-familial (i.e., ‘friendship-
like’) relationships and social behaviors. This project supports engaging
undergraduates in hands-on neuroscience research through paid research
opportunities and a capstone project. Finally, though the flying squirrel is
locally abundant, most Marylanders have never seen a flying squirrel nor are
they aware that flying squirrels are living in the local forests. Through
outreach at the local zoo, the research team will share the wonders of the
flying squirrel with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the body of work
on the mechanisms of recognition, memory, and familial bonding, we lack
understanding of the neural processes in selective, affiliative relationships.
Therefore, this work will bridge this gap by studying the role of the
nonapeptides, oxytocin and vasopressin, in the regulation of non-familial
selective affiliation using the flying squirrel as a model. This project employs
three strategies: First, the impacts of intranasal oxytocin or antagonist on
communal nesting behavior will be examined. Second, fluorescent co-labeling of
nonapeptide-expressing neurons and immediate early gene expression will be used
to identify brain regions where the nonapeptides are released during co-nesting.
Finally, the impact of season (i.e., photoperiod) on the presence and density of
nonapeptide receptors will be determined, and examined in relation to co-nesting
behaviors across the seasons. To understand the unifying principles of the
evolution of sociality, robust, experimental data are needed from species with
behaviors that range from asocial to gregarious. This work will fill a critical
gap in this field by studying the neural mechanisms of sociality via long-term
affiliative relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.