* 2217574
* Antarctic Ice Front, Shelf and Grounding Line Dynamics from High-resolution, Commercial Satellite Imagery and Elevation Data
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ian Howat, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2025
* USD 386,467.00

Predictions of sea-level rise depend on the response of Antarctica’s ice shelves
to changes in the ocean and atmosphere. Thinning and collapse of these ice
shelves may lead to rapid, runaway retreat of the ice sheet. It is therefore
critical to understand the processes controlling ice-shelf stability. Many of
these processes, such as ice rifting and crevassing, occur too quickly or are
too small to be seen in most satellite images, but are also too large and remote
to measure in the field. The NSF-supported Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) has
compiled a massive archive of high-resolution satellite imagery and surface-
elevation data collected from commercial satellites, spanning over a decade,
that can fill this observational gap and improve our understanding of ice-shelf
change. This project will provide a first, comprehensive application of
commercial satellite imagery, in combination with other datasets, to measure
changes in Antarctic ice shelves and potential impacts to ice-sheet stability.
This project will also include undergraduate and graduate students and leverage
existing resources at the Byrd Polar and Climate Research Center for education
and outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the PGC archive
of commercial satellite imagery (CSI) and high-resolution digital elevation
models to measure surface features, flow and strain rates, and surface elevation
change, with high spatial and temporal resolution, at a set of critical
Antarctic ice shelves. A set of measurement objectives will be used to assess
the capabilities of CSI for resolving significant changes in grounding lines,
ice shelves, and ice mélange. The team will use these measurements to address
outstanding science questions regarding the interaction between the ice shelf
and grounding line, the structural and dynamic evolution of ice shelves and
mélange, and ice-front stability. We will combine our measurements with
complementary datasets, such as ICESat-2 altimetry and ice velocity from Landsat
and Sentinel satellite constellations, as well as airborne measurements from
NASA’s Operation IceBridge, to provide a more comprehensive record of change.
This project will produce visuals, including three-dimensional fly-throughs,
that will be used in outreach activities to spark interest in Antarctic science
among diverse populations. This project will support the training of a graduate
student and will develop methods for utilizing CSI in glaciology and related
applications. Finally, the results will help guide the PGC’s future CSI tasking
and data production strategies to best serve science community
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.