* 2217554
* Neural discovery of abstract inflectional structure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Andrea Sims, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2026
* USD 332,988.00

In many languages, words have different forms based on their grammatical role in
a sentence. For instance, verbs in Standard English have different forms when
the subject is "I/you/we/they" versus "she/he/it" ("I walk", "she walks").
Because many languages have a large number of infrequently used words and many
forms of these words, speakers may not be able to memorize all of these forms
and must predict some. This project uses computational techniques to measure how
predictable the grammatical forms of words are and what information about words
(e.g., their sound structure, meaning, or distribution of grammatical forms)
contributes to form predictability. The project improves on previous techniques
by accounting for cases where unpredictable forms appear in predictable places.
For instance, the English verb "sing" has the irregular past tense "sang" and
participle "sung". If we know that the verb "give" has an irregular past tense
"gave", this (by analogy) increases the chance that the participle is irregular
as well, even though the irregular forms involved are different. The project
conducts a broad survey of world languages, as well as more focused study of two
language families: Romance and Semitic. The project contributes to scientific
understanding of the ways in which languages differ from one another and in what
respects all human languages must be similar. The project develops practical
prediction systems which can be used to improve the ability of technology
applications (e.g. automated translators, speech transcription apps, or
assistants like Alexa that generate fluent original speech) to handle rare word
forms. It also trains a graduate student in advanced computational skills
relevant to the technology industry, and the researchers plan to discuss the
project in public events designed to engage the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how inflectional
organization facilitates or inhibits the task of predicting previously
unobserved inflected forms of words. The extent to which distributional
principles shape inflectional organization, facilitate prediction of grammatical
forms, and interact with other aspects of morphological organization are
typologically not well understood. Drawing on a long history of memory-rich
analogical models in morphology, the project develops a computational model
which distinguishes between abstract/distributional morphological operations and
morphophonological surface form, allowing an independent analysis of the
relative difficulty of predicting each dimension. The model is used to conduct a
large-scale typological study. This award impacts society in three ways. First,
products from this research contribute to computational tools for under-
resourced languages, for which inflected form prediction is challenging. All
research software created is made publicly available with open-access
permissions. Second, the project provides interdisciplinary STEM training.
Third, the project supports outreach activities that promote the importance of
language diversity and scientific investigation of language via public
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.