* 2217492
* Planning for National Ultrahigh Field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Network
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Tatyana Polenova, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

With support from both the Division of Biological Infrastructure and the
Division of Materials Research, an award is made to the University of Delaware
to design and develop plans for a national network of ultrahigh field (UHF)
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer facilities. The overall goal of
the project will be to create the most powerful NMR network in the world with
comprehensive resources and expertise, spanning key areas of NSF interest, that
will be accessible to the entire scientific community within the United States.
Gains in sensitivity, resolution, and information content are highly nonlinear
with magnetic field strength, and ultrahigh fields combined with state-of-the-
art NMR probes and pulse sequences will enable fundamental investigations, with
atomic resolution, of emergent phenomena not accessible with the current
technologies. State-of-the-art UHF NMR instruments will be sited at
strategically located public institutions geographically distributed across the
US. The NMR network will be made available to researchers across multiple
disciplines for advancing the development and use of in vivo, in vitro, in situ,
solution, and solid-state NMR spectroscopy to address diverse problems of high
fundamental and technological importance. Instruments will be connected through
a central cyberinfrastructure hub and integrated with other high-field and UHF
NMR instrumentation. The proposed nationwide UHF NMR network will enable experts
and non-experts to access both UHF NMR instruments and a diversity of NMR
expertise. The intellectual framework established through the proposed network
will provide unique training for students in state- of-the-art NMR methods and
applications. The outreach program encompassing training in NMR instrumentation
and application of NMR methods will be invaluable for the development of the
next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning the UHF NMR network
will set the stage to address the urgent nationwide need for ultrahigh field NMR
infrastructure. The planning activities supported by this award will identify
the primary scientific, technical and system performance requirements and
associated designs and specifications for the UHF NMR network. Through these
activities, the researchers will formulate a plan to execute and manage the UHF
NMR network, including a project schedule with identified risks and plans to
mitigate them, a governance plan and effective project management methods for
tracking progress, costs and performance. Outcomes from this effort will include
sound baseline cost estimates for implementation and anticipated operations and
maintenance costs. The researchers will also develop plans for effective student
training and the involvement of a diverse workforce in instrumentation, facility
development, and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.