* 2217698
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Improved Modeling of Medical Decision-Making around Maternal Health Care
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Vania Smith-Oka, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This research aims to improve scientific understanding of the variables that
contribute to the distrust of mainstream medical and scientific knowledge.
Research has shown that mistrust in mainstream medicine is increasing among
communities who tend to be socially, economically, and politically powerful, and
that these beliefs are associated in certain contexts with public health events,
such as outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases. An improved understanding of
how social factors can render resistance to medical authority attractive can
uncover ways to better understand, predict, and address mistrust in medicine and
science more broadly. This project provides a scalable set of methodological and
theoretical innovations aimed at understanding resistance to mainstream medicine
that will provide frameworks to help researchers better understand medical
mistrust in other communities. In addition to training a doctoral student in
qualitative and quantitative data collection methods and anthropological theory,
the results of this research will be disseminated broadly to scholarly, medical,
and lay communities.

Specifically, this project focuses on medical decision-making during pregnancy,
birth, infancy, and early childhood (when questions of routine vaccinations must
be addressed), among a community that has not been historically mistreated by
biomedical research, but where medical mistrust has been observed in prior
research. It will investigate potential overlap between preferring non-
mainstream care during birth and being mistrustful of mainstream medicine more
generally. Investigators use ethnographic, pile sorts, and survey methodologies
to examine whether and how medical decisions that reject the authority of
mainstream medicine might be shaped by shared, subjective, and local ontologies,
whether there are social and epistemological characteristics that distinguish
mistrustful communities from others, and what characteristics might make medical
interventions in pregnancy and early childhood more, or less, acceptable.
Findings from this project will improve anthropological understandings about
resistance to medical authority, how people make medical decisions, and how
groups perceive and engage (or not) with mainstream medicine and other powerful
social institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.