* 2217786
* RII Track-2 FEC: Laying the Foundation for Scalable Quantum Photonic Technologies
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Chitraeema Chakraborty, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Quantum information promises revolutionary advances in computation,
communication, and sensing. By harnessing unique quantum mechanical properties,
it is possible to attain exponential computational speedup, construct a quantum
internet that sends information securely and anonymously, and enable sensors
with precision that is orders of magnitude better than existing classical
technologies. Although we have witnessed tremendous progress towards realizing
such quantum technology goals in the past several years, we have yet to realize
their full promise. This project is focused on realizing a scalable foundation
for quantum photonic technologies. Photonics is a field based on manipulating
and controlling the propagation of light, and photonic-based quantum
technologies are one of the most promising for realizing mid-scale quantum
technologies for sensing and quantum communication. This interjurisdictional
effort between the University of New Mexico (UNM) and University of Delaware
(UD) is focused on controlling the materials used to emit and absorb light, the
location and wavelength of these light emission sites, and their integration
into other photonic device components that can control how that light is
distributed or manipulated. The project includes (1) developing student talent
in a key area of national research need through the establishment of
assistantships that will allow students to conduct research in this area and (2)
the establishment of a quantum science and engineering graduate program at
University of New Mexico (UNM) based on the new program recently established at
the University of Delaware (UD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonics based quantum
technologies are one of the most promising branches, with the ability to realize
devices on current CMOS and III-V type platforms. However, the research effort
on this front is highly distributed, with some institutions focusing on the
computational aspects, some on the fundamental material science problems, and
others on the integration of devices to demonstrate photonic qubit systems. This
project will establish an interjurisdictional effort between the University of
New Mexico (UNM) and University of Delaware (UD) to realize a foundational
program for scalable quantum photonics technologies. The intellectual foci of
the effort include – (1) an integrated approach to overcoming the site- and
spectral-inhomogeneity challenges that currently hamper the development of
scalable quantum photonic material and device platforms; (2) coordinated efforts
to develop and explore quantum emitters in both 2D and III-V materials,
including first-principles calculations, materials synthesis, and quantum
emitter characterization; (3) development of photonic device components
including plasmonics, Kerr-microresonators for photon transduction, and
superconducting single photon detectors; (4) leveraging the complementary
expertise of UNM and UD to integrate photonic device components with quantum
emitter materials. This integration will be used to demonstrate a) site-
deterministic quantum emission into photonic device elements, b) capacity to
tune or transduce single photon wavelengths to overcome spectral inhomogeneity,
and c) all-on-chip deterministic generation, routing, and detection of single
photons. Project plans include strong educational and work-force development
programs, including the implementation of new graduate degree programs tailored
to the skills required by the “Quantum Workforce,” that will train the next
generation of leaders in quantum photonics
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.