* 2217648
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) 2022: University of Washington - R/V Thompson and R/V Carson
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 382,852.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington for Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment (SSSE) on R/V Thompson, a 274-foot general purpose, global
class research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal
research vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).
In 2021, Thompson completed 296 funded days with 224 (76%) of them for NSF. For
2022, the vessel is scheduled for 283 total days with 241 (85%) days for NSF.
Carson had 73 days in 2021 with 22 (30%) for NSF. For 2022, there are 131 days
scheduled, 69 (53%) of which are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
proposal, UW provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition
of the following Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Uncontaminated Seawater System on R/V Rachel Carson $41,000&lt;br/&gt;2) (2) new
CTD wire (0.322‚Äù) blocks for R/V Thomas G. Thompson $29,145&lt;br/&gt;3)
Diaphragm Pump and spares for R/V Thomas G. Thompson $10,207&lt;br/&gt;4) Survey
for EM2040 Multibeam System on R/V Rachel Carson $50,000&lt;br/&gt;5) Starboard
Aft Main Deck Crane on R/V Thomas G. Thompson $252,500&lt;br/&gt;
$382,852&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present
proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF
13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and
its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.