* 2217440
* Trustworthy Reinforcement Learning for Online Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Wei Sun, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

This research project will advance the frontiers of modern reinforcement
learning for online decision-making problems. Reinforcement learning deals with
how intelligent agents ought to take actions in an uncertain environment in
order to maximize the cumulative reward. It has achieved phenomenal success in
diverse business and scientific fields. However, less attention has been paid to
the trustworthy aspects of reinforcement learning. This project will investigate
different aspects of trustworthy issues like robustness, fairness, causality,
and explainability in important online decision-making tasks. The results of
this research will benefit many different fields such as statistics, machine
learning, operations research, marketing, economics, and finance. Open-source
software will be developed to provide applied researchers with cutting-edge
tools. The project will recruit students, especially those from unrepresented
groups, to be involved in the research and will develop new courses on
statistical reinforcement learning and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will focus on three
interconnected trustworthy reinforcement learning methods for online decision-
making problems: dynamic pricing, dynamic assortment selection, and matching in
two-sided markets. Issues of robustness, fairness, causality, and explainability
will be addressed in these decision-making tasks, which will advance the
exploration techniques used in existing reinforcement learning algorithms. The
project will develop new theoretical tools to analyze the statistical properties
of these modern reinforcement learning algorithms. Regret upper bounds and
matching lower bound will be thoroughly investigated. One important goal of
online decision making is to identify an optimal policy that maximizes the
overall gain, based on the contextual information and historical interactions
with the environment. Due to the complex nature of such problems, there is a
high demand for trustworthy tools for learning optimal personalized policy in
various settings. The knowledge gained from this research will benefit learning
in online auctions and other complex market design
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.