* 2217901
* BRC-BIO: Familiarity with friends: Transgenerational effects as a mechanism for partner choice in the legume-rhizobia mutualism
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chandra Jack, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2025
* USD 452,947.00

Mutualisms are of fundamental importance and found at every organismal level,
where they facilitate the fitness and survival of the interacting partners. For
example, nitrogen is an essential nutrient required for plant growth, yet the
most abundant form is inaccessible to plants, making it a limiting resource.
Legumes have overcome this limitation by forming beneficial partnerships with
symbiotic bacteria, known as rhizobia, where they receive usable nitrogen in
exchange for carbon metabolites. The problem is that prior to establishing the
relationship, the plant has no information about the quality of its partner.
Choosing the right mutualistic bacterial partner, while excluding parasitic
bacteria, is essential because the process to form the mutualistic relationship
requires the plant to expend energy that could otherwise be used for growth.
Many legume species already show some degree of specificity using signaling to
limit partnership with compatible rhizobia species. Once the partnership is
initiated, there is additional molecular signaling that triggers the plant
immune system. Either type of signaling may leave an imprint or memory on the
host plant that is specific to individual rhizobia strains. This study examines
the hypothesis that this memory may be heritable and help future generations of
the host plant choose beneficial strains due to familiarity, giving a better
understanding of non-genetic heritability and providing insight into the
maintenance of mutualistic relationships. This project also provides
undergraduate students with funded research experience, which has been shown to
improve diversity and increase retention in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
origination and maintenance of mutualisms presents an evolutionary conundrum as
both partners are expected to act in their own self-interest. As with all
mutualisms, there is a risk of the host being exploited by their partner leading
to the breakdown of the relationship. The ability to choose a faithful and
beneficial partner can stabilize the partnership. However, the mechanism that
allows for partner choice has not yet been uncovered in the legume-rhizobia
mutualism, despite evidence that host plants are able to preferentially nodulate
with more beneficial partners. This project examines the prediction that the
selected partner will likely be determined through a combination of genetic
(host plant and rhizobia genes), epigenetic and environmental elements. Using
the bearded clover, Trifolium barbigerum, the research team will determine
whether transgenerational effects from previous generations can influence the
host plant’s choice of symbiotic partner. This project will quantify nodule
occupancy to determine whether previous exposure to a strain and its efficacy
inform host plant selection using a combination of fluorescent labeling, qPCR
and metabarcoding to distinguish rhizobia at the strain
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.