* 2217221
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the geometry of magmatic plumbing systems using fluid inclusions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hector Lamadrid, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2025
* USD 179,409.00

Constraining the depth at which magma feeding volcanic eruptions is stored in
the crust is critical both for volcano monitoring agencies to interpret unrest
signals during volcanic crises, and for our understanding of the formation of
energy-critical metal deposits and the evolution of the Earth’s crust. However,
popular techniques using earthquakes and ground deformation to obtain storage
depths cannot be used at many potentially hazardous volcanoes which show little
activity at present, or have limited monitoring networks. More widely applicable
methods which measure the chemistry of erupted crystals are associated with
large uncertainty. This team will investigate a powerful but under-used approach
in volcanology, by measuring the densities of pockets of gas-rich fluids trapped
within growing crystals, known as fluid inclusions (FI). This method has the
potential to be significantly more precise and accurate, placing very tight
constraints on where magma is stored in the crust. After investigating the
strengths and weaknesses of depths from FIs using eruptions from Hawai’i and
Canary Islands as a case study (where storage depths have been determined by
other methods), magma storage depths will be investigated in a series of
explosive eruptions that occurred several centuries ago at both locations where
future eruptions of this type present a significant hazard. A rapid response
simulation will be carried out in collaboration with Hawaiian Volcano
Observatory (HVO) to determine just how quickly estimates of magma storage
depths can be obtained during the next large eruptive crisis, and how this
information can be used to inform decision making to mitigate societal risk.
This proposal will foster close collaborations between three PIs with
complimentary scientific expertise at different career levels, and support
several students and a postdoc in a multi-tiered mentoring structure spanning
three institutions. The team will develop and distribute synthetic and natural
fluid inclusions to be used as calibration standards, and a workshop will
promote collaboration and synergy between different research groups using Raman
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will capitalize on recent advances
in the spectral and spatial resolution of confocal Raman spectroscopy, allowing
highly precise and accurate measurements of the densities of CO2-rich fluids
trapped within fluid inclusions down to ~ 1 µm in size. The simple physical
relationship between the density and pressure of a CO2-rich fluid means that
distributions of FI densities can be converted into magma storage pressures with
very small errors (~5-10%), and then magma storage depths using known crustal
density profiles. First, detailed comparisons of depths obtained from FIs will
be compared to published work investigating melt inclusion saturation pressures
in samples from Kīlauea Volcano, Hawai’i, and Timanfaya, Canary Islands. This
will permit assessment of sources of uncertainty affecting FI barometry such as
decrepitation (when the inclusion explodes) using high-resolution electron
backscatter diffraction (HR-EBSD), and the presence of additional volatile
species (e.g., S, Cl, H) using synthetic FIs equilibrated with different fluid
compositions. After determining the strengths and weaknesses of fluid inclusion
barometry, new constraints will be placed on changes in magmatic plumbing during
explosive to effusive transitions at Kīlauea Volcano (a significant societal
hazard), evolution from shield to post-shield in the Galápagos, and from unknown
samples during an eruption simulation in collaboration with HVO. Synthetic FIs
with different concentrations of CO2 will be synthesized and characterized with
an experimentally calibrated Raman system to distribute to laboratories around
the world to use as standard reference materials for calibration of Raman
Spectrometers. This will eliminate systematic offsets between densities
determined in different laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.