* 2217741
* Center: Track 4: Learning to Serve: A Center for Equity in Engineering at an Emerging MSI
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,193,572.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the initial
steps to create a Center for Equity in Engineering at the University of Texas at
Austin (UT-Austin) with a centering vision that diversity, equity, and inclusion
are the responsibility of everyone within the university’s engineering
community. The efforts as part of this project lay the groundwork for the center
by focusing on recruiting and supporting Hispanic/Latino and Black/African
American undergraduate and graduate students. Rather than establishing a catalog
of new programs, this effort seeks to learn from partner minority-serving
institutions to establish the infrastructure to ultimately support students,
staff, and faculty in contributing to building an inclusive culture that
provides students opportunities to develop and hone technical and professional
skills while also establishing their identities as professional engineers.
Funding this effort to establish a Center for Equity in Engineering at UT-Austin
will strengthen the engineering workforce by providing equitable pathways for
all students, with a particular focus on increasing inclusion of Hispanic/Latino
and Black/African American undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support our vision, the center will support
UT-Austin Engineering faculty, staff, and students in doing the work of DEI as
part of their regular jobs and engagement in our community. The objective of the
Center is to catalyze a culture change in UT-Austin Engineering by leveraging a
servingness learning organization framework to recruit, support, nurture, and
matriculate a diverse community of students. An important metric will be to more
closely align the representation of Hispanic/Latino and Black/African American
engineering undergraduate and graduate students with that of the State of Texas
population of 18–22-year-olds. Our efforts are organized around three pillars:
(1) new and expanded student, staff, and faculty learning opportunities around
integrating equity and inclusion into engineering professional practice,
teaching, and an individual’s role in the institution; (2) intentionally
designed support structures that acknowledge the priorities of the institution
and its individuals, consider these priorities in creating opportunities for
participation in outreach and recruiting events, and provide support (including
funding) for new initiatives envisioned by members of the UT-Austin Engineering
community; and (3) improved and expanded expectations and accountability for all
members of the UT-Austin Engineering community, including revisions to student
learning outcomes, faculty review processes, staff job descriptions, and
recognitions for efforts above and beyond. The information learned from this
project will be disseminated to others via presentations, workshops and
publications so that the best practices learned from this project can be used
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.