* 2217765
* When the host is the ecosystem: linking presence of a keystone fungal symbiont to mycobiome structure and function in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Sarah Emery, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 864,975.00

Plants are colonized by diverse microscopic fungi that can improve plant growth,
protect plants from diseases or pests, and help plants tolerate stressful
environments. While many kinds of fungi live together inside of plants,
scientists are still trying to understand how different types of fungi interact,
how those interactions affect plants, and whether these fungal interactions can
be manipulated to help plants thrive in a changing world. This research will use
powerful genetic and mathematical tools to investigate fungi living in the
leaves and roots of the common dune-building plant, American Beachgrass, in the
Great Lakes region. The researchers will examine how fungi interact inside
plants to cause physical and chemical changes to the plant host, which can
affect plant survival. Additionally, the researchers will test if environmental
changes such as increased air pollution will affect the nature of these
interactions. The research will provide crucial insights into the complex world
of microorganisms living inside plants, and has implications for habitat
restoration in dune and coastal ecosystems, which are critical to the economic
and environmental health of the United States. Finally, this project will
provide training to the next generation of scientists. The researchers will
launch the “BioBridge” program, a field-based experience that will provide a
foundation for the success of historically excluded and lower socioeconomic
status biology students, while building community and a sense of belonging in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this research is
that a vertically-transmitted endophyte (Epichloë) acts as a keystone mycobiome
engineer of a foundational dune grass species (Ammophila) by modifying host
plant chemical and physical traits, with cascading implications for host and
macro-ecosystem function. First, a metabarcoding approach will be used to survey
the leaf and root fungal endophytes and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi associated
with Epichloë-infected and uninfected Ammophila. Ecological networks will be
built to contextualize aboveground-belowground species interactions and develop
a predictive understanding of how Epichloë modifies multispecies interactions
via changes to network structure. Second, a long-term nitrogen deposition
experiment will test the mechanisms by which resource availability and
colonization by Epichloë affect the Ammophila mycobiome. Physical and chemical
host traits will be measured and used to construct structural equation models
that examine relationships among chemical and physical plant traits. Finally, a
growth chamber experiment will be coupled with a field experiment to test
whether changes to the mycobiome associated with Epichloë presence are directly
responsible for improved Ammophila survival and growth. This work will have
implications for habitat restoration in dune and coastal ecosystems, which are
critical to the economic and environmental health of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.