* 2217522
* Unpacking Compound Treatments in Email Audit Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tirthankar Dasgupta, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 403,882.00

This research project will improve the design and analysis of audit experiments.
Audit experiments are tools used to test for discriminatory behavior in
situations where surveys and interviews can induce social desirability bias and
are known to make strong causal claims. However, a common issue in audit
experiments is the potential confounding of interventions with other attributes.
For example, researchers often use names to signal race, but names may also
signal other attributes, such as socio-economic status. Using other signals like
income or occupation as additional interventions may help disentangle the effect
of race from socio-economic status. This project will develop improved design
and methodology for disentangling the effects of potential confounders from
interventions of interest by incorporating such confounders as additional
interventions. The methods to be developed will be applied to the study of the
effects of race and related socio-economic factors on access to legal services.
Understanding discrimination in the market for legal services is important
because access to lawyers is a crucial first step for individuals to participate
in the justice system. The project also will support training and engagement
with audit studies through the involvement of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop methods to
address the complex problems in design and analysis that result from audit
experiments having a factorial structure. These methods will include designing
optimal factorial experiments that maximize information under resource
constraints, development of appropriate statistical models for assessing causal
effects of interventions, and data analysis procedures consistent with the
design. The modern theory of causal inference and randomized experiments will
serve as the foundation for the new methods. Analysis methods will be developed
to assess causal effects of interventions on a selected group of subjects
(finite population) as well as on a larger superpopulation from which such
subjects can be assumed to be randomly selected. Methods for model-free
(randomization-based) and model-based assessment of causal effects will be
developed. The investigators also will explore methodology to extend design and
analysis of audit experiments with binary or two-level interventions to the case
of multilevel interventions. The new methods will be applied to an audit
experiment to assess racial discrimination in response to requests for legal
services, using names on emails to signal race. The results of this research
will provide critical evidence for the study of racial discrimination in law and
access to the justice system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.