* 2217370
* RCN-UBE: Alaska Undergraduate Research Experience: Partnering for Alaska Students by Growing Recruitment and Retention through Undergraduate Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Alison Gardell, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,312.00

Connecting students from diverse backgrounds to place-based research with
culturally responsive mentors is one approach for increasing retention in the
biological sciences. Alaska is home to 228 federally recognized Alaska Native
tribes and includes some of the most diverse institutions in the country. This
high level of student diversity is not reflected in the available pool of
scientific mentors, which identifies the need to provide culturally responsible
mentor training for more Alaskan researchers. By providing researchers with
mentorship training, this project, AK UNiTE, aims to enhance the interest of
Alaskan students, particularly those from historically marginalized groups, in
participating in biological research in academic and other sectors in Alaska.
Ultimately, this work is expected to prepare a greater number of Alaskans for
STEM careers and transform scientific understanding by incorporating historical
and holistic place-based knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AK UNiTE will
undertake three major objectives during its five years of funding. First,
multiple cohorts of network members in the Alaska research community will
participate in culturally sensitive mentorship training to improve existing
research opportunities for Alaskan students. Second, AK UNiTE will work
collaboratively with all research-minded stakeholders (undergraduate students,
faculty, and non-academic research partners, including state, federal, and
tribal agencies) to ensure sustainable communication to define challenges,
identify the opportunities, and create conditions to support undergraduate
researchers and their mentors. Regular virtual meetings and forums will provide
a platform for the continual evolution of ideas that support current and future
cultural mentoring practices in biological research. Finally, researchers will
be incentivized to collaborate with faculty to incorporate relevant and
appropriate research components into 100- and 200-level introductory science
courses. The project will be assessed annually by a third-party evaluator to
ensure progress towards these overarching objectives. Overall, the goal of AK
UNiTE is to be a bridge connecting undergraduate Alaskan students with
culturally relevant place-based research opportunities and mentorship, thereby
increasing retention in the biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/), and by the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, Ethical and
Responsible Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.