* 2217824
* FII Track-2 FEC: Facilitating Ubiquitous Technology Utilizing Resilient Eco-friendly Sensors
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Harish Subbaraman, Louisiana Tech University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2026
* USD 3,050,897.00

Water pollution is a widespread problem. According to a recent Gallup Poll,
ground and drinking water pollution are Americans' top environmental concerns.
Some of the most serious pollutants include pesticides and heavy metals, such as
lead and arsenic. These substances not only get into our drinking water, but
their accumulation in plants and animals can make food unsafe in many
communities, adversely affecting human health. Yet, bodies of water are often
tested only once a year due to manual collection procedures and large, costly
equipment to measure pollutants. This project will create small, printable
sensors to simultaneously measure toxic heavy metals and pesticides on-site to
enable widespread environmental surveillance in bodies of water, and to measure
levels of heavy metals in human populations. The project will recruit and train
a diverse workforce to design, test, and produce these new types of sensors.
Through collaborations at four universities, the project will leverage the
unique skills and facilities at Boise State University, Louisiana Tech
University, the University of Alabama at Birmingham, and the University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences to produce and test the sensors. In addition to
traditional K-12 outreach activities and recruitment to increase diversity in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), this project has
developed a novel, hybrid pre-mentoring research experience (PRE Program) to
recruit and train underrepresented minority students that will enhance training
and increase retention. The PRE Program will be run by the University of
Arkansas at Pine Bluff, an HBCU institution. Students will engage in learning
and professional development activities for several months prior to working in
one of the other four universities for a summer research experience, gaining
essential knowledge and experience to ensure success in a STEM career.
Furthermore, the project leadership will work with economic development teams to
establish manufacturing capabilities to commercialize the sensors for large
global markets and to employ project trainees, which will amplify investment in
this project. The sensors have the potential to enable a future convergence with
the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, and consumer cell phone apps to
provide widespread surveillance and analysis of environmental toxins in water
and in human populations. This convergence will create new research and
commercialization opportunities contributing to the sustainability of the
project beyond the life of the award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance chemical and materials engineering, sensor design, environmental
research, and human safety. Our research will produce databases of eco-friendly,
printable sensor inks for microelectronic devices and functionalized photonic
carbon dots for detection of toxic chemicals, as well as electronic and photonic
sensor detection methods for multianalyte measurements. Using this fundamental
research, the project team will design and optimize economical, multianalyte,
eco-friendly sensors that avoid or use only a minute amount of precious metals.
The project will develop non-invasive, human HM sensors for on-site use in the
home and in community screening clinics. Sensors will be deployed to areas with
toxic spills or persistent leakage to evaluate initial exposure and monitor
exposure over time, and to gage the progress of remediation procedures. This
research project will (1) provide a fundamental understanding of the emergent
electrochemical properties of nanocomposite network coatings (NNCs) that avoid
or use only minute amounts of precious metals versus Si-based sensors; (2)
discover catalytic effects of NNC inks and their sensing mechanisms; (3) develop
optimal jet printing parameters for NNC inks; (4) explore novel dopant and
functionalization methods for luminescent carbon dot (CD) sensors, including
upcycling of papermill and plastics industry waste; (5) learn how the electronic
energy gap shifts between functionalized CDs and specific heavy metals; and (6)
optimize sensing parameters for multianalyte detection for printed ink and CD
sensors. These economical sensors will enable wider use and more frequent
monitoring of toxic chemicals which will facilitate a greater understanding of
the impact of human activity in the environment and how to minimize the spread
of toxic chemicals to humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.