* 2217472
* Supply Chain Decision Making Framework Considering Uncertainty
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 417,504.00

COVID-19 has exacerbated an already fragile supply chain network for many of
today’s everyday goods, food supplies, specialty chemicals, fuels, electronics
components, and pharmaceuticals. The pandemic tested the flexibility and
resilience of global supply chains as major international corporations
experienced personnel shortages and other unexpected disruptions to their
operations. These challenges motivate a vision for a restructured supply chain
of the future, characterized by flexibility and fast adaptability to abrupt
changes. To accomplish this, the decision-making time horizon, enterprise
complexity, and objectives of the enterprise must be considered when developing
a strategy for controlling individual manufacturing units, scheduling tasks in a
manufacturing plan to meet product demand, and planning at the enterprise
management level to ensure that raw materials are available throughout the
supply chain. This research program will develop methodologies and frameworks
that target the modernization of the enterprise structure to account for
uncertainty and more closely integrate different levels of the supply chain for
purified gas and pharmaceutical manufacturing and plastics recycling operations.
This will allow for more efficient use of resources, avoid unnecessary waste,
and compensate for expected and unexpected events to avoid the breakdown of the
supply chain. The research will take place at the University of Delaware and
will provide the funds to educate graduate and undergraduate students in this
interdisciplinary domain. The PI has a long history of promoting women and
underrepresenting minorities in their work. Results from this research will be
translated into software tools useful to industry for making better supply chain
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous attempts to integrate process models,
scheduling methods, planning problems and supply chain optimization focused on
small scale benchmark problems and were based either on using intuition to
incorporate full-scale representations of the lower-level problems into higher
levels or used mathematical simplifications of the lower levels to facilitate
integration. In this research program, a new approach to integrating decision-
making processes is proposed that leverages the large amount of information that
typically is available in enterprises and generates decision-making strategies
that account for uncertainty in a computationally tractable manner. The PI has
extensive expertise in the integration of planning, scheduling, and control
problems, as well as in the areas of feasibility analysis and uncertainty
quantification. It is proposed that integration and optimization can be achieved
by first defining mathematical models for the optimization of each decision-
making stage, and then identifying constraints that are dependent on lower-level
problems. Among other factors, the feasibility of the lower-level problems is
identified as essential information that must be incorporated in the higher-
level decision. These constraints are usually complex in form and cannot be
accounted for without increasing the dimensionality of the optimization problem
and generating intractable formulations. Therefore, it will be demonstrated that
data-driven models can be used to obtain simpler forms for the interdependent
constraints. These models will be created with the data available from the
enterprise, leveraging the potential of big-data analytics and the internet of
things. The effects of uncertainty are key to the performance of optimal
decisions in the supply chain. In this research program, strategies to minimize
the threats posed by operational and disruption uncertainties will be developed.
Computational complexity of the final optimization problem will be controlled
through the use of decomposition approaches and a rolling horizon
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.