* 2217722
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Enabling Standards- and Disclosure-Based Regulations in and through Software Systems: Making Algorithmic Work Management Software Accountable to Law
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Daniel Schneider, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Software systems have become an integral part of public and private sector
management, assisting and automating critical human decisions such as selecting
people and allocating resources. Emerging evidence suggests that software
systems for algorithmic management can significantly undermine workforce well-
being and may be poorly suited to fostering accountability to existing labor
law. For example, warehouse workers are under serious physical and psychological
stress due to task assignment and tracking without appropriate break times. On-
demand ride drivers feel that automated evaluation is unfair and distrust the
system’s opaque payment calculations which has led to worker lawsuits for wage
underpayment. Shift workers suffer from unpredictable schedules that destabilize
work-life balance and disrupt their ability to plan ahead. Meanwhile, there is
not yet an established mechanism to regulate such software systems. For example,
there is no expert consensus on how to apply concepts of fairness in software
systems. Existing work laws have not kept pace with emerging forms of work, such
as algorithmic management and digital labor platforms that introduce new risk to
workers, including work-schedule volatility and employer surveillance of workers
both on and off the job. To tackle these challenges, we aim to develop technical
approaches that can (1) make software accountable to existing law, and (2)
address the gaps in existing law by measuring the negative impacts of certain
software use and behavior, so as to help stakeholders better mitigate those
effects. In other words, we aim to make software accountable to law and policy,
and leverage it to make software users (individuals and firms) accountable to
the affected population and the public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing novel methods to enable standards and disclosure-based regulation in
and through software systems drawing from formal methods, human-computer
interaction, sociology, public policy, and law throughout the software
development cycle. The work will focus on algorithmic work scheduling, which
impacts shift workers who make up 25% of workers in the United States. It will
take a participatory approach involving stakeholders, public policy and legal
experts, governments, commercial software companies, as well as software users
in firms and those affected by the software’s use, in the software design and
evaluation. The research will take place in three thrusts in the context of
algorithmic scheduling: (1) participatory formalization of regulatory software
requirements, (2) scalable and interactive formal methods and automated
reasoning for software guarantees and decision support, and (3) regulatory
outcome evaluation and monitoring. By developing accountable scheduling
software, the project has the potential for significant broader impacts by
giving businesses the tools they need for compliance with and accountability to
existing work scheduling regulations, as well as the capacity to provide more
schedule stability and predictability in their business
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.