* 2217182
* Texture of Stochastic Processes in Physical and Radar Meteorology
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alexander Kostinski, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 571,879.00

As most people experience on a daily basis, weather quantities such as an
unpredictably changing wind speed and direction or rainfall rate, vary a great
deal from moment to moment and from one location to another. Atmospheric
phenomena often involve such quantities whose distribution of variations
(fluctuations) is not known although these fluctuations are typically correlated
in time and in space. For example, sensing a few raindrops usually implies that
more rain is to follow. Understanding such broadly varying and correlated
phenomena is now more important than ever as the warming climate is perceived by
public as more variable and weather extremes more severe. For example, is there
a trend discernible in this sea of randomness? This project will address this
and related questions by developing and applying a method of statistical
analysis capable of detecting such weak signals, without making any assumptions
about the underlying distributions. That is, the desired approach is agnostic
yet parsimonious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the general goal of this research
is to explore the role of correlated and, thereby, intermittent and pronounced
fluctuations in cloud and precipitation physics, radar meteorology and radiative
transfer. While much research has been devoted to studying probability
distributions of such fluctuations, their small-scale spatial and temporal
correlations or “texture” have received less attention. Yet, this texture is
intertwined with important physical mechanisms such as fragmentation of
raindrops causing higher drop concentration via the “birth” of fragments or
intermittency and “burstiness” of rainfall. The primary objective of this
research is to study such small-scale texture on the basis of a recently
discovered rank-based and distribution-independent approach to the absence of
texture (identical and independently distributed process or IID). This is of
scientific significance because pronounced correlated fluctuations are
responsible for rare yet important events such as drop coalescence. The newly
developed rank-time method of statistical data analysis is broadly applicable
and likely to help with discerning trends in climatological data such as a
possible global dimming in time series of satellite-derived optical depth data,
available for the last ∼ thirty years. This research is of societal relevance
because of potential contributions to better detection range of rainfall with
weather radar, resulting in improved flood and landslide prediction. The
research is likely to contribute to a broad range of problems, from atmospheric
pollution to instrumental noise diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.