* 2217785
* East Pacific Easterly Waves: Interactions With Wind Jets in Current and Future Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric Maloney, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,242.00

East-to-west moving waves with wavelengths of about 1,000km are an important
weather feature in the region spanning West Afria, the subtropical and tropical
Atlantic, the Caribbean, and the low-latitude equatorial Pacific. These easterly
waves (or EWs, meaning waves moving from the east) are best known as the
precursors to hurricanes but they are also important rain-bearing systems in
West Africa the Caribbean, and Central America. Despite the importance of EWs
their formation mechanisms and sensitivities to ambient conditions are still not
fully understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One issue of particular interest for
East Pacific EWs is their interaction with the Central American topography.
Central America is known for its gap winds, strong winds that funnel through
gaps in the American Cordillera, one at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, another at
the Gulf of Papagayo in northern Costa Rica, and a third that channels air
through the mountains and into the Panama Bight. Previous work by the Principal
Investigator (PI) considered the role of the gap jets, in particular the
horizontal shear of the jets, in promoting the generation of East Pacific EWs
and reinvigorating EWs which have crossed Central America from the Caribbean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work conducted under this award would use eddy kinetic
energy and vorticity budget calculations to elucidate the effects of the gap
jets. Further work uses computer models to study the effects of gap winds by
creating simulations in which the Central American topography is artifically
altered to fill in the gaps and block the jets. In addition to the direct
effects of the jets and associated wind shear on developing EWs the project
considers the potential impact of the cooling of the ocean surface by strong
surface winds. Cooler sea surface temperatures (SSTs) can inhibit convection and
precipitation, which could hinder the development of
EWs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional work examines the effects of climate change
on gap flows and EWs. The PI's recent analysis of climate model simulations
suggests that gap flows near the Gulf of Papagayo will strengthen as the world
warms, and the strengthening could enhance EW formation. Work conducted here
revisits this issue using the regional Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
model, which can be run at considerably higher resolution to better resolve the
gap topography and the mesoscale dynamics of EWs. A further consideration is
that EWs may shift away from the Central American coast, causing potentially
serious reductions in rainfall and water resources in the region. Changes in the
location of fully-developed EWs may be strongly influenced by the pattern of
Pacific SST trends, and WRF simulations are used in combination with climate
model simulations from the Community Earth System Model (CESM) to address the
effects of SST trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal value due to
the importance of EWs for hurricane formation and as rain-bearing weather
systems for agriculture and water resources. In addition, the PI's group mentors
undergraduate summer interns through the Earth System Modeling and Education
Institute (ESMEI), a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program at
Colorado State University. The PI also works with the Bridge Program of the
American Geophysical Union to recruit graduate students from diverse
backgrounds. The project provides support and training to one graduate student,
thereby developing the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.