* 2217104
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Efficient and Scalable Learning and Management of Distributed Probabilistic Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Xiang Lian, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2023
* USD 101,020.00

The advancement of cloud-computing infrastructure and machine-learning
algorithms have enabled transformative techniques that push the boundaries of
various domains, ranging from automated drug design to natural-language
understanding. However, understanding the full software/hardware stack remains a
grand challenge for domain experts in developing scalable domain-specific
machine-learning models, especially when the application data is of inherently
non-relational representations. The project’s novelties are to explore, design,
and implement an end-to-end system that delivers efficient and effective
management of probabilistic graphs, which can serve as a general data
abstraction in a variety of domains (e.g., social network, bioinformatics,
sensing and communication, to name a few). The probabilistic graph model not
only captures complicated correlations among real-world entities but also
quantifies the intensities of correlations or influences among them. The
project’s impacts are that it addresses important missing pieces from both
theory and system practices to support probabilistic graph management in a
systematic, inductive, and verifiable way. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This planning-
grant project investigates an end-to-end probabilistic graph management system
that promises efficient probabilistic graph learning, representation,
aggregation, and analysis with quality guarantees in a scalable distributed
setting. The exploration focuses on the full software/hardware stack of
probabilistic-graph management, including designing formal probabilistic-graph
definition/manipulation abstractions, and the provable compiling process of
inductive constraints with guaranteed correctness and efficiency of pipelining
execution in a distributed setting. This computing framework can serve as a
general-purpose probabilistic-graph analysis tool that benefits different
research domains by discovering and understanding the complex correlations among
real-world entities in a more comprehensive and transformative way. Besides this
advantage, the outcomes of this project, such as open-source software,
publications, and workshop tutorials, could benefit data-management research,
decision-making processing in general for the industry (sensing-based automatic
operations, e.g., auto-piloting, self-driving), and the government (data-driven
policymaking, e.g., public health/global trading monitoring). Furthermore,
products from this project can be integrated to enrich the curriculum
development of undergraduate/graduate-level courses (with course projects
related to cloud computing, data management, and machine learning) and therefore
train/benefit a rich body of underrepresented students (including
minority/female students) at the investigators'
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.