* 2217777
* Reconfigurability of deformable DNA origami nanoparticles on biomembranes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Steven Abel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2025
* USD 455,000.00

Biomembranes are essential to living cells, and they also serve as a valuable
interface for organizing nanoparticles for applications in biology and soft
materials. Adhesion of particles onto a membrane can give rise to emergent
interactions between particles that cause them to organize on the membrane and
transform its shape. Previous research has focused predominantly on
nanoparticles with rigid shapes. Recent advances enable the creation of
deformable nanoparticles, made from DNA, that have precisely controllable shapes
and mechanical properties. While the importance of particle flexibility in the
assembly of organized structures is known in some fields, it has not been
explored in the context of nanoparticle-membrane interactions. This project is a
quantitative study of the adsorption and organization of deformable and
reconfigurable nanoparticles on biomembranes. It will lay the groundwork for the
rational design of nanoparticles with more complex and tunable behaviors than is
possible with rigid particles. This project will establish fundamental
understanding and practical design principles for a technology that will open
new avenues to probe and actuate properties of membranes and to facilitate the
assembly and dynamic reconfigurability of nanoparticles on fluid surfaces.
Research activities will be integrated with outreach efforts to broaden research
participation, enhance scientific knowledge, and increase college
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will investigate interactions of
deformable DNA origami nanoparticles with lipid membranes and establish a
mechanistic link between particle flexibility, membrane deformability, and the
resulting configurations and self-assembly of the particles. Specific objectives
include (1) quantitatively characterizing adsorption of deformable nanoparticles
onto membranes; (2) assessing membrane-mediated deformations of adsorbed
nanoparticles; (3) classifying emergent behaviors of populations of
nanoparticles at higher densities; and (4) studying stimuli-triggered
reconfigurability of membrane-associated nanoparticles. The study will leverage
complementary computational and experimental methods to provide insight
inaccessible to either approach on its own. The rationale is to reveal new
understanding of the coupled behaviors of biomembranes and deformable, lipid-
anchored DNA origami nanostructures, thus enabling predictive design of
nanostructures that respond to, assemble on, and modulate biomembranes in
controllable manners. The proposal will cross-train graduate and undergraduate
researchers, encourage pre-transfer community college students to engage in
research, recruit underrepresented groups to contribute to the research project,
and educate rising high school seniors through hands-on projects and research
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.