* 2217573
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Legal Accountability as Software Quality
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Thomas Norton, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 237,800.00

Within the last decade, innovation in the field of Software Engineering has
produced new consumer products and services that affect nearly every aspect of
daily life. This innovation is made possible by the broad adoption of agile
software-development methods that emphasize fast delivery of working software
and a rapid, dynamic response to changing consumer needs. The culture of
innovation encourages entrepreneurship and the deployment of novel, creative
software to allow companies to quickly assume a position of market leadership.
Due to the ubiquity and pervasiveness of software, however, innovation that
produces software quickly, without attention to societal or ethical concerns,
risks creating harm to the public. Laws and regulations are enacted to protect
the public from such harm, and regulators and standards organizations serve to
guide companies in how to comply with the law. The cost of innovation with weak
accountability to law and society is high: while thousands of companies have
been fined billions of dollars by government regulators for non-compliance,
enforcement action addresses only a fraction of the potential wrongs. Regulators
often lack the resources to investigate every company, and as a result, millions
of users are affected by regulated technologies that are at risk of non-
compliance. To date, the disciplines of law and software engineering have been
largely siloed, and legal accountability is typically addressed late in the
design process in an ad hoc manner after key design decisions have been made,
and at a point where the cost to change those decisions is high. This project
will break down this interdisciplinary barrier by discovering integrative
methods that align legal and engineering considerations from both disciplines,
allowing design teams to make trade-off decisions early in the design process.
As laws and regulations protect the public from harm, these methods will accrue
benefits to society by ensuring that individualsâ€™ legal rights are protected by
software in a transparent and observable manner. The project will also yield new
courseware to support the training of law and engineering students, filling a
void in both disciplines where this training presently does not exist, and it
will inform public policy on the challenges and opportunities to demonstrate
accountability to law and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate new methods and tools to design software to be accountable to law
and regulation. The method will leverage structured-argumentation theory to
document and reconcile laws, regulations, legal precedents, and past enforcement
actions with software requirements and architecture. The project will prototype
novel tools to support enhanced, bidirectional collaboration and cross-
functional teaming, including experiments to evaluate the efficacy of the
methods and tools in producing legally accountable software in the data
protection domain. The project will contribute to scientific knowledge in
several ways: (1) the project will bridge theory from law, computer science, and
psychology on cross-functional teaming with empirical evidence of legal and
design thinking to produce (a) new structures to represent legal and design
reasoning, and (b) new methods for eliciting, critiquing, and justifying to what
extent design decisions satisfy legal requirements, while increasing subject
matter expert knowledge across two domains in law and engineering; (2) new
enhanced agile software-engineering methods, tools and metrics that support and
measure how well these discussions are moving toward increasing legal
accountability in design; and (3) new understanding about the extent to which
design reasoning to increase legal accountability from a legal and design
context is generalizable to other design contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.