* 2217111
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Direct Marketing as a Form of Price Discrimination in Residential Electricity Choice Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Meredith Fowlie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 11,853.00

Many U.S. states opened residential electricity markets to competition from for-
profit companies between 1996 and 2007. Prior to this time, most households in
the same town or city paid the same price for electricity. Under competition,
some households pay prices triple the prices of other households in their same
town or city, and households in low-income neighborhoods and vulnerable
communities tend to pay particularly high prices. This research will investigate
why low-income households tend to pay more than other households in a few
Northeast U.S. electricity markets. Among other reasons, it will explore the
role of door-to-door and other in-person marketing that is targeted at certain
geographic areas or communities. The project aims to help improve policy and
reduce inequality by analyzing the potential benefits and costs of additional
consumer protection policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will analyze
distributional impacts of retail electricity restructuring. In particular, it
will explore the hypothesis that heterogeneous barriers to search and costly in-
person marketing create a dual market where firms price discriminate on
consumersâ€™ barriers to search. Firms may achieve this by offering low prices
online for consumers who search and directly marketing higher prices to
consumers who do not search. The project team will conduct a survey and
randomized information intervention of 1,000 households in Maryland and
Connecticut. The survey aims to answer two research questions: 1. Why do
households sign up with direct marketers at high prices when lower prices exist?
2. Why do low-income households sign up for electricity products at higher
prices, on average, than high-income households? The randomized information
intervention will enable analysis of how search, switching, and price outcomes
change with reductions in search costs and biases about the benefits of
searching. The survey will also explore differences across sociodemographic
groups in preferences for bundled attributes, inertia, search costs, belief
biases, and perceptions of electricity marketers. It is important to
differentiate between these mechanisms since they have differing implications
for welfare and policy prescriptions. This research aims to build on existing
literature on unexplained consumer decision error in residential electricity
markets by identifying the key drivers of this decision error and exploring
strategic firm response in this context. In addition, this project may
contribute to the broader economic literature in two ways. First, it will assess
a new explanation for price dispersion. Second, it will identify the impact of
barriers to search and direct marketing on retail price differences across
socioeconomic groups in a particularly clean setting that is free from common
confounders, such as differences in payment risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.