* 2217438
* R/V Marcus G Langseth - Oceanographic Instrumentation 2022
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2023
* USD 184,842.00

A proposal is made to fund instrumentation on the R/V Marcus Langseth, a 235’
Global seismic vessel with general oceanographic capabilities. The vessel is
owned by Columbia University and operated by Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University under a cooperative agreement with NSF. The Langseth is
unique in the Academic Fleet in that it provides a unique combination of
capabilities for imaging the oceans, the seafloor and the solid earth beneath
the sea. It is the only vessel in the world dedicated to academic research that
is capable of conducting 3D seismic surveys as well as extended offset 2D
surveys. The tuned, linear source array, consisting of up to 36 airguns, with a
total capacity of 6,600 cu in is also unique asset of this vessel. All of the
requested equipment in this proposal is for upgrading existing systems.
Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4x
Sercel Seal Short Head Section $75,200&lt;br/&gt;2x Sercel Seal Short Head
Elastic Section Adapter $27,692&lt;br/&gt;1x Umbilical Armored lead-in
$81,950&lt;br/&gt; $184,842&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.