* 2217253
* RCN-UBE: Research Experiences in Southern California for Undergraduate Ecologists network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Nina Karnovsky, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2027
* USD 498,975.00

The Research Experiences in Southern California for Undergraduate Ecologists
network (RESCUE-NET) provides immersive ecological training opportunities for
undergraduates and equips them with the knowledge and skills necessary to tackle
our society’s unprecedented ecological challenges. Climate change, habitat
modification, introduced species and fire are impacting Southern California’s
rich biodiversity and ecosystem services. While training undergraduates, RESCUE-
NET research is focused on providing critical ecological information. RESCUE-Net
research opportunities emphasize collaboration amongst students and offers novel
opportunities for them to participate in the entire scientific process from
question/hypothesis development to data analyses and manuscript construction.
RESCUE-Net has been intentionally designed to engage diverse students.
Furthermore, RESCUE-Net is focused on bolstering across the region
collaborations of faculty from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) and
Community Colleges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;RESCUE-Net is a network of faculty in
Southern California who are dedicated to training the next generation of
ecological leaders. RESCUE-Net includes three types of educational research
projects: multi-site collaborative CUREs (Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experiences), multi-site research projects (MSRPs), and multi-site MUREs
(Mentored Undergraduate Research Experiences). CUREs are authentic research
activities that occur as part of courses. MSRPs are faculty-led research
projects that involve students from multiple campuses. MUREs are guided research
experiences that allow students to design and carry out collaborative research.
At the end of each year, faculty and students present their work at regional and
national conferences. RESCUE-Net faculty are united by a passion to mentor and
support the diverse Southern California undergraduate population and to remove
barriers that preclude PEER (Persons Excluded because of their Ethnicity or
Race), first generation, and low-income students from participating in
ecological research. Through iterative assessment, researchers track the
development of student scientific identity and self-efficacy. RESCUE-Net
addresses challenges that limit diversity and inclusion in ecological research
and provides key ecological insights to emerging environmental challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.