* 2217177
* Understanding Disciplinary Approaches in School Settings
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Yael Granot, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,524.00

Understanding how discipline in schools occurs and its effects on students and
others in the educational system implicate scholarly and policy arenas. This
project will examine traditional and emerging approaches to discipline commonly
employed in schools by studying these approaches together as opposed to in
isolation. In doing so, this research will provide an appreciation of several
disciplinary measures in schools, how they operate in tandem, and how students
and others perceive these approaches to discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing a mixed methods approach, this project will
integrate several literatures across fields to provide an understanding of
disciplinary approaches to youth in schools. The project will recruit student
and staff perspectives to explore the effects of differing types of discipline
and ways to respond to harm and violation in schools. This research will employ
student focus groups in the process of survey development, including self-
reporting by students about their own experiences and an experiment to ascertain
student responses to various disciplinary scenarios. School staff and law
enforcement also will be interviewed, providing a comparison of perceptions
between students and authorities. Working under the rubric of procedural and
restorative justice theories, this project will aid in understanding issues of
school safety, fairness, and justice, with a particular focus on youth
perceptions of these issues. Findings will be widely disseminated and made
available to scholars, school officials, policy makers, and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.