* 2217981
* 2022 Molecular Basis of Microbial One-Carbon Metabolism: Enzymes and Metabolisms Driving the Global Carbon Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Christopher Marx, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2023
* USD 14,980.00

This award will support the attendance of many early career and female
scientists at the Molecular Basis of Microbial One Carbon Metabolism Conference.
The conference will be held in Waterville Valley, New Hampshire August 7-12 of
2022. The conference aims to promote collaborative, interdisciplinary research
by bringing engineers and life science researchers together at the same venue.
The conference is designed to be highly interactive, with talks, poster
sessions, panel discussions and informal meetings. The scientific focus of the
conference is microorganisms and microbial communities that metabolize C1
compounds such as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, methane and methanol. There
will be ample opportunity for sharing the latest research results and for
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will help build a critical
understanding of the structural and functional basis of microbial C1 metabolic
processes, which are crucial for global carbon cycling. The conference presents
a unique opportunity to facilitate intense and productive communication between
researchers from multiple disciplines, all sharing a common interest in the
microbial metabolism of C1 compounds such as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
methane and methanol. A focus will be placed on the training and inclusion of
the next generation of scientists and providing opportunities for female
researchers in the field of microbial C1 metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.