* 2217329
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Re-Imagining STEM Equity Utilizing Postdoctoral Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Philip Rous, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deena Khalil
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,599,101.00

Improving models for enhanced recruitment, engagement, and transition to faculty
roles for minoritized postdoctoral scholars is critical to address their
significant and disproportionate departure from academic career paths in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. While some
institutional approaches have produced modest, localized results, collaborative
approaches across networks of institutions and established state university
systems could be leveraged to address this challenge. The NSF INCLUDES Alliance:
Re-Imagining STEM Equity Utilizing Postdoc Pathways (RISE UPP) aims to increase
the number of minoritized faculty in STEM by focusing on four areas of evidence-
based interventions: 1) facilitating a formal assessment of departments,
institutions, and systems and promoting inclusive policies, programs and
practices that are undergirded by more equitable norms and expectations; 2)
creating pathways, through policy and practice, that facilitate recruitment and
conversion of minoritized postdocs into tenure-track positions within and across
participating university systems; 3) developing minoritized postdoctoral
scholars by providing training, professional development, and community with
other scholars across their university system and the RISE UPP Alliance network;
and 4) supporting mentors of minoritized postdocs and junior faculty by
providing training, compensation, recognition, and advocacy. RISE UPP’s goals
align with the vision of NSF INCLUDES to innovate and facilitate collaborative
approaches to broaden participation and leadership in STEM. The Alliance will
collaborate with and build upon the work of the NSF INCLUDES Aspire Alliance to
diversify faculty and improve institutional cultures, maintaining a unique focus
on the postdoctoral scholar career stage and the structural changes needed
within and across state university systems to facilitate racial equity in the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RISE UPP leverages the work of two state
university systems that have developed and implemented inter-institutional
approaches to diversify faculty through postdoctoral recruitment, training, and
transition into faculty positions - the University System of Maryland’s NSF AGEP
PROMISE Academy Alliance and the University of California President’s
Postdoctoral Fellowship Program. These systems will act together as Core Model
Partners and will provide support to three additional state university systems
that will adapt these models as Scaling Partners: the University of Texas
System, the Texas A&amp;M University System, and the University of North
Carolina System. The RISE UPP Alliance will help Scaling Partners act as a
system to facilitate the more equitable and inclusive recruitment, development
and subsequent hiring of minoritized postdoctoral scholars into tenure-track
positions at R1, R2, and teaching-intensive institutions within participating
state university systems. The Alliance will contribute to the body of knowledge
in broadening participation research by examining how collaborations within and
across multiple state systems may interact to shape efforts at organizational
diversification and transformational change needed in STEM fields. The five
elements of collaborative infrastructure will guide this multi-institutional,
multi-dimensional project to forge novel partnerships and accelerate change. The
National Association of System Heads (NASH) will serve as the backbone
organization for RISE UPP, having served as a forum for discussion,
dissemination, and action-oriented change efforts among state university systems
for decades. The National Postdoctoral Association will also serve as an
amplifying partner, and will assist in recruitment, production of resources,
including a toolkit, and dissemination across the NSF INCLUDES National Network.
By investing effort into building tools to help other institutions and systems
implement and scale successful approaches, RISE UPP can contribute to a STEM
professoriate that reflects the population of the Nation and reduce the barriers
to broad implementation of effective approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners
of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The Alliance is co-funded by NSF's Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program, which supports institutional
change to advance African American, Hispanic American, Native American Indian,
Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian and Native Pacific Islander STEM doctoral
candidates, postdoctoral research scholars and faculty toward tenure and
promotion in academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.