* 2217501
* Collaborative Research: SBP: Socioeconomic Mobility of Young Adults Without College Degrees: Understanding Transition Between Jobs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Borbala Csillag, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 76,619.00

A high-quality job paves the way for upward socioeconomic mobility for a young
adult by providing more income and career progression opportunities.
Unfortunately, many young adults without postsecondary degrees spin their wheels
between low-wage jobs. This project examines factors less reliant on formal
education that may facilitate or counteract changes in job quality among young
adults without postsecondary degrees. This project provides insights to workers
about personal actions they can take while searching for and adjusting to new
jobs to improve job quality. For employers and managers, this project clarifies
how job tasks and the work environment can facilitate worker development and
reduce turnover costs. Findings further inform the design of programs aiming to
support young workers moving into better-quality jobs, including programs
serving youth from low-income families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances knowledge by developing and testing models that explain how individual
factors (e.g., socioeconomic mobility beliefs), family background (e.g., social
class origin), and work and nonwork environmental factors (e.g., workplace
practices and government programs) drive changes in job quality. The project
team is collaborating with the Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic
Development and the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development to
collect data and analyze administrative records. The project team is surveying
workers aged 18-29 without postsecondary degrees and unemployed at the beginning
of the study. Additional rounds of surveys are being fielded as participants
search for and adjust to new job(s) over the course of one year. Survey
responses are being paired with administrative records. This project extends
understanding of the role of behavioral processes during job transitions in
intra-generational socioeconomic mobility. This project also contributes to
knowledge about the interplay between individual agency and contextual factors
shaped by family, work organizations, and government agencies during transitions
into early adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.