* 2217678
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Co-design of law and computer science for privacy in sociotechnical software systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yaacov Nissim Kobliner, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 248,675.00

Software systems are deeply integrated in society. Alongside their many
benefits, however, the use of personal data by these systems carries risks to
the people and organizations that use them. Legal and technical data protection
measures developed over the last few decades to curb these risks have evolved in
diverging ways. This makes it hard to reason about whether the collection,
analysis, and sharing of personal data in such systems complies with legal
privacy standards. It also makes regulators’ jobs harder when technical measures
are not well-understood outside of the communities that develop them. To bridge
this gap, the project will develop ways to integrate technical and legal
approaches to privacy in the design of such sociotechnical software systems.
Through bringing together this expertise, the project team will develop
accountability frameworks based on legally- and mathematically-sound principles,
increasing our ability to develop systems that provide both legal compliance and
meaningful protection of people’s data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop new methods for translating and co-developing technical and legal
concepts that map well onto each other. One main approach will be to establish
technical interpretations of legal concepts that can be incorporated in the
design, analysis, and verification of accountable systems. Another is to develop
paradigms for translating concepts from the technical study of privacy in ways
that promote their understanding and adoption in legal analysis and
policymaking. The third is methods for the development of new “hybrid” concepts
that are simultaneously definable and evaluable by legal and technical experts.
The project team will use this work to develop a practical legal-technological
toolkit for designing robust accountable formal software systems and
regulations, and although the initial work will be instantiated primarily around
privacy regulations, the toolkit of methods will be designed to support similar
alignment and translation in other domains where regulation meets
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.