* 2217477
* BPE Track 3 Inclusive Mentoring Hub: Raices Institute for Transformative Advocacy (RITA)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Idalis Villanueva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2027
* USD 799,994.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-BPE Track 3: Inclusive
Mentoring Hub project, called Raíces Institute for Transformative Advocacy
(RITA) will equip engineering contingent faculty (adjuncts, part-timers, and
non-tenure track), who are Black, Indigenous, People of Color of all
intersecting identities (BIPOCx), to form their own transformative grassroots
advocacy strategies for attaining equity in promotion pathways and working
conditions at their hiring academic institutions. Project objectives center
around: developing authentic mentor/mentee relationships, learning/developing
transformative individual/collective advocacy plans, and raising awareness for
the promotion and/or working conditions of BIPOCx contingent faculty in
engineering. Due to the scant attention paid to contingent faculty, this
population is severely understudied and undersupported. In the United States
alone, there are ~1.5 million faculty employed in higher education out of which
over 46% are contingent, the majority composed of marginalized groups, creating
a missed opportunity to broaden participation. To broaden participation, our
nation needs to leverage a diverse and inclusive science and engineering
enterprise to secure economic, national security, and jobs of the future. This
project attends to all aspects of this national need. Contingent faculty
typically serve fundamental undergraduate courses and large class sizes,
indirectly impacting the educational experience of students. Yet, continual
stresses of an unstable and non-permanent contingent workforce with limited
professional development, promotion opportunities, and benefits, negatively
affects higher education. Literature suggests that contingent faculty struggle
with implementing evidence-based teaching and mentoring to students because they
are either juggling multiple courses in multiple institutions to ‘make ends
meet’ or handle multiple service responsibilities with little-to-no support to
assist students fully. RITA serves as one of the early studies into the
realities and circumstances of contingent faculty in engineering with the aim to
generate knowledge, provide recommendations and strategies for institutional
action to support, and provide equitable working conditions for these faculty.
This project will, by extension benefit numerous undergraduate engineering
students who are enrolled in many of these contingent faculty-led
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RITA will develop a grassroots-initiated,
knowledge-generating, inclusive mentoring hub where first-hand, experiential
information acquired from the BIPOCx contingent faculty in engineering will be
strategically shared with key decision-makers at their institutions. While not
all paths lead to promotion, we argue that all contingent faculty need better
working conditions. This project is a partnership between the University of
Florida (a Hispanic-Emerging Institution), Virginia Tech (a Predominantly White
Institution), and Morehouse College (a Historically Black College and
University). These institutions will create a series of professional development
and mentoring opportunities to assist two cohorts of contingent engineering
faculty (Phase 1- 12 faculty and Phase 2- 12 faculty) to create individual and
collective advocacy plans alongside a repertoire of mentors, evaluators, and
professional development experts. Through an implementation research methodology
called participatory action research (PAR), RITA’s key research question to be
answered is: How can BIPOCx contingent faculty in engineering be mentored, at
the grassroots, towards transformative advocacy plans for attaining promotion
and/or equitable working conditions? PAR will require a series of collaborative
planning, acting, and reflection activities between the BIPOCx contingent
faculty and their mentors to design and enact advocacy plans in a safe space and
environment. Journals, logbooks, and other reflective materials will be
collected and analyzed using phenomenographically-inspired approaches. The coded
and de-identified information will yield multiple practices, recommendations,
and strategies that will be assembled into an Online Repository and shared via
podcasts for widespread dissemination. This work will significantly: (1) inform
the understudied scholarship on how to support these contingent faculty in
engineering; and (2) lay the foundation for an action agenda that alters the
trajectory of these faculty by raising awareness for the promotion and/or
working conditions of BIPOCx contingent faculty in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.