* 2217637
* Track 1 EFRI DCL: Planning Grant: Brain Inspired Intelligence Distributing High Efficiency RF/Analog Signal Processing Circuit
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Bayaner Arigong, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to form a diverse research team, plan corresponding
activities, and develop research tasks at Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU), an
Historically Black College and University, aimed at conducting research on
brain-inspired dynamics for engineering energy-efficient circuits and artificial
intelligence. The proposed research plan will leverage the expertise in various
fields to develop brain inspired intelligence distributing high efficiency RF
signal processing circuits which can be applied to 5G/6G wideband wireless
communication, IoT, national security, radar, quantum computing, smart city, and
smart health etc. The planning grant activities will catalyze the inclusion of
all traditionally under-served populations in engineering in future U.S.
engineering workforce development and research innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on forming a multidisciplinary
research team with expertise in neuroscience, wireless communication, signal
processing, high frequency circuit and system design, and novel material design.
Planning grant activities that will be carried out during the project period
include 1) organize multiple workshops, inviting speakers in different fields
from internal or outside of primary institution; 2) structured mentoring the PI
in the execution of forming diverse research teams; 3) directed activities to
overcome the challenge of geographic distance in collaborative activities; 4)
develop the research plan and tasks through coordinating with experts in varied
fields; 5) promote minority, women, and underrepresented students to develop
their STEM careers. The planning activities in this project will significantly
enhance the capability and capacity of FAMU to participate in and lead mid-scale
research projects exploring transformative research ideas that address national
grand challenges and societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.