* 2217733
* DASS: Enabling Comprehensive and Interactive Open Source Software License Compliance
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Because software is protected under U.S. copyright law, software licenses
represent an important legal consideration in software engineering. A license
defines the terms pursuant to which software can legally be distributed,
modified, and (re)used. While certain software licenses, known as open-source
licenses, allow considerable use of the software in future projects by other
engineers, such licenses still come with conditions that must be complied with
in order to use the software legally. Determining the nature and extent of those
conditions can be challenging for software engineers, who are typically not
trained in the intricacies of the law. Reusing, adapting, or distributing
software without abiding by its license terms can lead to significant legal and
economic consequences. Software engineers need a better understanding of the
licensing issues that they face and their implications, as well as guidance to
address these issues, and legal practitioners need better support in collecting
the information necessary for assessing licensing-related legal issues. To
address these fundamental challenges, this project will conduct a series of user
studies with software engineers and legal professionals to understand their
needs and preferences in solving issues related to software licensing. Based on
the acquired knowledge from the studies, this project will aim to develop a
conversational system that will allow software engineers to address their
licensing needs and issues interactively, and more efficiently and effectively,
compared to existing solutions, thus preventing software license
incompatibilities. The proposed system will also assist legal professionals in
collecting the technical and legal information they require for solving software
licensing cases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce and disseminate
educational materials on the acquired knowledge in order to further the
provision of legal information and guidance through interactive/conversational
solutions. These materials are intended to be integrated into computing and law
curricula. In addition, the project will focus on recruiting and retaining
computer science and law students from traditionally underrepresented
categories. The project is centered on five specific goals. First, it will
create comprehensive taxonomies of licensing needs, issues, exceptions, and
misconceptions for software engineers. Second, it will determine the primary
legal questions that need to be answered in determining license compatibility
and the information required to answer those questions. Third, it will build a
comprehensive database of existing open-source licenses that encodes licensing
terms and their relationships, including exceptions and other conditions, and
language incompatibilities across distinct licenses. Fourth, it will elicit
design requirements and user preferences for interactive license compliance.
Finally, it will design, develop, and evaluate an interactive solution that uses
collected data to engage with engineers and provide guidance on license
compliance in a way that will make future engagement with legal counsel more
efficient and effective. This project aims to improve software accountability
with respect to intellectual property law and open source licensing, by
assisting developers and lawyers in understanding and addressing the licensing
issues that arise in their work, and to contribute to the developing research on
the automation and accessibility of legal services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.