* 2217766
* Selective Attention and Intersensory Processing in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lorraine Bahrick, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 700,000.00

How do infants make sense of the world around them? This project examines the
possibility that infant attention is initially drawn to the intersensory
redundancy that occurs when the same information is perceived through more than
one sensory system. An example of intersensory redundancy is the information
common to the movements of the face and sounds of the voice of a person
speaking. Multiple measures will be used to determine: (1) whether infants pay
attention to information provided by intersensory redundancy before paying
attention to other types of information, (2) whether intersensory redundancy
helps infants process information more efficiently, and (3) areas of the brain
involved in intersensory processing in infancy. Answering these questions will
provide insight into how infants learn from caregivers. This project will have
broader impacts through training graduate and undergraduate students in
cognitive neuroscience, which will increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Findings may also contribute to
understanding deficits children with disabilities experience processing
audiovisual speech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major aims that
will be addressed in a series of experiments on 5- and 10-month-old infants. Aim
1 examines how intersensory redundancy affects infants’ attention and learning
from audiovisual speech, using simultaneous measures of heart rate changes
associated with attention and electroencephalogram (EEG) measures of attention
and memory. Aim 2 examines whether infants’ attention can be biased toward or
away from intersensory redundancy by providing specific types of information
during initial learning prior to EEG testing. Aim 3 is to determine which areas
of the brain are involved in intersensory processing of audiovisual speech in
infancy, using computational modeling of EEG data. Infants are expected to show
enhanced brain activity to redundant information provided by audiovisual speech,
and areas of prefrontal cortex are expected to be involved in processing
intersensory redundancy in infancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.