* 2217657
* OSIB: Neurobiology of Host Manipulation by Parasites
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,424.00

It is well established that parasites can promote their survival and
proliferation by altering the physiology and behavior of their hosts. Large gaps
exist, however, in our understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms
that parasites target to modify their host nervous systems. This project
explores how parasites can redirect host reproductive energy to meet their own
demands for growth and multiplication. Experiments will be performed on
gastropod snails of the genus Biomphalaria, intermediate hosts for larval
schistosome flatworms. This project responds to several programmatic objectives
of the NSF Organismal Systems and Infection Biology (OSIB) initiative. It will
provide students at the University of Puerto Rico with unique opportunities to
participate in research at the cutting edge of neurobiology, parasitology, and
global health. Visiting experts will present modern approaches to parasite
biology, gene editing, and neuroimaging technologies. Infection of Biomphalaria
snails by larval schistosomes has major socioeconomic implications for
developing countries due to its obligatory role in schistosomiasis, a pervasive
tropical disease of poverty. A collaboration with the Theodor Bilharz Research
Institute in Cairo, Egypt, thus expands the horizons of student participants,
exposing them to the benefits of a global approach to scientific discovery. This
project will increase the number of scientists from underrepresented groups that
are trained to conduct interdisciplinary research at the nexus of neurobiology
and parasitology. It will also contribute to forming a citizenry that is
increasingly aware of global health issues and
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater snails of the genus Biomphalaria
serve as intermediate hosts for the digenetic trematode Schistosoma mansoni.
Within the intermediate host, trematode larvae multiply and transform into the
cercariae that can infect their mammalian definitive hosts. Larval proliferation
is facilitated by modifications of host behavior and physiology, including a
reduction of reproduction known as ‘parasitic castration’. As a simultaneous
hermaphrodite, the male and female systems of each Biomphalaria specimen must be
highly regulated and coordinated. Several neuropeptides are among the signaling
systems that control gastropod reproduction. This study explores two
neuropeptides that were recently described in Biomphalaria; a gonadotropin
releasing hormone-related peptide that is proposed to regulate the female
reproductive system and a family of FMRF-NH2 related peptides that control the
male mating apparatus. Neuropeptide expression will be investigated across the
prepatent phase of infection. The mRNA that encodes the peptide precursors will
be detected using a novel in situ hybridization technique (Hybridization Chain
Reaction) and the mature peptides will be localized with immunohistochemistry.
Synaptic signaling through a FMRF-NH2 gated ion channel will be investigated
using neurophysiological methods on identified neurons. This project responds to
several programmatic objectives of the NSF Organismal Systems and Infection
Biology (OSIB) initiative. The proposed experiments will provide new insights
into 1) temporal dynamics of infectious processes, 2) parasitic manipulation of
host behavior at the level of individual neurons, and 3) interactions between
the immune and nervous systems in an under-studied model system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the BIO Directorate and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.