* 2217780
* Broadening Participation in STEM
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Laura Benitez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hispanics represent one of the
fastest growing populations in the US, yet one of the least represented in
engineering. This project aims to address the systemic inequities that hinder
the participation and advancement of Hispanics in engineering along the
engineering career continuum, including the social/family, education and
professionalization systems. Broadening the participation of URMs in engineering
serves the national interest of strengthening America’s STEM workforce and
global competitiveness. As the nation’s second largest Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI), the Center for Equity in Engineering (CEE) is uniquely
positioned to increase the participation of Hispanics in the engineering
workforce. First, the project will expand the pipeline by providing Hispanic
students and their families with early exposure to culturally relevant role
models and engineering content. This objective will be accomplished through
programs like Familia Engage, summer engineering camps for high school girls,
and a teachers &amp; counselors forum. Second, the project will create an
inclusive collegiate experience that promotes students’ success through
curricular reform and trainings for faculty and students, some to be co-led by
students themselves. Third, the project will create deeper professional/career,
leadership, and research development opportunities. The team strives to increase
the placement rates of our students in the engineering workforce through
connections with professional associations and employers. It is the expectation
that other institutions will learn from the strategies to increase the number of
engineering graduates and use of theoretical frameworks to inform curricula and
policy changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GOAL of the Center for Equity in
Engineering: Engage, Educate, Enrich (CEE-E3) is to increase enrollment,
retention, and advancement rates of Hispanic students in engineering higher
education. The vision is to be a national model for inclusion, professional
preparation, and success of Hispanic and other URM students, particularly
Latinas, in engineering careers. The CEE-E3 encompasses three focus areas (in
line with the three objectives outlines above): 1) K-12 Outreach (ENGAGE); 2)
Education &amp; Training (EDUCATE) and 3) Professional &amp; Research
Experiences (ENRICH). The project will focus on both academic and non-academic
outcomes for students, as informed by the Garcia’s “Servingness” model. Drawing
on the frameworks of biculturalism, culturally relevant pedagogy, and community
cultural wealth, the project will introduce and explore Hispanic cultural values
as they relate the norms of science &amp; engineering teaching and to the
professionalization of the engineering workforce. Using mixed methods, the
project will document and explore students’ self-efficacy and resiliency, as
well as students’ and their families’ exposure to role models along the career
pipeline. The project will leverage a board partnership with major universities,
engineering professional societies, community colleges, K-12 systems, non-
profits, engineering employers and alumni. It will expand URTGV’s student
educational opportunities through an R1-institution collaboration to create the
Alliance for Student Participation in Research Experiences for Hispanics (ASPIRE
Hispanics). The project team will introduce students to role models,
professional networks, and ongoing personal and career development through
professional society partners. Finally, through the national Equity in
Engineering Education Summit, the project will share promising practices with
institutions serving Hispanic populations so that they can replicate or adapt
the best practices at their home campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.