* 2217116
* IntBIO COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Integrating fossils, genomics, and machine learning to reveal drivers of Cretaceous innovations in flowering plants
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephen A Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,031,115.00

The Tree of Life is marked by short periods of rapid innovation where groups
emerge with dramatically altered forms and diversify quickly. This has happened
multiple times throughout geologic history including with the rise of birds,
mammals, the transition of plants from water to land, and the origination of
flowering plants. The rapid emergence and diversification of flowering plants in
particular represents one of the most remarkable episodes in the history of life
on earth. However, while fundamental to understanding the ecology and evolution
of modern ecosystems, this episode remains unexplained and leads to one of the
grand challenges in the biological sciences â€“ determining what processes may be
responsible for such rapid changes in form and function across the Tree of Life.
A major impediment to addressing this question is the availability of data and
methods for analyzing those data. The goal of this study is to use and develop
new machine learning approaches to gathering data for both fossil and living
plant species and to use these data to help develop new techniques. These
techniques will help identify what contributed to the rapid change in plants
that resulted in their dominance in the environment today. This project will
train undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in machine
learning methods, evolutionary biology, and techniques for working with both
fossil and living specimens. The project will also include resource development
and training for middle schoolers, high schoolers, undergraduates, and the
broader research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to evaluate
the evolutionary processes underlying the emergence of innovation, using
flowering plants as a case study. Specifically, the project will examine
Cretaceous radiations of flowering plants characterized by rapid evolution, a
rich fossil record, and the origin of innovations and lineages of great
ecological significance. The central goals of the proposed research are to (a)
generate a large morphological dataset for flowering plants using novel machine
learning methods, (b) develop new statistical methods for modeling evolution,
and (c) use these advances in data collection and methods to identify the
processes that led to the episodic and rapid emergence of novelty across the
Tree of Life. Collectively, these new developments in machine learning
techniques, morphological data collection, and analytical techniques for
addressing evolutionary processes will be potentially transformative to several
fields including the biological sciences, computational biology, and machine
learning. The large scope and scale of this project, together with its highly
integrative nature, creates the potential to address one of the most important
standing questions in evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.