* 2217994
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the hidden groundwater storage dynamics of the Great Lakes Basin by synthesizing geodesy, hydrologic modeling, and remote sensing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Zhong Lu, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2027
* USD 289,251.00

Understanding the complex and interwoven effects of changing climate and land
use on hydrology is necessary to manage water resources. The Great Lakes Basin
(GLB), the world’s largest surface freshwater resource, has experienced dramatic
shifts in lake levels from record lows to record highs over the last decade.
Despite over a century of lake level measurements, we do not fully understand
what drives such fluctuations in Great Lakes levels. One reason is that the
basin’s extensive groundwater resources are poorly monitored, and often ignored
in models. Here, we propose to develop a hydrologic model that more accurately
simulates both surface and groundwater flows, driven by and validated using data
from both ground GPS instruments and satellites. This model will provide an
unprecedented view of how groundwater, the “sixth Great Lake”, affects lake
levels across the GLB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a fusion of hydrologic
modeling with GPS, InSAR, satellite imagery, and GRACE data to more accurately
simulate surface and subsurface flows in the GLB. This will be the first such
integration of geodesy (deformation and gravity change), measurements of
groundwater-coupled surface water extent from remote sensing, and integrated
hydrologic modeling. Through data assimilation, we will produce both historical
and nowcast groundwater flow and storage reanalysis products to reveal the
spatio-temporal distribution of groundwater across the basin, and relate this to
fluctuating lake levels. This will provide reliable information about surface
and groundwater storage, lake levels, and flow rates that are needed for water
resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.