* 2217681
* Planning: Track 1: Curriculum and Advancements in Recruitment, Education, and Engineering Retention (CAREER)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Vicki Stieha, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,808.00

The goal of the proposed planning effort is to develop the partnerships and
institutional mechanisms necessary so that within five years, the Boise State
University College of Engineering can engage Idaho's underserved Latinx
population as a Hispanic "serving college." The focus of the work is
particularly crucial in the region as Idaho is one of the fastest-growing states
in the country, Boise State University is the largest public university with the
largest engineering college in the state, and the Boise metropolitan area in
southern Idaho contains the state's three largest cities by population. The
Latinx population is approximately 13% and is the largest underserved population
in Idaho, with the majority in southern Idaho. The university is also located in
the state capitol, a vigorous center for government, business, and innovation.
This planning effort focuses on strengthening pathways, ensuring community, and
changing the culture so Boise State serves transfer students from Idaho
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis of the work is on the
concept of "servingness," which research has correlated to positive academic,
non-academic, and student experience outcomes at Hispanic-serving Institutions
(HSIs). The team already engages with the College of Western Idaho (CWI) and the
College of Southern Idaho (CSI). CWI is an emerging HSI, and CSI just became an
HSI in 2021. Planning work will advance knowledge of organizational development,
the servingness framework, and its study and application to help emerging
institutions build an identity as an HSI that serves rather than merely
enrolling Hispanic students. The team will examine potentially transformative
features: improving pathways and placement for students transferring from
community colleges, intentional community building practices, and the cultural
shifts required to educate and incentivize faculty to employ inclusive teaching
practices. As the planning effort moves toward best practices, this experience
can contribute to the literature and introduce practical solutions to other
universities in partnership with community colleges. Broader impacts include
meeting the needs of our Latinx population, representing 24% of the state's
growth over the last decade. This community has also provided 31% employment
growth since 2009. Idaho has a low percentage of students attending college
(40%), and many area high schools are designated Title 1 and rural; many of
these students may initially attend community colleges. The knowledge and
partnerships gained from this proposal are imperative to increase the number of
these students seeking an additional educational opportunity at four-year
institutions. Other universities can also gain from findings resulting from this
effort about math placement, curriculum complexity, and cultural change.
Finally, the effort will help strengthen partnerships with community colleges,
helping Idaho become more of a transparent system that students can easily
navigate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.