* 2217908
* BRC-BIO: The evolution of cellular stress responses and host defenses to bacterial pathogens
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Elias Taylor-Cornejo, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 435,554.00

The cell has evolved specific stress sensors that maintain cellular balance. One
such sensor is an enzyme known as IRE1, which can monitor protein production in
the cell, and signal when proteins are not being made properly. Defects in the
regulation of the IRE1 sensor have been implicated in several human diseases
including cancer, diabetes, and neurological disorders; therefore, identifying
new ways to regulate this vital sensor could lead to innovative designs of new
therapeutics. IRE1 maintains protein quality control using two distinct
functions that either destroys or edits the molecular instructions needed to
build proteins. These two functions have evolved at different points in the
evolutionary history of this enzyme. While IRE1 from mammals performs both
functions, the IRE1 from microorganisms, such as yeast, exclusively performs
only one function. This begs the question: what was the original function of
IRE1 â€“ destruction or editing? To answer this question, this proposal seeks to
dig deeper into the evolutionary history of the IRE1 sensor using genetic and
bioinformatic approaches to characterize the function of the IRE1 in amoeba,
which share a common ancestor with mammals and yeast. Furthermore, this project
investigates whether IRE1 also functions as an ancient cellular defense against
harmful bacteria. This research is designed to integrate into a course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) and programs that promote the
participation of underrepresented groups in biology to train and diversify the
future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1)
is a highly conserved stress sensor in eukaryotic cells that can detect the
accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). IRE1
maintains protein quality control in the ER using two fundamentally distinct
ribonuclease (RNase) activities: mRNA degradation and mRNA splicing. While
mammalian IRE1 performs both RNase activities, IRE1 from certain species of
yeast exclusively perform only one. This research aims to reveal the
evolutionary history and mechanisms that underlie the distinct functions of IRE1
by characterizing IRE1 from the model amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, which
shares a distant common ancestor with both yeast and mammals. This will be
accomplished through genetic approaches that mutate amino acid residues of
amoeba IRE1 that are conserved between amoeba, yeast, and mammals, then testing
whether these mutants can survive growth conditions that disrupt protein
production in the ER. In addition, IRE1 from different species of yeast will be
replaced with IRE1 from amoeba to test for functional redundancy between
organisms. In parallel, candidate mRNA targets of amoeba IRE1 will be identified
using a bioinformatic pipeline, then validated using both in vivo and in vitro
RNase assays. Lastly, this proposal seeks to uncover the role of IRE1 as an
ancient host defense against intracellular pathogens by exploiting a natural
host-pathogen interaction between bacteria and amoeba. The resulting data will
elucidate the evolutionary history and function of a vital cellular sensor that
maintains cellular homeostasis in all eukaryotic cells and determine how it can
be differentially regulated to control cell fate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.