* 2217582
* EAGER: Neuromodulation in the second near-infrared window
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Guosong Hong, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding the full complexity of the brain requires precisely manipulating
the activity of specific neurons and observing their responses. One approach to
manipulate neurons, which is termed “optogenetics”, uses visible light to
activate light-sensitive ion channels on the cell membrane of neurons. Since
visible light does not penetrate deep into the brain, this approach usually
requires the invasive implantation of an optical fiber, which delivers light of
desired wavelengths into the brain. The aim of this EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to improve the penetration depth of
light for manipulating specific neurons in the brain, thus eliminating the need
of an optical fiber and allowing the subject animal to behave freely. The
results obtained from this project will enable noninvasive approaches to
modulate brain activity through the intact scalp and skull. This project will
also include research training opportunities for underrepresented minority (URM)
high school students, with efforts to guide their pursuit of careers in STEM-
related work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding neural computation requires
causal manipulation of neural activity to dissect the complex circuit
connections and the relationship between neural activity and certain behaviors.
Optogenetics enable precise modulation of neural activity with millisecond
temporal resolution and neuron-type specificity. Conventional optogenetics is
performed in the visible spectrum; however, the delivery of visible light
usually requires invasive implantation of an optical fiber into the brain, due
to light attenuation (i.e., scattering and absorption) in cranial bone and brain
tissue. This tethered fiber interface usually leads to acute tissue damage,
chronic immune responses, and restriction of the subject’s free behavior. To
address these challenges, the Investigator aims to investigate the feasibility
of in vivo neuromodulation with light up to 1,500 nm in wavelength in the second
near-infrared (NIR-II) spectrum. NIR-II light benefits from much reduced
scattering and absorption compared to its visible counterpart, and it has been
demonstrated to enable deep-brain imaging through the intact scalp and skull in
mice. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives: (1) Synthesize
biocompatible polymers with NIR-II absorption in the range of 1,000~1,500 nm;
(2) Target NIR-light sensitive transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1)
ion channels in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons with NIR-II absorbing
polymers for in-vitro neuromodulation; and (3) Demonstrate the feasibility of
NIR-II neuromodulation in the mouse hippocampus through the intact scalp and
skull. The knowledge gained from this project will shed light on the feasibility
of optogenetic neuromodulation in the NIR-II window and thus offer more guidance
on NIR-II light-based approaches in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.