* 2217927
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Iron Deposits in Puerto Rico to Elucidate Metal Transport and Magnetite Mineralization Processes in Skarn Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Laura Bilenker, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2025
* USD 257,214.00

Characterizing ore deposits, the sources of metal for our society, provides key
information about the processes related to their formation. Iron is a metal that
is vital for the infrastructure of developed countries and essential for those
that are developing as it is the primary component of steel. Iron is also
critical for the production of a more sustainable infrastructure that includes
technologies such as wind turbines and electric cars. Therefore, an improved
understanding of how and where iron ore deposits form works toward increased
security for societal progress. This project will characterize three iron ore
deposits in Puerto Rico, where ore deposits have remained largely unstudied. As
these deposits are relatively unchanged after tens of millions of years, they
will provide insight into the processes involved in their formation, which are
generally lost due to extensive metamorphism and/or erosion. This work will
provide field and research opportunities for at least ten undergraduate and four
graduate students from Auburn University (AU) in Alabama and the University of
Puerto Rico, Mayag√ºez (RUM) over three years. Students from these two
universities will unite virtually on a monthly basis and in person for annual
field seasons in Puerto Rico and analytical workshops at AU, fostering a diverse
lab group called AURUM. Establishing and growing AURUM will cultivate long-
lasting relationships between diverse early career scientists, setting the
foundation for future collaborations and success of persons underrepresented in
Geoscience. In the future, this research will help inform local management
decisions related to these resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals
of this study are: 1) to characterize in detail the iron skarn deposits of
Puerto Rico; 2) to track the timing and relationship between metal transport,
fluid flow events, and magmatic activity. Ore deposits are excellent records of
geologic processes and environments, yet detailed studies of most deposits on
this island have never been published. In particular, the Tibes, Keystone, and
Island Queen iron skarns were prospected and briefly mined decades ago. However,
these potentially economic deposits have not been investigated since. These
sites present a unique opportunity to study relatively undisturbed iron skarn
examples because they have not experienced extensive post-depositional
metamorphism. The research goals will be achieved through field mapping,
microscopic observations, magnetite trace element and stable isotope (iron, Fe;
oxygen, O) geochemistry, and garnet geochemistry and geochronology at each site.
This project will further develop the use of Fe isotope ratios and paired Fe-O
isotopes in magnetite as tools in skarn characterization by strategically
generating data in these three unaccreted skarn systems. Expanding the existing
Fe-O database is a critical step in establishing Fe-O isotope systematics as an
effective tool in skarn research and magnetite-bearing deposits in general.
Geochronology of garnets associated with the mapped ore bodies will provide an
effective date for ore formation, while the geochronology of garnets throughout
the skarn will constrain the duration of skarn-forming fluid events. Garnet
geochemistry coupled with geochronology will allow for temporal and chemical
discrimination between ore-forming versus non-ore-forming events. Considering
the relative lack of research on the ore deposits of Puerto Rico and the
opportunity to study in detail unaccreted iron skarn systems, the new data will
contribute significantly to foundational knowledge on where and how iron ore
deposits form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Petrology &amp; Geochemistry Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.