* 2217506
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Michigan Dearborn: Center for Pervasive Personalized Intelligence Center
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Marouane Kessentini, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the ecosystem of computing devices (e.g.
cellphones, household appliances, vehicles, etc.) connected to each other via
the internet. The goal of the Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI) Center
is to enable the next generation of IoT systems to be more proactive and
personalized without compromising security and privacy, thereby improving
decision making, increasing efficiency and enabling new types of computing
applications. This proposal will study the feasibility of establishing a new PPI
site at the University of Michigan-Dearborn (UM-Dearborn) in collaboration with
industry and the two PPI sites at the University of Colorado Boulder (CU) and
Oregon State University (OSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at UM-Dearborn
will investigate foundational research under three thrusts: Intelligent
Transportation, Smart Energy, and Software Engineering Intelligence. First,
under the intelligent transportation thrust, investigators will develop new
algorithms and techniques enabling personalized and context-aware maneuvering of
connected and automated vehicles via artificial intelligence, i.e., intelligent
personalization. Second, for the smart energy thrust, investigators will create
new techniques that enable novel AI-assisted personalized demand response
technologies for electric prosumers. Finally, under the software engineering
intelligence thrust, investigators will explore methods to help software
developers to build optimized PPI applications that can be efficiently and
securely deployed and evolved in cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in IoT impact many facets of everyday
life. The PPI Center explores research thrusts in Artificial Intelligence,
Computing Systems, Programmability, Energy, Visualization, and Computer Security
and Privacy that are broadly applicable beyond IoT systems to a variety of other
scientific domains such as environmental science, agriculture, biology,
transportation, and robotics. The research outputs will be disseminated through
publications, research presentations to industry and academia, open-source code
and industrial collaborations. The PPI Center is committed to broadening
participation in computing through, for example, summer schools for industry
engineers and K-12 outreach through partnerships with UM-Dearbornâ€™s programs. To
improve the retention of underrepresented populations, the proposed Center will
work with technology associations to showcase PPI applications that help
humanity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPI Center will maintain a publicly
accessible project repository that will store open-source code, publicly
available datasets, papers and other research outputs that can be disseminated
to the general public on ppicenter.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.