* 2217745
* Track 3: Increasing Minority Presence within Academia through Continuous Training at Scale (IMPACTS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Sylvia Mendez, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2027
* USD 799,882.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite concerted efforts to
diversify engineering academia, the engineering professoriate remains primarily
White and male. In order to counter the disproportionate representation of
engineering faculty who are members of underrepresented groups (URGs; i.e.,
women and STEM-underrepresented minority populations), an Inclusive Mentoring
(IM) Hub will be established. The IM Hub will be designed to aid in the
preparation, persistence, and promotion of URG engineering faculty through the
creation of a mentorship network of technically similar and otherwise strategic
emeriti faculty mentors (primarily White males) and demographically similar
senior faculty mentors. The two sets of mentors will be expected to cross-
pollinate and assist one another to become more effective mentors from their
unique vantage points as engineering academic leaders. For example, the senior
URG faculty will counsel the emeriti faculty (who are expected to primarily be
of non-URG populations due to the demographic realities of the engineering
professoriate) regarding the distinct differences one encounters in engineering
academia as a woman and/or person of color. Increasing Minority Presence within
Academia through Continuous Training (IMPACT) at Scale (IMPACTS) will leverage
the seed successes and lessons garnered during the development of IMPACT as a
National Science Foundation (NSF) Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE)
Project (Awards 15-42728 and 15-42524) and an INCLUDES Design, Development and
Launch Pilot (DDLP) (Award 17-44500). The IM Hub will target 25-30 engineering
faculty mentees per year. The intended outcome, wherein retired and senior
engineering faculty mentor, support, and advocate for the next generation of URG
engineering faculty, has the potential to significantly impact the engineering
faculty ecosystem. The implicit benefit of IMPACTS will involve a stronger and
more diversified STEM professoriate and workforce, given that larger numbers of
student talent would be taught and trained by a more empowered diversity of
faculty. Additionally, the project will advance knowledge on the value of an IM
Hub designed as a mentorship network, which has the capacity to broaden
participation, inclusivity, and equity in engineering
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Society for Engineering Education
(ASEE) will provide the core means of soliciting participation in IMPACTS across
U.S. engineering academia, as well as using prior constructs to implement and
monitor the IM Hub. In order to advance knowledge on the IMPACTS participants’
experience and factors related to sustained participation and perpetuation of
such mentorship, the University of Colorado Colorado Springs will implement a
multi-phased phenomenological mixed-methods study. The research primarily will
target the hypothesized effectiveness of engaging emeriti faculty, in tandem
with senior URG faculty, in the mentorship of URG faculty mentees. The use of
professional goals progression, interviews, and surveys will be key in
documenting success. Finally, Georgia Tech will provide overarching project
leadership and will aid implementation and expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.