* 2217489
* NSF Ocean Instrumentation 2022: University of Washington - R/V Thompson and R/V Carson
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 210,415.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington for Oceanographic
Instrumentation (OI) on R/V Thompson, a 274-foot general purpose, global class
research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal
research vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).
In 2021, Thompson completed 296 funded days with 224 (76%) of them for NSF. For
2022, the vessel is scheduled for 283 total days with 241 (85%) days for NSF.
Carson had 73 days in 2021 with 22 (30%) for NSF. For 2022, there are 131 days
scheduled, 69 (53%) of which are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
proposal, UW provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition
of the following Oceanographic Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Kongsberg Seapath 380-5+ MK-ll for R/V Thompson $83,839&lt;br/&gt;2) Kongsberg
Seapath 380-5+ MK-ll for R/V Carson $83,839&lt;br/&gt;3) Kongsberg EM 2040 for
R/V Carson $210,360&lt;br/&gt;4) (2) Sonardyne Wideband Mini Transponders
(WMT)&lt;br/&gt;and USBL CASIUS support equipment for R/V Thompson
$42,737&lt;br/&gt; $420,775&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.