* 2217499
* Planning: Track 1 EFRI DCL: Living Biomineralization to Engineering Architected Ceramics
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Hao Yan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The proposed planning grant activities aim to further develop a diverse group of
researchers and trainees around new concepts in engineered living reeflike
structures that reimagine ways in which shoreline building blocks are designed,
manufactured, and occupied in light of new living materials and sustainable
technologies. The proposed planning grant will support team-building across the
geographic and disciplinary boundaries through the use of facilitated workshops,
a public symposium, and structured sub-group meetings in order to build and
foster a diverse and inclusive research team that actively engages diverse
stakeholders in the proposed research, training, and outcomes. A key goal of the
proposed activities is to train students in the technical, analytical, and
communication skills needed to be effective “catalysts” of living material
technological innovation and sustainability planning; preparing the next-
generation of engineering leaders for the interdisciplinary teamwork that is
expected by building industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant team
plans to use genetically engineer diatoms to express proteins that selectively
extract inorganic precursors such as silicon from the water. The diatoms will in
turn use the extracted precursors to assemble hybrid frustules that can be used
as architectural material for a sustainable built environment. To prepare to
address the proposed research goals, the team will employ professionally
facilitated workshops to strengthen communication across disciplinary
boundaries, a key component of building an inter-disciplinary team. The PIs
describe creating a network of stakeholders interested in shoreline remediation
and sustainable building materials, making sure to incorporate the diverse array
of end-user input into their research. The proposed activities also include
engaging the University of Buffalo's RENEW Institute during planning grant
activities, which will provide expertise in the areas of policy, urban planning,
sustainability, and environmental/ecological economics. These activities can
serve as a model for graduate training in the area of sustainable living
building material technology, since the social, economic, political, and
management challenges associated with shorelines’ and communities’ adoption of
sustainable material technologies transcend the specific technology being
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.