* 2217172
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Drawing of Composite Fibers for Wearable Energy Storage  Textiles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Caiwei Shen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2025
* USD 251,341.00

This grant supports research that will advance the fundamental understanding of
the manufacturing process of multifunctional composite fibers through thermal
drawing to enable energy storage textiles for next-generation wearable
electronics and smart textiles. Thermal drawing, a manufacturing process that
pulls fibers out of melts, is the most commonly used fiber production method in
the textile industry. Its capability of manufacturing multifunctional composite
fibers has been limited due to its susceptibility to melt fracture. This
research will fill the knowledge gap on how the composition and nanostructures
of the composites affect the failure mechanisms during the thermal drawing
process. With the new fundamental knowledge, composites containing
nanostructured carbon electrodes as the filler and polymer electrolytes as the
matrix will be designed and processed into wearable fibers. Such composite
fibers can be woven into energy storage textiles to serve as the power source
for wearable electronics and smart textiles in many consumer, medical, and
military applications. This research will promote US manufacturing science and
technology and help preserve US technological and economic dominance in wearable
and smart electronics. The research tasks will be used to train highly skilled
engineers and scientists in STEM fields for the US manufacturing workforce. The
outreach activities associated with this research will promote the early
exposure of K-12 students, especially those from women and underrepresented
minority groups, to STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While thermal drawing is a
versatile tool capable of scalable manufacturing of multimaterial
multifunctional fibers, it has yet to achieve its full potential in
manufacturing composite fibers due to the limited understanding of its failure
mechanism. This research designs and experiments on new electrode-electrolyte
composites with one-dimensional carbon nanomaterials and solid polymer
electrolytes and seeks to understand the fundamental failure mechanisms during
the thermal drawing of such composites. The failure mechanism will be elucidated
using transport phenomena modeling and in-process rheological measurements. As a
result, the research will elucidate 1) the currently unknown structural effects
of one-dimensional nanofillers on the rate-limiting failure mechanisms during
the thermal drawing processing of composite fibers, and 2) the widely observed
but unexplained process effect of thermal drawing on the alignment and
dispersion of the nanofillers in the produced composite textile fibers. This
better understanding of the failure, alignment, and dispersion mechanisms will
provide a new solution to produce supercapacitor-type energy storage textiles
and enable the continuous manufacturing of new functional materials and devices
using thermal drawing from a preform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.