* 2217714
* MCA: Using phylogenetic comparative methods to link plant-soil interactions, including with pathogens and mutualists, with physiological mechanisms across Rhododendron
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jean Burns, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2025
* USD 323,121.00

Plant interactions with soil microbes, including pathogens and mutualists, are
critical for plant health, diversity, distribution, and abundance. Missing from
much of this research is the link between evolutionary history and physiological
mechanisms. This work explores the hypothesis that disease tolerance has been
shaped in part by physiological adaptations to water, which balance fundamental
tradeoffs between water retention and carbon acquisition. Because diseases like
root rot limit access to water, physiological adaptations to water stress may be
essential to understanding disease tolerance. Similarly, the presence of
belowground mutualists may also mediate disease tolerance through physiological
mechanisms. To explore these issues, the investigator will integrate
physiological and microbial approaches across diverse Rhododendron taxa.
Rhododendron provide an ideal system to conduct this research because of the
variation among species in disease susceptibility to an invasive plant pathogen
(Phytophthora cinnamomi). Phytophthora cinnamomi causes root rot disease and can
infect over 5000 plant species. Understanding the mechanisms governing this
interaction can improve selection for stress and disease tolerant crops.
Characterizing the beneficial effects of mycorrhizal fungal mutualists also will
enhance horticultural outcomes, including leading to healthier plants for the
nursery industry. The project will give a mid-career scientist the opportunity
to learn new physiological and microbiological tools to be applied to this and
future projects. This work will enhance the PI’s career goals of developing a
physiological and mechanistic program of study, deepening the understanding of
plant-soil interactions, progressing toward promotion to Professor, and training
a diverse lab in ecology and physiology. The PI and collaborators will provide
training for diverse graduate and undergraduate researchers. Recruitment efforts
will leverage existing programs such as the McNair Scholars and the North Star
Consortium at Case Western Reserve University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigator will conduct common garden and greenhouse experiments to explore
the physiological and phylogenetic determinants of disease susceptibility.
Growing 20 Rhododendron species across an experimental water gradient will
provide a test of whether responses to water stress are shaped by evolutionary
history. A greenhouse experiment will test how physiological mechanisms
influence pathogen tolerance. Another experiment will explore how mycorrhizal
mutualists modify physiological traits and disease susceptibility. This mid-
career advancement award will also train the PI in cutting edge plant
physiological techniques, including the measurement of turgor loss point, will
train a graduate student in plant physiology and ecology, and will provide
training opportunities for undergraduate researchers. This work will also
include the development of an open access database, RA-LEAFY, to tap into the
considerable community of enthusiastic Rhododendron and Azalea hobbyists and
generate opportunities for scientific engagement for diverse students and
community members. By providing an accessible entry point into scientific
research, this work will enhance recruitment of diverse talent to the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.