* 2217354
* Collaborative Research: IntBio: Defining the mechanisms and consequences of mutualism reorganization in the Anthropocene.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Nicholas Smith, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,253,011.00

No organism lives in isolation. Instead, life is a web of beneficial and costly
interactions among organisms and the environment. Yet little is known about how
these connections will shift with global change. By the end of the 21st century,
climate change will increase mean annual temperatures and shift precipitation
patterns. At the same time, invasive species will cover at least 17% of Earth’s
land surface, including most of North America. Plant associations with
microorganisms belowground are one of the most widespread mutualisms on the
planet. These mutualisms are also particularly sensitive to global change.
However, the mechanisms underlying how plant-fungal mutualisms will withstand
and adjust to new environments are still unclear. Thus, the key question
remains: How will mutualistic partners reorganize and affect mutualism function
in the future? Answering this question requires integrative, multi-disciplinary
research across scales and systems. This work will create these synergies by
tracking organismal, physiological, population, and community responses of
native plants and their beneficial and disease-causing fungi to an invasive
plant, Alliaria petiolata (garlic mustard). The project will have educational
impact for a next-generation STEM workforce by providing integrative research
and training experiences for undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IntBio project builds on a long-term experiment of
exotic plant invasion to address four AIMS. I: Determine long-term patterns of
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) and pathogenic fungal communities associated with
native plant species and how fungal communities are reorganized by invasion. II:
Determine how reorganization of plant-AM fungal mutualisms affects plant
physiology including carbon fixation and nitrogen uptake. III: Determine the
extent to which reorganization of plant-AM fungal mutualisms and/or soil
nutrient availability alter plant growth, survival and reproduction.
Experimentally addressing these aims will allow IV: Integration of the results
from the first three AIMs to scale from mutualism reorganization to plant
physiology, to plant population and community demography. The research is
integrated across different scales (spatial, temporal, levels of biological
organization). It will generate novel insights that will be broadly
generalizable to mutualism reorganization that is likely occurring under in
other global change scenarios. This research is grounded in “photosynthetic
least cost theory.” The overarching prediction is that if belowground mutualism
reorganization makes nutrient acquisition more costly for the plant in terms of
its carbon use, then significant shifts in plant physiology will be observed.
This project will be the first to explore integrative, untested, and potentially
transformative ideas surrounding the reorganization of mutualistic interactions
in the Anthropocene. This team bridges Texas Tech University, a Hispanic Serving
Institution, and the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, which serves students
from Appalachia. Undergraduate students from Hispanic or Appalachian families
share a common web of socio-cultural, financial, and academic barriers related
to success in college. The training component aims both to enrich undergraduate
students’ experiences through integrative research and to enhance such 1st
generation students’ success through financial, mentoring and training support,
and opportunities for students and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.