* 2217870
* BRC-BIO: The effects of nanoparticle matter in air pollution on a sentinel species: House sparrows as the new Canary in the Coalmine
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Natalia Gonzalez Pech, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2025
* USD 502,043.00

The rise of anthropogenic activities and their associated environmental
pollutants are now considered a major contributor to population declines in wild
species. As of 2020, the world had lost an estimated two-thirds of its animal
populations, constituting a sixth global mass extinction event. Despite growing
awareness of the consequences of air pollution on human health, there is little
understanding of how airborne particulate matter affects non-human populations.
The respiratory anatomy of avian species makes them uniquely susceptible to
airborne particulates; songbirds can therefore serve as a sentinel species for
ecosystem-wide air pollution concerns. The overall objective of this project is
to characterize how the nanosized fraction of particulate matter in air
pollution affects both the physiology and behavior of exposed organisms, in
particular birds. While addressing this scientific goal, 4 undergraduate
researchers per year will oversee all data collection. In addition, the research
students and PIs will also partner with ExploreHope, an existing on-campus
outreach program, to develop and lead a weeklong summer camp titled, Angry bird
origins: How pollution affects avian communities. This camp will provide
scholarships for 15 local K-12 students from traditionally underrepresented
backgrounds per year to help foster relationships between the local community,
K-12 students, and undergraduate researchers with the ultimate goal of
increasing the retention of diverse students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on experimentally investigating the impact of iron oxide
nanoparticles (IONPs) on a songbird model, the house sparrow (Passer
domesticus). House sparrows are an ideal model organism because they inhabit
human dominated areas and could be particularly susceptible to airborne
pollution. IONPs are one of the main components of the particulate matter
fraction in air pollution. The overarching hypothesis is IONP exposure will
disrupt the organismâ€™s behavior by either detrimentally affecting auditory
sensory processing and/or through bioaccumulation of nanoparticles. The first
objective is to test the prediction that IONP exposure decreases hearing
sensitivity. Wild-caught birds will be assigned into either a control or
treatment group and will undergo a pre- and post-exposure auditory tests.
Preliminary data suggests that IONP exposure detrimentally effects hearing
thresholds. The second objective is to test the prediction that IONP exposure
alters species-relevant behaviors. Behavioral tests after IONPs exposure will
assess changes in foraging and the anti-predator response. These behaviors are
biologically relevant and linked to biological fitness. The third objective is
to localize and quantify the accumulation of IONPs in relevant organs. We will
assess the organ bioaccumulation of IONPs via inductively coupled plasma (ICP).
This interdisciplinary work will span the biology and chemistry departments at
Hope College, a research-driven undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.