* 2217985
* Two-component Robotic Extrusion Additive Manufacturing of Concrete Structures: Silicone-solution Phases and Fiber Distributions for Functionally Graded Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Reza Moini, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2026
* USD 439,237.00

Additive manufacturing using concrete materials has a potential to revolutionize
the future of building infrastructure constructions. Current additive
manufacturing techniques, however, are limited in their ability to produce more
structurally robust concrete, mainly because of employing a single material in
the process and complex process physics in concrete-mixture extrusion. This
award supports fundamental research to advance two-component robotic additive
manufacturing (with concrete and adjustable chemical liquid phase) that provides
an innovative method to create cutting-edge designs and manufacturing of
concrete components. The project brings together work on the science of an
extrusion-based process with materials and chemistry research, achieving
concrete materials with properties that can be engineered and tuned across
fabricated layers, namely, to produce functional gradient. The two-component
extrusion additive manufacturing investigated can be applied to develop highly
engineered infrastructure components and will benefit the construction additive
manufacturing industry to better exploit the growing global market. The study
will support the U.S. industry in maintaining its competitiveness in a rapidly
growing technological field of concrete additive manufacturing, as it continues
to spread in the construction and housing sectors. The project will also
stimulate manufacturing innovations and broaden diversity through educational
and outreach activities including workshop and research opportunities to high-
school, undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at a foundational understanding
of the two-component extrusion process in layer-wise robotic additive
manufacturing and the physical and chemical characteristics of fiber-reinforced
concrete with silicone-containing hydrophilic or hydrophobic compounds to
develop tunable functionally graded concrete. The primary scientific barriers in
two-component extrusion reside in the need for fundamental knowledge about the
physics of intermixing with two materials. This research is motivated to
understand how the two-component process, together with the chemistry of the
silicone-containing concrete compounds at the layered interfaces, be leveraged
to tune the local gradient properties of materials and improve their load-
bearing capacities. The project will elucidate (i) the underlying physical
relationship between the materials' rheological properties and the processing
parameters (flow rates, pressures, in-line intermixing in an extrusion nozzle)
combining an experimental method and analytical model, (ii) the novel
engineering of the interfacial bonding mechanisms through hydrophilic and
hydrophobic chemistry, and (iii) new manufacturing of stronger and tougher
functionally graded concrete materials by incorporating fiber reinforcements of
various configurations investigated by an experimental-analytical-modeling
approach including fracture mechanics. The enhanced materials processing
knowledge gained through this project will help harness opportunities for
effective designs and manufacturing of stronger engineering
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.