* 2217920
* BRC-BIO: Powering Dynamic Social Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher Beachy, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 06/30/2025
* USD 497,632.00

Energy use is at the center of adaptation and evolution. To be successful,
individuals must manage their energy expenditure and intake. Foraging with
social group mates is one way to ensure foraging success. However, group
foraging comes with costs of increased feeding competition. If competition is
high, then individuals should choose to forage with others that they have
strong, long-lasting, and potentially reciprocal relationships with. This
project tests if variability in energy expenditure at the individual and social
group level predicts social network relationships. It also explores the
likelihood that individuals in a social group will forage together. By tracking
the detailed movements of a large bat species that switches between individual
and group foraging strategies, this project tests how individuals make social
foraging decisions. This project will directly enhance undergraduate biological
and computational education. It will also provide targeted training for students
historically underrepresented in biological sciences in the United States and
Panama. Activities teaching principles of foraging behavior will be developed
using the data generated in this project for Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experiences and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy expenditure and energy
balance should influence how an individual reacts to changing environments.
Energy expenditure may also shape the cohesiveness of social groups. Despite
these expectations, we have little predictive information of how individual
energy expenditure and balance shape decision-making and relationship within a
social group. The goal of this project is to test how variation in energy
expenditure among and within individuals impacts cooperative decision-making. By
building validated relationships between heart rates, triaxial accelerometry,
and foraging behaviors of free-ranging bats in Panama, this project will meet
three aims. First, it will generate quantitative individual energy landscapes to
measures how the distribution of energy in time and space varies seasonally and
across a social group. Second, the project will test how individual energetics
reflect the decision-making process to forage cooperatively. Finally, the work
will explore how the energetic basis of these decisions reflects social network
dynamics. This project develops a tractable study system and machine learning
classification pipeline for further exploration of how unrelated individuals
cooperate in social groups. It also investigates the fundamental relationships
of individuals and groups within a dynamic landscape. The research aims of this
project are integrated with undergraduate and graduate student education at
Southeastern Louisiana University and in Panama at the Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute. Through supported, first-hand learning students will
integrate field bio-logging of behavior and energy expenditure with
computational biology. In addition, engagement materials for 8 â€“ 14-year-old
students will be developed in collaboration with a scientific illustrator
targeting diversity, ecology, and ecosystem services of bats in
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.