* 2217874
* BRC-BIO: Using the genus Aquilegia to develop a multidisciplinary approach to study the evolution and ecology of nectar variation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Justin Miller-Schulze, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 501,592.00

Most flowering plants rely on animal pollinators to reproduce. Given the
importance of attracting pollinators in order to complete their life cycle, many
plants have evolved to produce floral nectar, composed of sugars and other
nutrients that serves as a reward for pollinators. Different animal pollinators
(e.g., bees, birds, or moths) have different metabolic needs, and previous work
has shown that plants adapted to different pollinators vary in the amount and
the biochemical composition of the nectar that they produce. However, little is
known about the genes that control this variation in nectar production. This
work combines biochemical profiling of nectar components produced by closely
related plants that have adapted to different pollinators with genetic analyses
in order to identify the genes that control variation in nectar volume and
biochemistry. As around 35% of agricultural crops rely on animal pollinators,
identifying genes that control important aspects of nectar variation could help
improve nectar quality and pollination efficiency to increase crop production.
In addition, this work provides numerous opportunities to train both
undergraduate and masterâ€™s students to conduct hands on research in fields such
as genomics, metabolomics, and bioinformatics in preparation to pursue advanced
degrees or obtain careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-pollinator
interactions are a driving force of floral diversification with animal
pollinators, exerting strong selection on floral trait evolution that can
contribute to reproductive isolation and speciation. Prior focus on floral
adaptation to animal pollinators has largely focused on morphological traits
such as color and shape. However, floral nectar plays an important role in
pollinator adaptation, and is regulated by both genetic and environmental
processes. Much remains to be discovered about the genetic and environmental
factors influencing nectar trait variation and very few studies have
incorporated metabolomic data when examining nectar adaptation to different
animal pollinators. This research will: 1) describe nectar characteristics of
four Aquilegia species adapted to different animal pollinators (e.g., bee,
hummingbird, hawk moth) using a combination of developmental assays,
transcriptomics, and metabolomics; 2) use high-resolution genetic mapping to
identify loci controlling variation in nectar characteristics, including
metabolites, between closely related taxa adapted to different animal
pollinators, A. formosa (hummingbird) and A. pubescens (hawk moth); and 3)
explore how environmental factors such as temperature and humidity affect nectar
production and composition in two Aquilegia species using a combination of
studies in wild populations and under controlled conditions. Together, these
investigations will be the most comprehensive set of analyses yet implemented to
explore the genetic and environmental factors influencing the evolution of
nectar metabolomic variation in a plant system known for its floral adaptations
to different animal pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.