* 2217526
* RAPID: Investigation of Nano-scale Metals in Ash from the Marshall Fire, Colorado
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* James Ranville, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2024
* USD 85,464.00

Wildfires are becoming more prevalent and are expanding out of wilderness areas
and into the wildland-urban interface, including densely packed suburbs. The
most devastating effects of these fires are apparent: the loss of homes,
communities, and sometimes lives. However, beyond the physical destruction, one
of the unanswered questions about the environmental impact of structure burning
is whether fire liberates metal particles from household and structural
components. Metals are found in everything from pipes to electronics to paints
and pigments. Metals such as lead, copper, zinc, cadmium, and others can be
toxic to the environment and humans. Once released, the smallest of these metal
particles can be transported by wind events with subsequent deposition by rain
and snow throughout different environments. The December 31st 2021 Marshall Fire
in Boulder County, Colorado resulted in over 1000 structures burned, with as yet
unknown impacts on metal release to the surrounding environment. It is of
pressing concern to rapidly analyze ash from burned structures for the presence
of metal particles. In order to accomplish this, the research team at Colorado
School of Mines is employing state of the art particle analysis techniques that
are sensitive to specific metals to determine if metal particles are present in
ash samples. If found, further analysis will determine if the concentrations are
at significant levels, and if humans are at risk of toxicological effects. By
leaching the ash with simulated biological fluids, the project will assess the
potential for metals to be absorbed by human lungs. This project will provide
essential information to increase understanding of fire-derived metals while
furthering our analytical capabilities via application to complex natural
systems. Beyond the scientific goals of this project, community outreach and
education are of high priority. Community members will be invited to participate
in sample gathering and data analysis. The research team seeks to hold virtual
and classroom forums involving the Boulder community, from the high school level
to others within the general populous. These presentations will be aimed at
educating the community on the findings of the research, sharing the health
impacts of nanoscale particles, and providing hands on experiments for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As climate change induces desertification of the
environment, wildfires are becoming more prevalent and more devastating.
Wildfires are expanding out of wilderness areas and into the wildland-urban
interface, including densely packed suburbs. The Marshall Fire in Boulder
County, Colorado recently burned over 1,000 homes and many other structures. The
ash and smoke generated from this fire has the potential to be more harmful to
both the environment and human health than materials generated from wildland
fires. Specifically, the anthropogenic materials burned may lead to the presence
of metal-containing nanoparticles (diameter &lt; 100 nm) in the resulting
ash/soot. The project goal over the next 12 months is to determine the amount of
metal (Cu, Cd, Hg, Pb, Zn among others) present in the nanoparticle form in ash
and soot. The research team will collect samples from the area impacted by the
Marshall fire, focusing on ash from within burned homesites, nearby soils, and
surface waters located downwind of the burned area. Samples collected in non-
urban, upwind sites will act as controls. This RAPID project will utilize the
novel technique of single particle ICP-MS to detect and quantify the
nanoparticles present in deionized water suspensions. The research team will
investigate the effects of particle size on metal bioaccessibility by performing
single particle ICP-MS analysis as part of dissolution experiments using
simulated lung fluids. Timely analysis of the burned materials will advance
knowledge of metal speciation in post-fire debris and may inform a responsible
remediation effort with respect to human health and environmental impact. Beyond
the scientific goals of this project, community outreach and education are of
high priority. Through a “citizen science approach”, community members will be
invited to participate in sample gathering, with results being communicated back
to the participating homeowners. The research team will hold virtual and
classroom forums involving the Boulder community, from the high school level to
others within the general populous. These presentations will be aimed at
educating the community on the findings of the research, sharing the health
impacts of nanoscale particles, and providing hands on experiments for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.