* 2217621
* Track 4 Phase I: The Autism Self-advocacy Center for Equity and Neurodiversity in Engineering (The A-SCENE) at Vanderbilt University
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Arnold Burger, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,198,203.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurodiversity is an emerging
paradigm through which neurological differences, traditionally viewed only in
terms of disability -- autism spectrum disorders, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, dyslexia -- are instead viewed as human variations
having associated impairments but also unique strengths highly relevant to STEM.
Yet this group, now representing at least 20% of the US population, is vastly
underrepresented in the STEM workforce: recent work suggests that only 11% of
STEM undergraduates are neurodiverse, and a 2021 NSF report suggests that only
4.4% of all STEM PhD recipients are neurodiverse. Growing research evidence
suggests enhanced abilities and skills in neurodiverse learners highly relevant
to the engineering workforce. Examples include enhanced divergent thinking in
ADHD, success in competitive colleges for autistic students, and enhanced
cognitive and socio-emotional resilience, visuo-spatial ability, and emotional
reactivity with corresponding neural differences in dyslexia. The National
Science Foundation Broadening Participation in Engineering Phase I award to
Vanderbilt University will address the opportunity to more fully include this
underutilized workforce by creating the capacity for a future Phase II Center
for Equity in Engineering called The Autism Self-advocacy Center for Equity and
Neurodiversity in Engineering (The A-SCENE). To be fully ready for Phase II, we
need to more fully develop a number of elements through this Phase I grant,
specifically: (a) develop an emerging understanding of the strengths,
opportunities, aspirations, and results across the undergraduate experience,
graduate experience, and workforce development; document and systematically
refine this analysis; engage the project Advisory Board and other key
stakeholders for feedback and buy-in; and create a collaborative roadmap for
implementation of any and all changes needed, including identification of
responsible individuals for each change to be implemented for Phase II
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed vision of A-SCENE is to create a
comprehensive and fully interconnected system of programs and supports --
representing a whole Vanderbilt School of Engineering effort in partnership with
Fisk University -- to ensure that neurodiverse students can access and succeed
in engineering majors and careers, from the undergraduate experience to graduate
training and professional development to meaningful engagement in the STEM
workforce. The A-SCENE will be a timely, innovative, sustainable, and replicable
model that engages neurodiverse students across engineering in educational and
research experiences while building a community that celebrates differences,
supports needs, develops engineering identity, empowers self-advocacy, opens
doors to employment, and inspires nationally a broader paradigm of neuro-
inclusive engineering. The A-SCENE builds on unique strengths at both Vanderbilt
and Fisk, including the Frist Center for Autism &amp; Innovation, the Fisk-
Vanderbilt 3+2 program in engineering, and the College Autism Network. The
A-SCENE will reach a large community of neurodiverse individuals, both directly
at Vanderbilt and Fisk, as well as broadly through dissemination of the A-SCENE
model. For example, at Vanderbilt and Fisk alone, engineering includes ~275
neurodiverse students, with another ~70 entering engineering each year. These
numbers reflect the current underrepresentation; a fundamental goal is to
identify barriers and implement interventions to significantly broaden
participation of this group. In addition to Fisk University, we will identify at
least one but preferably up to three additional core university partners for
Phase II, which will further amplify impact. Finally, engineering undergraduate
and graduate students nationwide now number in excess of 700,000, of whom
~77,000 are expected to be neurodiverse. Finally, dissemination of the A-SCENE
Engineering Neurodiversity Playbook and our Autism Career Empowerment
professional certification program through ABET, NSF INCLUDES, and other
national networks will broaden the impact further
still.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.