* 2217891
* BRC-BIO: The transcriptomics of environmentally-controlled differentiation into male or female in plants
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jennifer Blake-Mahmud, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2025
* USD 501,356.00

Plants reproduce via male and female functions much like animals do. Differently
from animals, however, most plants (~90%) combine male and female function in
one individual. Even though less than 10% of plant species have separate males
and females, this plant mating system has evolved repeatedly in the history of
green plants and provides an opportunity to understand its evolution. Moreover,
many economically important crops have separate males and females, and often the
male or the female is more valuable than the other (e.g., female holly, male
gingko), and they can be difficult to distinguish before maturity. In other
situations, keeping males and females separate and stable (e.g., female
Cannabis, female hops) is necessary to maintain the quality of a product.
Despite the importance of this aspect of plant biology economically we know
little about factors that determine this expression in plants. This project will
research a special group of plants that exhibit separate males and females –
those for which the environment controls the expression of male or female
function. Chromosomes that determine male or female flower types are rare in
plants and species where the environment plays a strong role have the ability to
express either male or female flowers, and change from one to the other, during
their lives. Changes in gene expression is the most likely mechanism controlling
this phenotype in these species thus, this study examines the relationship
between gene expression and floral development in maples and makes comparisons
to other plant species with different plant mating systems. Understanding more
about how gene expression relates to expression of male versus female flowers
will help make more economical decisions and plan for population stability in
the face of climate change. This project also involves the development of
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences that include both field elements
and training in modern genetic techniques and analysis. It also involves local
outreach with a focus on evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically
several mechanisms that determine male versus female function in organisms has
been categorized: genetic, social, temperature dependent, and environmental.
This division has resulted in primarily ecologically-based research of species
with suspected environmental determination and reinforced a false dichotomy
between genetics and environment. This project investigates the transcriptomic
underpinnings of environmentally-based plasticity in floral function and seeks
answers to the following questions. 1. Are there differences in the amount and
kind of gene expression associated with the expression of floral type? 2. To
what extent does the transcriptome change during floral development? 3. How
similar is the transcriptomic profile of species with this plasticity in
comparison to other species? Is it more similar to those exhibiting dioecy or
monoecy? Through this work new understanding of how gene activation and activity
responds to the environment to shape floral phenotype will obtain. This
understanding is becoming more critical with a changing climate. Furthermore,
the proposed research addresses long-held questions on the evolution of plant
mating systems. Although environmental control of floral phenotype is frequently
mentioned as a potential pathway to dioecy, no studies have explored how
transcriptomically similar these species are to those with monoecious or
dioecious mating systems. This inhibits our understanding of the route to
dioecy, a major and repeated evolutionary transition in plants. Similar
evolutionary transitions in animals happened too infrequently and too far back
in evolutionary time to facilitate experimental investigation, so if we wish to
understand how and why females and males originated, our best chance may reside
in the study of plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.