* 2217840
* BRC-BIO: Alpine Hotspots: Nutrient patches facilitate upslope expansion of tropical alpine communities undergoing rapid climate change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kelsey Reider, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 09/30/2025
* USD 470,754.00

Glacier forefield environments have long acted as natural laboratories for
understanding the establishment of ecological communities in newly available
habitat. There is often a long lag in the initial colonization of plants in
alpine ecosystems because of limited soil nutrients. However, there may be
strong animal-plant facilitation mechanisms at play, where communal dung
deposition by native herbivores creates nutrient hotspots and fuels more rapid
plant establishment. The project will define how nutrient hotspots ameliorate
extreme abiotic conditions and accelerate primary succession in high-mountain
landscapes, facilitating the development of pioneer communities and upslope
expansion of plants and other organisms into glacier forefields. The research
will provide strong research and professional training and mentoring for
students at multiple career stages at a primarily undergraduate institution. Two
Master’s students, 6–12 undergraduates, a post-baccalaureate research
technician, and at least one local Peruvian student will receive training
through this project, equipping the next generation of climate change biologists
with skills to address growing challenges in this field. Revealing unexplored
processes underlying how ecological communities will keep pace with rapid
climate change will enable future experimental and predictive modeling work,
which can inform urgently-needed stewardship of lands newly exposed by
retreating ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal-plant facilitation might be a more
ubiquitous mechanism of primary succession than currently recognized in newly-
exposed deglaciating lands worldwide. The lack of understanding of the
potentially significant role of animal-mediated facilitation impairs our ability
to predict how glacier forefield biodiversity, assemblages, and ecosystem
function will develop under rapid climate change. The goal of this proposal is
to understand the consequences of nutrient hotspots created by animals in terms
of ecosystem succession. This research will help to create a new conceptual
model of the earliest stages of ecosystem development in glacier forefields
supported by extensive field data, and guide future predictive and experimental
work. A multi-scale, field-based approach will reveal how hotspots alter glacier
forefield community development. The specific aims are to: 1) define patch-level
impacts of hotspots on soil nutrients, microbial biomass, and plant
characteristics in glacier forefields; 2) determine landscape-level hotspot
effects on plant and microbial community assembly across a 130-year
chronosequence of glacier retreat; and 3) define patterns of animal activity and
nutrient deposition at hotspots and non-hotspot
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.