* 2217975
* Collaborative Research: Perception, Behavior and Learning in the Museum
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Thomas Albright, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 530,819.00

In addition to their traditional role as a source of emotional rewards and
inspiration, the modern mission of art museums is education. Objects of interest
are presented in the context of a narrative that the museum visitor follows to
learn history, materials, technique, and function, as well as relationships to
the natural world and human civilization. Narrative principles for exhibition
design have for decades emerged from small scale observational studies of museum
visitor behaviors, such as expressions of engagement and choice of path.
Building on recent advances in scientific understanding of sensory processing
and behavioral choice, in combination with sophisticated computational tools for
characterization of fine details of behavior, a team of scientists and museum
professionals will turn a designated gallery at the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art into a laboratory for investigation of human perception, action, choice, and
learning. The broad applied goal of this project is to obtain scientific
knowledge that will further enhance the educational mission of museums. The
intellectual impact of the project will be an improved understanding of
environmental and social factors that guide human behavior under naturalistic
conditions. More generally, the project will benefit the larger communities of
architecture and design professionals, as a model of experimental methodology
and by offering a unique multifaceted dataset for analysis and evaluation of the
influence of the built environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon
several technological and computational innovations. One is the methods of
computational ethology, which is a new approach to quantitative behavioral
analysis that employs high-resolution 3D motion capture together with machine
learning methods for behavioral classification. This approach will yield
efficient non-invasive measurements of visitor locations, rates of movement,
poses, social interactions, gestures and expressions that reflect transitory
cognitive states, such as visual attention and engagement with works of art.
Observations from tens of thousands of anonymous museum visitors will be
subjected to descriptive statistical analyses, to gain insights into the
relationship between the structure and content of exhibition design and the
behavior of individuals and social groups, and to discover spatial and temporal
contingencies between visitor behaviors at different locations in the gallery.
Results of these descriptive analyses will be used to develop predictive models
of visitor behavior, capturing the full gamut of individual styles of visitor
interaction with works of art and other visitors, informed by visitors’ sensory
operating characteristics as well as sensory and motoric affordances of the
gallery space. In the final stage of the project, strategic modifications to
gallery design will be used to test and further develop predictive models in
forecasting visitor behaviors. Results will constitute a new empirical framework
for exhibition design and its impact on visitor
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.