* 2217057
* Establishment of Research and Education Partnerships for Underrepresented Students in Biophysics at Texas Southern University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Harvey, Texas Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2025
* USD 899,976.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award supports Texas Southern University (TSU) in a
partnership with the Center for Theoretical Biological Physics (CTBP, Rice
University) in a collaborative research and training program. This collaboration
will impact students from underrepresented and underserved communities, as is
consistent with the largest segment of the student population on the TSU campus
(greater than 80%). This NSF-PREP project is aimed at improving the retention
and academic preparedness of graduates who successfully go to graduate school,
medical school or successful biophysics careers and related sciences. Research
projects concern the effect of low dose radiation on cells and their genetics,
with a focus on developing collaborations particularly in the areas of
fundamental modeling of chromatin structure and dynamics, and modeling of gene
signaling networks coming from the CTBP side. The funded activities integrate
Texas Southern faculty and student efforts and training with the activities of
the CTBP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration has two main research
projects: (1) Determining mechanisms that affect cell proliferation at low x-ray
doses consistent with diagnostic imaging energies and (2) Understanding how low
dose x-rays affect leukocytes, post-exposure molecular response pathways and
repair mechanisms and phenotypic impact on cell proliferation. The objectives
will be accomplished by emphasizing three distinct thrusts: (1) computational
modeling and theory-based investigation of changes in biologically relevant
processes, linear energy transfer (LET) and Relative Biological Effectiveness
(RBE) engendered by x-ray irradiation in realistic leukocyte cell morphologies
consisting of liquid water at relatively low doses, (2) experimental and
computational evaluation of radiation damage at the DNA scale due to x-ray
irradiation at relatively low doses, and (3) validation and testing of
computational models with biological experiments exploring the functional impact
of low dose x-rays on protein-protein and protein-small molecule interactions.
Establishment of a strong partnership between TSU and the CTBP will provide a
pipeline for a high-achieving and diverse student population with training in
theoretical biophysics and experimental radiation biology research to continue
to graduate or medical school, respectively. The dual aspect of student mentors
in active learning and research experiences are primary components of this
targeted endeavor. For all students, most of the attrition occurs in the first
two years of college, when students are taking introductory gateway courses. The
grant will enable TSU to create and build a successful biophysics program in
partnership with the CTBP. TSU is located within Houston and is one of the
largest Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in the nation.
Underrepresented STEM students will naturally be impacted by the academic and
research thrusts outlined in the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.