* 2217793
* BRC-BIO: Using analysis of historical and contemporary samples to elucidate mechanisms of altitudinal range expansion by plants
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Lua Lopez Perez, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,611.00

Species distributions changes over time and space, often in association with
environmental conditions. Due to climate change, environments are rapidly and
dramatically changing. These changes have consequences for plants. The magnitude
of the environmental change and the ability of plants to respond to such changes
will determine their long-term fate. One way plants may respond to climate
change is moving to better suited environments. Thus, range-shifts may be an
important coping mechanism for plant populations when environments change. This
project uses non-native populations of the model species Arabidopsis thaliana to
understand the evolutionary mechanisms behind altitudinal range expansion. Non-
native species are ideal, non-planned experiments useful in understanding
responses to new environments. This work will leverage historical samples stored
in herbaria, to directly explore changes over time. Historical samples will also
be combined with samples from contemporary populations. Together, these samples
will be used to explore adaptation patterns along altitudinal gradients.
Integrated with the research is a long-term community outreach program at the
California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB) herbarium. This program
targets campus students, their families, and K-12 students. The program aims to
showcase the richness and ecological relevance of the local plant community. The
herbarium also strives to bring awareness of the cultural relevance of plants.
Finally, the research data will be incorporated in a Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experience (CURE) to provide students with hands-on research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Typically, inferences about past eco-
evolutionary events are based on existing populations. Unfortunately, this
offers only a snapshot of long-term processes. Historical herbaria samples allow
direct observation of changes over time and space. This project uses historical
and contemporary samples to study the eco-evolutionary mechanisms over ~150
years of altitudinal movement in California by Arabidopsis thaliana. Data from
herbaria records show that A. thaliana stayed at low altitudes for approximately
40 years. Subsequently, in the next 60 years, A. thaliana spread to elevations
above 2,000m. These movement patterns, along with its status as model organism,
makes A. thaliana great to investigate various questions. Including, how much of
the upward elevational shift is due to adaptation? And, which traits were
important? Two complementary approaches will be used to answer these questions.
First, investigation of historical A. thaliana samples will identify temporal
changes in distribution. Parallel study of contemporary populations across
altitudinal gradients will explore patterns of local adaptation. Whole genome
sequencing data of both herbaria and contemporary samples will explore what
genetic changes occurred across time and space. Further, the data will be used
to test for signatures of adaptation. Genomic data will also inform genome
association studies. Data on fitness-related traits will identify morphological
changes across time (historical samples) and space (contemporary samples) and
test if they are indicative of altitude adaptation. Quantitative data will be
combined with genomic data. Together, these data will be used to investigate
adaptation and determine how much phenotypic plasticity is environmentally vs.
genetically controlled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.