* 2217346
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: National Data Science Alliance (NDSA)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* LaTanya Brown-Robertson, Clark Atlanta University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bernard Grant
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,300,000.00

The NSF INCLUDES National Data Science Alliance (NDSA) is designed to increase
the number of Black people who earn data science credentials, such as
undergraduate, graduate, and post-baccalaureate minors, certificates, and
degrees. On average, Blacks comprise about 3% of all data science professionals,
demonstrating the need for an Alliance-scale effort to address this STEM
broadening participation challenge. Also central to NDSA goals is expanding data
science research that advocates for social justice and transforming data science
discoveries into tangible benefits that advance equity for all. The potential
for the perpetuation of harm through biased data technologies and algorithms is
well documented. The NDSA establishes a national network of Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) with industry, government, and academic
collaborations to apply an equity-centered, collective approach to increase the
number of Black data science professionals and eliminate harmful biases in data-
driven models. The proposal involves three HBCUs, organized into regional hubs:
Clark Atlanta University, Fisk University and Howard
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NDSA is engaging over 1,000 HBCU faculty,
staff, and administrative leaders in targeted efforts that create equity-based
data science ecosystems where all students can thrive. The project aims to
produce at least 20,000 Black students with data science credentials. The NDSA
pursues four mutually reinforcing goals: (1) expand academic and research
opportunities that engage HBCU students in data science; (2) develop research in
data science that reduces bias and promotes ethics, fairness, and validity; (3)
foster the growth of sustainable institutional capacity in data science at
HBCUs; and (4) champion evidence-based inclusive practices and strategies that
broaden the participation of HBCUs in data science. The NDSA leverages
Participatory Action Research (PAR) through faculty/staff workshops, curriculum
development workgroups, and research affinity cohorts. Project outcomes are
expected to significantly diversify the data-capable workforce and result in
societal impact for the benefit of the entire nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Alliance is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners
of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The Alliance is also funded by the Historically Black Colleges
and Universities – Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to
strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at HBCUs, and the Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program, which assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.