* 2217037
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: A Full-stack Approach to Declarative Analytics at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kristopher Micinski, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2023
* USD 83,768.00

Declarative programming languages permit users to define a problem's rules and
goals, and the structure of a valid solution, automating the mechanics of
computation within their implementations. Such expressive programming systems
provide an opportunity for non-experts to immediately scale their analytic tasks
to massive datasets, leveraging AI-based programming. The project's novelties
are a set of techniques, integrating novel optimizations across the full
computation stack, that deliver orders-of-magnitude scalability enhancements to
declarative programming. The project's impacts are centered on permitting non-
specialists to scale sophisticated deductive inference algorithms to the next
generation of cloud-based clusters and
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linguistically, the project's approach is
based on a key semantic extension to Datalog to support indexing for structured
inductive data. While algebraic data is supported in currently existing Datalog
engines (e.g., Souffle), the project’s novel approach also materializes indices
for all such ADTs, enabling orders-of-magnitude algorithmic improvements in
runtimes of queries over algebraic data. Operationally, the project advances
state-of-the-art implementation strategies based on parallel relational algebra,
which enables off-the-shelf data parallelism that rapidly scales to many-core
clusters and supercomputers via MPI. The project seeks to integrate each of
these technologies to scale key applications---including program analysis and
security auditing---and demonstrate their application to large datasets enabled
via the project’s unique synthesis of these
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.