* 2217215
* DASS: A Framework for Accountable Smart Contract Wills
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 748,328.00

Many aspects of everyday life are affected by legal documents, including wills
and contracts. At the same time, the technological advances of recent decades
have resulted in a steady migration of many aspects of life, both personal and
professional, from the physical to the virtual. Because of this, activities
governed by wills and contracts will increasingly be performed by software. To
ensure the full access and trust of the public that will be relying on these
systems, it is important to ensure that such software is accountable, meaning
that the software should (1) verifiably follow all applicable rules and laws,
(2) adapt appropriately to changes in laws, and (3) be explainable, so that non-
programmers can understand what the code does and how it relates to what they
intend. This project aims to develop a framework for the design and
implementation of accountable software systems for wills implemented as smart
contracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop accountable software by
combining expertise in the law with techniques from natural-language processing
and formal methods for verifiable software generation and execution. The
framework will include a two-stage translation process. In the first stage,
natural-language legal documents (here, wills) will be translated into an
intermediate semantic representation (Answer Set Programming) that can generate
target smart-contract-language (Solidity) source code out of templated building
blocks. In the second stage, the smart-contract language is then compiled into
executable code that will be analyzed to ensure that the executable code
faithfully represents the intended behavior. The translation will be
explainable, meaning that each formal instruction can be traced back to the
original human-understandable legal document text. The project will develop an
annotated dataset that maps legal statements in natural language into the
intermediate representation and use this to adapt deep-learning techniques that
have revolutionized the machine translation of natural languages from wills to
code. The framework will guarantee that the translation and execution of a will
is faithful to the will and the law using two complementary methods: (1) It will
check the translated formal representation against laws written in natural
language using a natural-language inference module that is able to assess
whether the original text expressed in the will in the context of creation and
execution is consistent with relevant legal text, and (2) the executable code
will be analyzed using compiler technology to reason about the semantic
similarity between the validated source code of the contract and its decompiled
executable. The project will have significant positive impacts on society, in
terms of both computing technology and law: it will develop novel techniques and
tools to translate human-understandable contracts to machine-understandable
smart contracts in a well-defined and explainable way, and it will validate the
resulting executable code against the original contracts. During the project,
the researchers will also identify legal regimes that can be successfully
automated and improve accountability. All of the software and data produced
during this research will be made freely available to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.