* 2217513
* Polymerized Estrogen Microfibers in Injectable Hydrogels for Astrocyte-Mediated Neurite Guidance and Protection
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ryan Gilbert, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 418,382.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central nervous system (CNS),
including the brain and the spinal cord, is a complex superhighway of
information transport within the human body. The CNS is vital to conducting the
many varied processes of life, but it is also a remarkably fragile, soft tissue.
Traumatic injuries to the brain or spine can lead to swelling, inflammation, and
scarring that prevent full functional recovery in nearly all patients. Many
drugs are available to treat such injuries, but unfortunately the outcomes are
still quite poor – in part because of the complexity of the response to the
injury and difficulty in delivering the medicine precisely where and when it is
needed. There is hence an urgent impetus for novel science and engineering
approaches to figure out how to improve drug efficacy within the injured CNS. In
this project, the team are building new materials that are composed of drug
molecules strung together in long chains called “polymers”. These polymerized
drugs can act as a structural implant for supporting the growth of cells such as
neurons from the brain and spinal cord, while gradually releasing small amounts
of drug molecules locally at the site of implantation. Specifically, they are
using recently invented polymers of estrogen, the major female sex hormone,
which is known to promote regenerative effects in the spinal cord post injury.
The team will examine the fundamental scientific relationships between the
structure of these materials and how critically important cells from the central
nervous system respond to them, including neurons and other cells that assist in
controlling neuron behavior. Two material formulations will be studied: one is
an array of microscopic fibers, which mimics the fibrillar proteins that often
guide cell growth in the body and the other is a soft hydrogel material, which
is basically like the pharmaceutical equivalent of jello. They hypothesized that
combining these two drug-containing materials together into a single hybrid
conduit will help us understand how to coax cells in the injured CNS to avoid
scarring and inflammation and promote healing and regeneration of healthy
tissue. The information gleaned from this work could someday pave the way for
new therapeutic approaches to spinal cord injury and traumatic brain injury. The
team will also broaden participation in STEM outreach activities through
participation with the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Research (LSAMP) and
the National Chemistry Day. The team will engage undergraduates in science
writing such as creating and editing Wikipedia pages and submissions to the open
source journal, Wiki. J. Sci.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contusive injuries to the central nervous system provoke
acute trauma, inflammation, and swelling, followed by a complex and chronic
secondary injury cascade which ultimately prevents full functional recovery. The
major female sex hormone 17β-estradiol (E2) has been shown to promote functional
recovery in rodent models, but requires repeated systemic administration. The
team proposes to develop novel implantable biomaterials composed of polymerized
pro-drugs of 17β-estradiol (E2), formulated as oriented electrospun microfibers
embedded in a matrix of injectable hydrogel. These materials degrade slowly by
hydrolysis to release E2 locally. The fibers are made from a linear copolymer of
pro-17β-estradiol and a flexible chain linker unit. The hydrogel is formed from
4-arm star polyethylene glycol with terminal units of hydrophobic E2, which
forms transient non-covalent crosslinks with poly(β-cyclodextrin) in aqueous
solution. Chemically, these polymerized estrogen scaffolds slowly degrade by
hydrolysis to release low (nanomolar) doses of E2 locally at the site of the
scaffold, sustained for exceptionally long periods of time (months to years),
and with the ability to be applied in a minimally invasive manner. The oriented
microfibers are proposed to mimic the approximate mechanical properties of
fibrillar proteins and will promote mechanical contact guidance cues for
controlling the morphology, phenotype, and protein expression in astrocytes and
neurons in vitro. The injectable hydrogel matrix surrounding the fibers is
intended to mechanically match the stiffness of very soft tissue in the central
nervous system. The central goal of this research project is to relate the
material properties to the cell response. The team will synthesize a library of
polymerized E2 variants with systematically tuned chemical structures. The
hydrophobicity and chain flexibility will be varied, which in turn will
influence mechanical properties, surface topology and the rate and mechanism of
degradation and drug release. These materials will then be incubated with
astrocytes and neurons to assess the impact of their properties on the cell
behavior observed. The ultimate goal is to understand how to orchestrate cell
response to biomaterials that can promote regenerative phenotypes and possibly
improve the likelihood of functional recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.