* 2217691
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Perception of water insecurity and epigenetic signatures of stress
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jacinta Beehner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 31,189.00

Water insecurity is a worldwide problem and can be a major stressor that
negatively impacts mental and physical health. Despite this burden, the
connections between perceived water insecurity, psychological stress, and
biological responses are not well understood. This doctoral dissertation project
incorporates a biocultural approach to examine whether objective and/or
perceived water insecurity are socio-environmental exposures that impact human
biology. The study focuses on the experiences of women who often must cope with
the burden of water insecurity, examining relationships between stress, resource
insecurity and health that may be variable and mediated by culturally specific
practices. The project findings may aid in the development of future policies
addressing environmental and social inequality. Results from this research are
shared with national and international communities through outreach activities,
which strengthens international collaborations and can inform future studies
exploring the short and long-term effects of resource insecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study builds upon biocultural studies of embodiment
and health, proposing that the subjective perception of resource insecurity, in
this case water insecurity, and the practices derived from it are key factors
contributing to health disparities. This project investigates the connections
between perceived water insecurity, psychological stress, and DNA methylation in
stress-related genes by comparing women from water-secure and water-insecure
neighborhoods in a rapidly growing megacity. Perceived water insecurity and
perceived stress are gauged using interview questionnaires. Saliva samples are
collected to measure DNA methylation in stress-related genes. This mixed-methods
approach can provide a critical biocultural understanding of the extent to which
perception, anticipation, or fear of water insecurity may impact mental and
physical health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.