* 2217640
* Track 4: Center for Equity in Engineering: Organizational Transformation for Graduate Education
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,981.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University-level administrators,
College-level personnel, academic departments, graduate programs, and individual
advisors all play important roles in graduate engineering education, but
integrating those different influencers to achieve an overarching, coordinated
goal is quite challenging. This project will establish a Center for Equity in
Engineering focused on organizational transformation for graduate education at
Virginia Tech (VT). Establishing such a center is important because the highly
decentralized nature of graduate education in engineering makes integrated
reform strategies extremely challenging and fosters inequities throughout the
system. Importantly, the Center will reframe broadening participation such that
the focus is on changing systems to promote student success rather than trying
to “fix” graduate students. We will focus on organizing, aligning, and
integrating many interconnected systems and processes within the system of
graduate education (e.g., recruitment, admissions, funding, research,
professional development) to promote student success and wellbeing and disrupt
systems of oppression across these systems. Aligned with the vision for an ideal
STEM graduate education system set forth by the National Academies and the
objectives of the National Science Foundation's Broadening Participation in
Engineering program, we envision a more equitable and inclusive graduate
engineering education where student experiences and outcomes are not predicted
by demographic variables or citizenship. Instead, this Center will work toward
facilitating an environment where every graduate student will be provided with
opportunities to develop their technical and professional skills, establish
their identities as professional engineers, and be included and engaged in the
community. This Center will provide a model for other institutions to support a
more equitable graduate education enterprise within colleges of
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By meaningfully addressing continual calls for
systemic, structural, and sustainable change within graduate education, this
Center will make significant intellectual contributions in advancing
understanding of how to enact organizational transformation to promote equity in
graduate engineering education. Grounded in a collective impact framework and an
action research design, this project will be organized around four pillars: 1)
revamping policies, 2) aligning structures, 3) shifting culture, and 4)
transforming practice. Through coordinated efforts, the Center will reorient
existing decentralized structures, resource flows, and decision processes and
foster both bottom-up and top-down change processes. The Center is designed in a
way that integrates existing organizational structures, builds infrastructure so
that activities in progress can become better coordinated and impactful,
includes a variety of mechanisms to ensure successful engagement of stakeholders
throughout the organization (i.e., administrators, faculty, and students), and
ensures multiple, regular opportunities for critical feedback and evaluation.
The Center leadership team includes every VT College of Engineering
administrative position associated with graduate education as well as scholars
and leaders in broadening participation and graduate education. Using an Action
Research lens, we will document successes and failures, resulting in
complementary insights and robust findings that will advance understanding of
what promotes and impedes transformative change. This Center will include
efforts that span two VT campuses: a well-established campus in Blacksburg, VA
and the new Innovation Campus in Alexandria, VA, which exclusively focuses on
graduate engineering education and aspires to produce the most diverse cohorts
of graduates in the nation. This design will enable insights on how to pursue
organizational change in two distinct contexts: one with existing inertia and
one that is void of historical baggage. In addition to a dissemination strategy
that includes a variety of different formats to reach a range of audience needs,
the Center will engage multiple working groups of graduate students and faculty
who will hopefully become more equity-minded, which also will broaden the
impacts of this Center as ideas from their engagement are built into their
future work and interactions with colleagues and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.