* 2217924
* BRC-BIO: Elucidating how protein-nucleic acid interactions create site-specific integration of retrotransposable elements
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Shawn Christensen, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2025
* USD 490,662.00

Retrotransposable elements are a class of ubiquitous genomic parasites found in
most eukaryotes, and they constitute a major component of these genomes.
Replication of retrotransposable elements results in chromosomal aberrations,
including insertions, deletions, and double stranded breaks, which can affect
cellular gene expression and act as a source of new genes. Long INterspersed
Elements (LINEs) have played a central role in this process. As such, the
proteins encoded by LINEs are being explored as molecular biology tools for
potential genome engineering. Knowledge of how the LINE protein binds to DNA
near the insertion site is essential to understanding the integration mechanism
and how the protein might be engineered to change site-specificity. The project
will enhance the research capacity and research program at the PI’s primarily
undergraduate institution, launch the PI’s career, and provide a phosphorimager,
used by the PI, research assistants, and researchers and students from other
STEM departments. Funding for research assistants makes research accessible to
low-income and diverse students. Undergraduates will have opportunities to
participate in hands-on original research in biochemistry and molecular biology,
present their research at conferences, and publish the findings. They will
develop their communication and presentation skills and will be more prepared
for graduate studies and careers in STEM fields via journal clubs and bi-weekly
joint lab meetings between the PI and CO-PI. Working with the Co-PI and graduate
students during two-week paid research internships at the research-intensive
institution will further student's research training and provides opportunities
to network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration mechanism of LINEs, which
plays a central role in genome mutation and evolution, shares mechanistic
similarities to telomere elongation and group II introns. This project focuses
on using R2Bm from Bombyx mori, an earlier branching group of LINEs known as
Restriction Like Endonuclease (RLE) LINEs, to explore how the R2Bm protein binds
to DNA and what DNA sequences are important for binding to the R2Bm protein.
Site-specific RLE LINEs are of particular interest because of their specificity
and because they encode a single multifunction gene product. A detailed
knowledge of how the RLE LINE protein binds to DNA near the insertion site is
essential to understanding the integration mechanism as a whole and how the
protein might be engineered to change site-specificity. In addition, the
proposed studies will shed light not only on the integration mechanism of the
model element R2Bm but also on the integration of similar elements. The
objectives of the project are: (1) to characterize an important conserved motif
in the R2Bm protein by amino acid substitutions; (2) to analyze the protein-DNA
complexes using in vitro protein DNA-binding assays; and (3) to characterize the
DNA target requirements by SELEX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.