* 2217138
* BCL-2 Family Interactions With 2-Trans-Hexadecenal Define Pro-Apoptotic And Anti-Apoptotic Classifications
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jerry Chipuk, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 754,638.00

Cells that become infected or mutated often respond by inducing a suicide
program called apoptosis. This program is important to healthy tissues because
it ensures that stressed and/or diseased cells are eliminated. Despite the
biological importance of apoptosis, the signals that allow for cellular suicide
to proceed are incompletely understood. The goal of this project is to
understand apoptosis at the single-molecule level using a combination of state-
of-the-art techniques that will reveal fundamental biology with applications to
biotechnology and medicine. Throughout the duration of this project, research
opportunities will be provided to high school students, undergraduate students,
post-baccalaureate students, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows,
including those who are underrepresented in science and medicine, with the goal
of inspiring and building a diverse scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is crucial
in biological processes ranging from embryogenesis to carcinogenesis. The BCL-2
(B-cell CLL/Lymphoma 2) family of proteins is a critical regulator in the
apoptotic pathway with both pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic functions, making
it crucial to understand its underlying mechanisms. BCL-2 proteins such as BAX
(BCL-2 associated X protein, the major pro-apoptotic BCL-2 protein), collaborate
with other BCL-2 family proteins, leading to the creation of proteolipid pores
in the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM). This causes the OMM to become
permeable, allowing pro-apoptotic proteins to leak out of the mitochondria to
activate caspases and cell apoptosis. While nearly three decades of literature
suggest protein-protein interactions within the BCL-2 family delineates anti-
apoptotic from pro-apoptotic function, new preliminary data reveal that lipid
binding into an uncharacterized hydrophobic pocket in pro-apoptotic members is
the true determinant of pro-apoptotic function. The scientific aims of this
project are to reveal a detailed structure-based mechanism of how mitochondrial
lipids directly alter the conformation of BAX to result in its activation and to
expand upon these transformative concepts by engineering lipid-binding domains
into anti-apoptotic BCL-2 proteins to evaluate their molecular and cellular
functions. In parallel, a major overarching goal of this project is to nurture,
inspire, and advance the career development of young scientists at all levels by
preparing a diverse biomedical research workforce armed with the methodological
skills, analytical acumen, and scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.