* 2217558
* Collaborative Research: The mismeasure of GxE: causes and consequences of environmental exposures for the evolution of plasticity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Kimberly Hughes, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2026
* USD 528,914.00

How do populations evolve in complex and changing environments? Why do some
populations have the necessary genetic variation to adapt to environmental
change, while others do not? This research proposes to answer these questions by
combining ideas from genetics and behavioral biology. Instead of starting at the
population level and working towards mechanisms, the investigators will instead
start with the developmental processes that differ across individuals to produce
variation that fuels evolutionary change. The focus will be on the
relationship(s) between an individual’s choice of environment (e.g., where to
live) and the developmental processes that are shaped by that environment (e.g.,
their later behavior and survival). The research will integrate theory, and
experiments with fruit flies, to study the links between environment choice and
development, and how these links differ between individuals, at the population,
individual, and genomic scales, and across generations. This approach will
develop and test new mathematical tools that will allow future researchers to
predict the evolutionary consequences of environmental variation for any
population. As part of this research, the investigators will mentor and train
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers at
multiple institutions for four years; and, they will run a summer research
program for high school teachers to provide experience with hands-on research
and guide them to develop lesson plans in mathematical theory and genetics for
their classrooms. Therefore, this research will uncover fundamental principles
of evolution necessary to predict population vulnerabilities to environmental
change while training the next generation of leaders in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
comprehensive framework that links functional genetic mechanisms of trait
expression with organism-level environment preferences to predict GxE within and
among generations. The research will combine experiments and theoretical models.
At the organismal level, the Aims will interrogate links between preference for
a particular environment, and experience in each environment—and how these
processes result in expressed patterns of plasticity and fitness. This approach
will provide understanding of which individuals will be plastic, and why. The
next step is to identify underlying gene expression networks that produce
variation in behavior and functional links between environment choice and
plasticity. Simultaneously, the investigators will develop population level
theoretical models that will examine how variation in environmental exposures
influences genetic variation in responses to environments, and how these
processes together control the expression of GxE and influence its evolution. By
coordinating experimental work and population-genetic models of the evolutionary
causes of GxE, this research will provide biologists with a rigorous conceptual
toolkit from which to interpret or apply these ideas to any organism. Together,
these efforts will “put the pieces together” to produce a priori, bottom-up
predictions about GxE and its evolution, predictions which are currently
lacking. At the same time, the investigators will run a Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) program, using established best practices. The RET will impact
hundreds of students from underrepresented groups by enhancing the expertise of
their teachers with critical hands-on biology research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.