* 2217155
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Silk Protein Innovation and Novelty (SPIN) : integrating across disciplines to decipher silk fiber evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Paul Frandsen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,157,668.00

Silk is one of nature’s strongest and lightest biomaterials. It is used by
hundreds of thousands of species for an array of applications. Yet, outside of a
few species, little is known about the genomic basis and material properties of
natural silks. This project takes an integrative approach to examine the
molecular, developmental, and functional basis of silk across a diversity of
uses. An integrative team of natural historians, molecular biologists,
developmental biologists, and bioengineers are combining their expertise to gain
insight into how nature shapes silk fiber function. This research is
foundational to engineering new materials that can applied to many products,
from surgical adhesives to sustainable clothing. As part of this project,
multiple postdoctoral researchers and graduate students gain interdisciplinary
training in genomics, gene editing, and engineering. Furthermore, this project
creates a traveling museum exhibit to educate the public about the natural
properties of silk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silk has been shaped and re-adapted for
an extraordinary diversity of uses across multiple distantly related arthropod
groups and hundreds of millions of years of evolution. To date, silk research in
insects has focused largely on fibers from the domesticated silkworm moth,
Bombyx mori. This project uses a comparative, multi-tiered approach to study
silks of the most dominant clade of silk-producing insects, the caddisflies and
moths. The combination of genomics, proteomics, functional genetics, and
biophysical measurements will illuminate how silks adhere to underwater
substrates, how they consolidate into an insoluble fiber, and help understand
the molecular basis of their mechanical properties. Evolutionary correlations
are woven between genotypes and phenotypes and direct tests of causality are
conducted in strategically chosen focal species that are amenable to genetic
modification. Overall, this project addresses the overarching question, “How
does nature shape silk fiber function?” with a new framework for a fundamental
biological superstructure that has untapped potential for the production of new
polymer-based biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.