* 2217759
* Interaction of electromagnetic pulses and nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 09/30/2025
* USD 353,461.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research aimed at developing and applying new methods to model the interaction
of electromagnetic waves and matter. Almost everything in everyday life around
us, from photosynthesis to television screens and mobile phones, is a result of
some form of interaction of electromagnetic fields (light) and matter. Atoms and
molecules in matter can absorb and emit light and can interact with each other
coupled to electromagnetic fields. When electromagnetic fields are weak, their
interaction changes the dynamics of electrons and nuclei, but the
electromagnetic fields themselves remain unperturbed. When strong
electromagnetic fields interact with matter, however, the motion of the
electrons and the nuclei induce electromagnetic fields in addition to the
incident fields. The induced fields can be substantially larger than the
incident field and this can significantly change the material properties. The
goal of this project is to simulate the interaction of coupled light-matter
systems by using a quantum description of the matter and classical field
approach to the electromagnetic fields in a self-consistent, coupled formalism.
The developed methods will be applied to a wide range of nanomaterials that are
of fundamental and technological importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will also provide broad research training opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in an interdisciplinary environment
overarching physics, electrical engineering, materials science, quantum
mechanical simulations, high-performance computing, and novel computational
algorithms. In addition, the PI will host high-school teachers through the
Vanderbilt Research Experiences for Teachers program, and develop classroom
modules with them on emerging scientific and technological frontiers in
nanoscience and computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research aimed at
developing and applying a time-dependent orbital-free (TD-OF) approach coupled
with Maxwell equations to describe the interaction of electromagnetic waves and
matter. The coupled Maxwell TD-OF equations treat the electron and photon
dynamics in a microscopic framework on equal footing. In the coupled frame, the
densities and currents are calculated using a quantum mechanical approach in the
presence of a time-dependent vector potential, and then Maxwell equations are
solved using the quantum mechanically calculated time-dependent microscopic
currents and densities. A new approach, the Riemann-Silberstein formalism, will
be used to solve Maxwell equations by the propagation of "the wave function of
the photon". The OF approach will allow for electrodynamic simulations to be
performed for systems of experimentally relevant sizes with a quantum
description of the electrons. The results of the simulations will be tested
against recent experimental results. Computational challenges of gap plasmonics
(charge transfer plasmons, plasmonic tunnel junctions, high harmonic generation)
and 2D plasmonics (real space mapping, edge plasmons, terahertz plasmonics) will
be pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also provide broad research
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
an interdisciplinary environment overarching physics, electrical engineering,
materials science, quantum mechanical simulations, high-performance computing,
and novel computational algorithms. In addition, the PI will host high-school
teachers through the Vanderbilt Research Experiences for Teachers program, and
develop classroom modules with them on emerging scientific and technological
frontiers in nanoscience and computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.