* 2217898
* BRC-BIO: Understanding tree phloem functioning during drought
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jessica Gersony, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2026
* USD 502,817.00

In this time of relatively extreme climate change, it is crucial that we
understand how plants interact with the climate, to accurately predict future
climate conditions and to inform CO2 mitigation efforts. Currently, forests
sequester upwards of 25% of anthropogenic CO2 emissions, annually. However, it
is unclear how their ability to sequester CO2 will change in the future,
especially in areas that are predicted to have increased droughts. This project
will investigate a key unknown underlying our uncertainty around how trees
respond to drought: the phloem. The phloem is the “sugar highway” of the plant.
It is the pipe that transports sugars that are photosynthesized in leaves to
areas that need sugar to grow. If the phloem loses functioning during drought,
the resultant lack of an ability to transport sugars to areas in need could
reduce photosynthesis or even cause plant mortality. This project will
investigate how phloem functions in the context of drought for forest trees. We
will use novel Raman spectroscopy methods that allow us to visualize sugar
throughout the plant and quantify phloem functioning, among other methods.
Additionally, this project will focus on increasing the availability and quality
of research experiences for students from under-represented communities through
collaborating with students and faculty from the neighboring Holyoke Community
College, integrating art into the research process, and providing research
opportunities for Smith College
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Droughts are predicted to increase in
intensity and frequency around the world. This project seeks to further our
understanding of how trees respond to drought by investigating phloem function
in whole-plant physiology under drought. The phloem is responsible for
transporting sugar from sites of production to sites of need and is driven by
positive pressure generated by water. Due to its integral role in whole plant
function and its dependence on water, the phloem is hypothesized to be a key
regulator of drought responses e.g., photosynthetic down-regulation and
mortality. The objectives of this proposal are three-fold: to quantify
differences in phloem function during control and drought conditions for mature,
forest trees, to understand when the phloem loses function in relationship to
photosynthesis, and to investigate how phloem functioning relates to plant
mortality. We will approach these objectives through the use of Raman
spectroscopy and measuring the rate at which carbon moves in the phloem,
alongside other physiological methods. A forest rain-fall manipulation
experiment will be established and used in controlled mortality experiments on
saplings of northeastern US tree species in controlled environments. This
project should improve our understanding of phloem function, and subsequently
whole-tree function, in drought conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.