* 2217806
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Integration and Culture Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Arianna Garvin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 25,172.00

The current climate crisis is a stark reminder of humanity’s shared history of
dealing with climatic extremes. In archeological theory, climate change or
natural disasters have been blamed for the collapse of civilizations. Equally
common, however, are instances in which polities in the ancient world adapted to
or circumvented climatic extremes. Learning how ancient people dealt with severe
climate phenomena can inform current and future responses to such crises.
Archaeology is exceptionally positioned to unearth the long record of mutual
interactions between human cultural practices and their environments. This
project will examine ancient human resilience to climatic extremes at the
archaeological site directly affected by El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
events. Since the mid-Holocene societies have experienced ENSO events that, when
most powerful, transform ecological conditions, prompting heavy rainfall and
flooding in some locations and severe drought in others. This project takes a
community-engaged approach to excavation and analysis. Through hiring and
training residents, distributing educational resources, offering recurring
presentations at schools, and preparing cultural heritage exhibitions this
project will provide long-term community benefits. In this way, archeological
work will be made relevant to local people. This project aims to respect,
record, and integrate Indigenous knowledge systems, broadening the vision of
climate science to incorporate traditional and local knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on an area directly affected by ENSO events, this
research investigates three resilient ways in which people integrated ENSO-
related changes into their social and ecological systems. First, in the local
dimension residents had access to various ecological niches, including
floodplain, ocean and desert environments.. Thus, ENSO events that disrupt
traditional irrigation canals and maritime resources also offer opportunities in
desert landscapes, prompting extensive biota growth. This raises the question of
how people in the area took advantage of such fluctuations. In addition to
differentially affecting ecological niches, ENSOs have varying impacts on
neighboring coastal valleys. As a second adaptation to these events, this
project tests for trade between groups of people inhabiting the coastal
zone.Finally the region was a strategic forefront of maritime resources and
likely participated in subsistence exchanges with people inhabiting higher,
agriculturally-focused sites of the valley. ENSOs affect resource availability
across the various altitudinally-determined ecological zones, so this project
will also investigate coastal-highland resource exchanges as an ENSO-resilience
strategy. In conclusion, this project will combine climate modeling and
archaeological data from site levels before, during, and after significant ENSO
events to explore local resilience and determine how patterns of exchange
fluctuated as fundamental human adaptations to ENSO
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.