* 2217147
* RCN-UBE: Advancing CURE Teaching Assistant Professional Development via the CURE TAPESTRy Network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Melissa Aikens, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2026
* USD 482,409.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by engaging facilitators of
biology course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) in the creation
and evaluation of novel professional development resources and opportunities
designed for laboratory coordinators and teaching assistants (TAs) who are,
themselves, responsible for leading CUREs. The research-oriented nature of a
CURE presents a unique set of instructional challenges for those that teach
them, requiring distinct professional development (PD) opportunities. Given that
no community currently exists that focuses on CURE TA PD and the literature on
CURE TA PD is limited, this project aims to establish the CURE Teaching
Assistant Professional Development to Enhance Scientific Teaching, Research, and
Mentoring Capacity (TAPESTRy) network, with the primary goal of advancing CURE
TA PD knowledge and best practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project will: (1) establish the CURE TAPESTRy network and cultivate growth in
the network through recruitment of diverse individuals interested in
professional development for laboratory coordinators and TAs PD; (2)
characterize the current landscape of PD opportunities for CURE TAs through a
literature review and national survey; (3) create, implement, and evaluate an
innovative year-long fellowship program for CURE TA PD facilitators, in which
fellows will create and assess CURE TA PD resources; (4) generate a curated
repository of field-tested CURE TA PD resources, which will be freely available
to practitioners and researchers; and (5) develop, launch, and assess an edX
“train-the-trainer” massively-open online course (MOOC) for CURE TA PD
facilitators. By promoting PD for CURE TAs, the CURE TAPESTRy network will
contribute to the professional growth of TAs while simultaneously cultivating
the pedagogical knowledge and intellectual capital needed to assist
undergraduates in developing their research skills. This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).This project
is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing
the quality of undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing associate’s or
baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.