* 2217246
* IntBIO: Linking genome to phenome to understand the function of Masticatory Myosin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matthew Gage, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,134,685.00

Muscles provide the primary means for animals to produce force, move, and
interact with their environment. Muscle function is a consequence of
hierarchical structure from molecular to whole muscle and muscle/skeletal
systems. However, deep understanding of how muscles work is limited by research
that does not fully cross these scales. Multiscale studies that investigate how
genes encode proteins, how trillions of proteins of different kinds interact,
how muscle mass and shape influence contraction, and how skeletal geometry tunes
the speed and forcefulness of movements are the best avenue for enabling new
insights into muscle performance. This project leverages the synergy of state-
of-the-art, multiscale experimental techniques, and mathematical modeling of
muscle, to understand bite performance in rodent models. Rodents have a range of
bite strategies, jaw geometries, and muscle protein compositions, including a
unique type of the muscle motor-protein myosin called masticatory myosin.
Previous studies have suggested that masticatory myosin has exceptional
properties that could provide new insights into how muscles produce bite forces.
This project will test whether bite performance is influenced primarily by
muscle size and shape, skeletal geometry, or the presence of masticatory myosin.
Insights gathered from this integrative complement of studies will inform future
studies of how muscle function is controlled by features of muscle tissue. In
the broader impact activities of this project, the principle that biological
function is “more than the sum of its parts” will be introduced through a
custom-coded computer game that will teach secondary school students from groups
underrepresented in STEM about how muscles
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding complex biological systems like
muscle is challenging without multiscale convergence approaches, such as those
used in this project. A fundamental idea in muscle physiology is the trade-off
between force and velocity. However, a masticatory isoform of the myoprotein
myosin has been suggested to be both forceful and fast. Unique mechanochemistry
of two molecular loop sequences connecting myosin functional domains could
explain this paradoxical phenomenon. This idea will be tested using targeted
mutagenesis of C2C12 muscle cells, in-vitro motility assays, and single-fiber
experiments that measure peak and loaded velocity of diverse myosin aggregates.
An alternate idea is that fast and strong performance of jaw muscles with
masticatory myosin is due to organ- to organism-scale differences in muscle
size, geometry, bite type, and biomechanics that can buffer myosin force or
speed limitations. This idea will be tested in experiments where muscle
activation, strain, force, and leverage dynamics are measured using
electromyography, sonomicrometry, micro force-buckles, and X-ray Reconstruction
of Moving Morphology during biting on food items with controlled size and
varying hardness. These methods will permit determination of the realized force-
velocity of biting. Rodents are ideal for determining the cross-scale
mechanistic bases of force-velocity modulation, as phenotypes exist with
distinct myosin isoform expression but shared bite biomechanics. Force-velocity
relationships across biological scales (actomyosin, myofibers, intact muscles,
and whole feeding systems) will be coupled using a subtractive approach, and
multiscale mathematical muscle modeling will be used to determine the
mechanistic bases for emergent performance in geometrically similar or different
rodents that either possess or lack masticatory
myosin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.