* 2217453
* PIC: Hybrid Photonic-Electronic Reprogrammable Reservoir Computing with Polarization Modes-enhanced Dimensionality
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

The recent success of Machine Learning methods based on brain-inspired
Neuromorphic Computing (NC) to perform complex information processing tasks
spiked significant research in new unconventional computational schemes such as
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and RNN-based Reservoir Computing (RC) which
are capable to implement parallel data processing to overcome limitations of
conventional sequential computing. Particularly, decomposing the reservoir into
an inner network with static weights and an output neurons layer with adaptive
and trainable weights allows realization of physical RC where optical-based RC
platforms are attractive due to the “speed-of-light” propagation, inherent
parallelism, relatively low operation power, and the possibility to harness
additional degrees of freedom such as polarization and wavelength. Furthermore,
on-chip Photonic Integrated Circuit (PIC) offer enhanced light-matter
interaction and modes polarization for enlarged reservoir, and interconnection
with CMOS compatible electronics for power efficient electrical reprogrammable
feedback. The proposed physical RC PICs are expected to impact mobile
applications such as unmanned autonomous vehicles (UAV) and robotic platforms by
reducing the need for communication with remote computers, thus avoiding latency
and prolonging battery life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(technical description)
&lt;br/&gt;To realize the reservoir computing (RC) processor utilizing the
polarization degrees of freedom on a photonic integrated chip (PIC), we propose
the following objectives: (1) numerical and theoretical study aiming to explore
the effect of introducing polarization as a new degree of freedom on RC
efficiency depending on the underlying architecture of PIC with the electronic
feedback elements providing dynamics control; (2) design, fabricate and
characterize silicon PIC interconnected with external electronic feedback,
admitting the designed architectures; (3) experimentally test the PIC system
with external electronic feedback to realize reprogrammable RC tasks, validate
the theoretical study and evaluate its performance for relevant applications
providing higher accuracy and lower energy consumption compared to state-of-the-
art. Rapid prototyping and testing will be performed at UCSD with full scale
runs performed at the AIM Photonics foundry. The proposed research is
transformative in nature as it will: (i) greatly expand the limits of
applicability of RC in CMOS compatible PIC platforms, (ii) develop a fundamental
understanding on the effect of reprogrammability on the induced reservoir
dynamics and the corresponding performance error, (iii) expand the current
notions of both RC and the optical degrees of freedom employed for RC (e.g.,
polarization). The transformative broader impact of the project arises from the
creation of a new much faster and more efficient RC PIC accelerator that will
impact mobile applications such as UAV and robotic platforms. The project will
provide scientific training for students at graduate and undergraduate levels as
well as serve as a basis for outreach, education and collaborative efforts with
middle and high schools. Engagement of students of diverse ethnicity, gender and
economic backgrounds in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
will be continued via the ongoing RET, REU, and COSMOS activities. The program
will continue developing a plug &amp; play Integrated Photonics Education Kit
(IPEK) and disseminate it to other institutions to implement hands-on classes
for a large number of students with diverse origins and gender, and workforce
population in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.