* 2217297
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Integrated mechanisms of environment-host-virome interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Simon Anthony, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 814,512.00

In nature, encounters between humans and wildlife correlate with greater viral
burdens in wildlife and therefore with higher risk of new viral pathogens
spilling over into human populations. Yet, the factors contributing to this risk
remain poorly understood, especially among highly mobile, but tightly packed
populations of animals, such as cave-dwelling bats. Using the Egyptian fruitbat
as a study system, this project seeks to understand how factors such as access
to food, overall animal health, and responses to immune challenges influence
each other in the wild to control the degree of viral infection in populations
experiencing variable exposure to humans. The project will use highly
integrative approaches to illuminate the fundamental biology of disease risk and
to enhance the capacity to predict risks of viral spillover from bats to other
wildlife or to humans. The project will also have broader impact on education
and training by implementing an innovative active-learning experience, called
“From the Bat Cave – Integrative Disease Research for Undergraduates”, in which
postdoctoral researchers will learn to apply integrative research and mentoring
methods to involve cohorts of undergraduate students in research and peer-peer
mentoring through GBatNet, a NSF-funded international network of bat research
groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Human disruption of the environment is thought to
play a central role in disease emergence in wildlife populations by reducing the
availability of foods and refuge that animals rely upon, thereby stressing the
animals and making them more susceptible to viruses. However, the mechanisms
governing relationships among the environment, the wildlife host, and the viral
communities they support are poorly known. To address this problem, the project
will take advantage of a single cohesive wild system of Egyptian fruit bats
(Rousettus aegyptiacus) to sample animals of different sex, age, and
reproductive condition from caves that support different numbers of bats, are
subject to variable levels of hunting, and are surrounded by different qualities
of foraging habitat and hence food resources. Using each individual bat as the
unit of observation, analyses will aim to relate landscape resources, and
individual condition and immunity to viral profiles, thus answering three key
questions: (1) how do host abundance, reproduction, age, and condition
differentially or interactively influence viral diversity; (2) how do molecular
immune mechanisms respond to environmental and physiological stressors in wild
populations; and (3) how do gene expression profiles and viral infection
influence one another in the wild? The results should allow links to be
discerned that connect environmental gradients of human disturbance to virome
diversity via organismal conditions, thereby providing essential new information
for understanding disease dynamics in the wild, modeling risks, and thus
preventing the next pandemic. Moreover, the project’s integrated and mechanistic
systems approach to studying fundamental processes in disease emergence is
expected to be generalizable across taxa at the human-wildlife disease
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.