* 2217070
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: Scalable Specialization in Distributed Edge-Cloud Systems – The Extended Reality Case
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Ada Gavrilovska, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2027
* USD 715,369.00

This project will develop design methodologies for a scalable, domain-specific,
heterogeneous, distributed edge/cloud system with stringent constraints on
latency, energy, thermal power, computational requirements, and size. The work
will use a distributed multiparty augmented / virtual / mixed reality
(collectively, extended reality or XR) experience as a target parallel and
distributed application with challenging quality-of-experience goals,
scalability requirements, design constraints, and diverse and fast-evolving
algorithmic components. There are orders-of-magnitude gaps between desirable
design goals and today's state-of-the-art, making this a long-lived
multidisciplinary research challenge. The project brings together work in
Computer Architecture, Programming Languages and Compilers, Systems, Security
and Privacy, and Accuracy and Correctness. It will result in innovations that
cut across the system stack to improve quality-of-experience scalability with
the number of users and devices and device resources, XR device performance
scalability with hardware parallelism, and design methodologies scalability with
system complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will disseminate its
research results through considerable open-source software artifacts, building
on the team’s previously released ILLIXR system (the first open-source end-to-
end single-device XR system), in addition to publications in top venues and
talks in academic and industry venues. High-performance, energy-efficient
distributed applications such as multiparty XR (and numerous others) have the
potential for transformative impact on a vast number of societal activities such
as medicine, education, entertainment, manufacturing, science, and more. The
team will work in close collaboration with industry partners for direct
technology-transfer avenues. The PIs will continue their past record of strong
involvement of undergraduates, women, and minorities in research; leadership in
establishing the CARES movement; and other efforts to broaden participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.