* 2217727
* Deformation Mechanisms of Gradient Steels with High Strength and Ductility
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Anter El-Azab, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2025
* USD 642,540.00

Gradient metals are designed such that the physical properties change steadily
with position. This has many benefits but none more than the ability to achieve
enhanced strength and ductility at the same time. There are competing views
regarding the mechanisms responsible for this phenomenon, but many of these
views have not been validated and reconciled. This award will use a combination
of novel in situ mechanical testing and modeling at various length scales to
distinguish the various deformation mechanisms in gradient steel
microstructures. Structurally gradient steels with high strength and ductility
have broad applications in nuclear, petrochemical and automobile industries. The
fundamental knowledge derived from this study may be generally applicable for
the design of other strong and ductile structural metallic materials. The award
will also support an extensive education and outreach plan, including the
opportunity for graduate students to work with collaborators at a national
laboratory, recruitment of minority undergraduate students as interns, and
mentoring of middle and high school students in science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this grant is to investigate, at a
fundamental level, the influence of microstructure gradient on mechanical
behavior of steels by integrating severe plastic deformation, in situ
micromechanical testing, and crystal plasticity simulations. The goal is to
design heterogeneous materials with significantly improved mechanical strength
and ductility. The hypothesis is that significant grain coarsening of the
elongated grain morphology arises from dynamic recrystallization and/or stress-
driven grain boundary migration, and the switching between the two mechanisms
should be temperature dependent. A further hypothesis is that the suppression of
localized shear softening under the combined influence of deformation mechanisms
and gradient microstructure evolution leads to increased strength and ductility.
To test these hypotheses, a dislocation plasticity based theoretical framework
combining plastic deformation, dynamic recrystallization, and stress-driven
grain boundary migration will be developed to study gradient microstructures.
The modeling will complement the investigation of the fundamental deformation
mechanisms by in situ tension microscopy studies at various temperatures and
length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.