* 2217003
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: Co-designing  Hardware, Software, and Algorithms to Enable Extreme-Scale Machine Learning Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,251,217.00

The newly emerging Artificial Intelligence (AI) of Things (AIoT) and Internet of
Senses (IoS) systems will make mobile and embedded devices smart, communicative,
and powerful by processing data and making intelligent decisions through the
integration of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI).
This project aims to provide a new generation of systems, algorithms, and tools
to facilitate such deep integration at extreme scale. The novelty of the project
is to fundamentally ensure scalability of future Machine Learning (ML) systems
over the large population of distributed devices, by formulating the seamless
integration of advanced ML algorithms with co-designed hardware, computer
architectures, and distributed edge-cloud systems, along with meaningful
security and privacy guarantees. This co-design methodology allows synergistic
consideration of the intrinsic heterogeneity, performance and energy constraints
of devices, as well as the unprecedented scale and complexity of data produced
by these devices. The project's impacts are to lay the foundation for the future
of AIoT and IoS systems by solving challenges driven by needs related to their
complex and heterogeneous contexts, and to advance a wide swath of fields
including ML, edge computing, IoT, hardware, software and related engineering
disciplines. This project is also contributing to society through developing new
curricula, disseminating research for education and training, engaging under-
represented students in research, and outreaching to high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to build a
new co-designed framework of hardware, software, and algorithms to enable
extreme-scale ML systems for the emerging AIoT and IoS systems. The project
consists of five research thrusts. Thrust 1 develops hardware, computer
architecture and compiler approaches to address the scalability issue in AIoT
and IoS systems by enforcing large-scale split learning on devices. Thrust 2
investigates extreme-scale ML on weak embedded devices by designing a new system
framework that adaptively partitions and offloads the ML computing workloads.
Thrust 3 addresses system and data unreliability by designing new cross-layer
algorithms and hardware techniques. Thrust 4 investigates algorithm, hardware
and software co-design to enable secure and privacy-preserving ML systems at
scale. Thrust 5 involves designing and implementing an IoS testbed and a smart
building testbed to evaluate the proposed system
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.