* 2217912
* BRC-BIO: An integrative approach to examine the impacts of evolutionary novelty on generalist species
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Clare Scott Chialvo, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2025
* USD 502,161.00

Novel adaptations can significantly impact the behavior, evolution, and genetic
diversity of organisms. One such novelty, toxin tolerance, is thought to be
important in species richness and dietary breadth of plant-feeding insects. In
general, tolerance of highly toxic compounds is predicted to limit the dietary
range of insects. However, some species that feed on a wide range of
plants/fungi are surprisingly able to detoxify noxious chemicals that only occur
in a small number of their hosts. Furthermore, the impact of such novelties on
generalist species is poorly understood. To address this knowledge gap, this
project will examine tolerance to potent mushroom toxins in a fly species that
uses a diverse set of fruit and mushrooms as hosts. By investigating how novelty
affects generalist species and the conditions under which it is maintained,
these studies will inform predictions about the evolution of novel adaptations.
Fundamental to the research are activities designed to increase public
engagement with science and technology. These activities will facilitate
increased inclusion of students from historically excluded groups. In addition,
the work will implement in-class, hands-on research opportunities, and generate
a publicly available database containing trait information for the fly
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flies in the genus Drosophila exhibit a spectrum
of feeding behaviors. These range from specialists on a single toxic fruit to
generalists that feed on a variety of mushrooms. Mushroom-feeders can tolerate
high concentrations of deadly mushroom toxins that are lethal to many organisms.
One mushroom feeder, Drosophila tripunctata, is unique in that it uses a
combination of fruit and mushroom hosts. In populations of this species, the
degree of toxin tolerance varies. In addition, females exhibit egg-laying
preference for either fruit or mushrooms. Using a local population of Drosophila
tripunctata, the planned research will test three hypotheses. The first is that
toxin tolerance has the potential to drive sympatric speciation. The second is
that maintaining this novel adaptation increases genetic diversity. Finally, the
third is that the benefits of maintaining toxin tolerance outweigh the
associated costs. The complementary evolutionary, behavioral, and ecological
assessments of a novel adaptation in a generalist species will begin to uncover
the impacts of these types of traits and characterize the selective pressures
that maintain them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.