* 2217943
* Understanding the Emergence of Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Paul Duffy, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 307,072.00

Over fifty percent of the world’s population now live in cities, but scientific
understanding of how large, nucleated centers emerged from farmsteads and small
villages remains poorly developed. This project will work to fill that gap.
Researchers will use the past as a laboratory to model how the earliest large,
permanent settlements in human history formed, operated, and eventually,
collapsed. Within the framework of this project, their goal is to contribute to
building cross-culturally relevant models of resilience and sustainability in
nucleated contexts for both the distant past and recent times. Building on the
research team’s two decades of teaching, training, and mentoring of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars, including
underrepresented groups, the project is designed to actively promote equity and
diversification in archaeology. Community engagement will be ensured by
providing public lectures at schools, cultural centers, and museums as well as
offering site visits and participation of local students in field work. The
research datasets will be available through public lectures, scientific
journals, mass media, websites, open-access data repositories, and in a
monograph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For modeling cycles of population aggregation
and disintegration in prehistory researchers will utilize Resiliency Theory (RT)
as a conceptual framework. RT provides a productive framework for modeling
social reorganization in prehistoric and historic contexts, with a focus on
changes that unfolded over long periods of time. In this project, RT will be
used to identify the conditions that were associated with those prehistoric
aggregations that were more durable, thus more resilient. Specifically, this
research will concentrate on two periods when people left their farmsteads and
small settlements to live in large, aggregated villages which were occupied for
divergent periods of time. Multiple variables will be explored to understand the
process of population aggregation, as well as variation in household and
settlement organization in these contexts. The researchers will use the results
to compare the evolutionary arcs of these nucleated sites and determine those
specific aspects of socioeconomic organization that led to longer-occupied large
settlements. By identifying configurations that corresponded to more durable
large settlements in the prehistoric past the project will develop cross-
cultural and cross-temporal models of nucleation and sustainability that are
relevant to present and future societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.