* 2217415
* Transfer of statistical learning from perception to production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Lori Holt, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 553,741.00

Whether chatting with a friend at a café, discussing a topic in a classroom, or
debating politics with a relative, we depend on our ability to communicate with
many different people. Only 5 percent of the 7.5 billion English speakers are
native talkers and there are also tremendous dialect differences in regional
English. Thus, we quite often encounter a speaker whose speech differs from our
own. Prior research demonstrates that links in how the brain coordinates
listening and speaking can lead conversation partners to sound more like one
another. The influence of what one hears on how one talks is often referred to
as “transfer.” Transfer provides a window through which to better understand the
mechanistic links between speech perception and speech production. This is
important because it provides a foundation for broader impacts across a variety
of domains, such as: 1) developing new technologies for effective education
approaches in classrooms with language diversity; 2) assisting individuals with
communication challenges like stuttering; 3) providing constraints to refine
artificial intelligence and machine speech recognition systems; and 4)
engineering brain prostheses that can restore speech lost to
stroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project focuses on understanding how
the brain links what we hear with how we speak, even when changes are subtle and
not consciously identifiable. The investigators take a novel approach to the
study of transfer by manipulating the make-up of the speech stream in subtle but
systematic ways. This method allows clear predictions about the expected changes
to production if it is implicitly influenced by perception. Preliminary data
suggest this is the case: creating a subtle accent by manipulating the pitch of
a voice induces robust changes in how speakers produce the very same dimension.
This influence goes beyond immediate imitation of heard speech (for example,
repeating a just-heard word). Rather, it implies a more fundamental change to
the speaker’s production system that likely involves a form of incremental
learning through small, but persistent, neuroplastic changes to the brain. The
current project will systematically investigate when and how transfer occurs in
order to reveal the responsible mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.