* 2217635
* Behavior and the Evolution of Species Ranges
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Karin Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2026
* USD 880,393.00

Explaining why species occur where they do is a fundamental problem in biology
that has important implications for conservation. Species ranges are not fixed:
some species are able to expand their ranges and succeed in new habitats. Why
species ranges sometimes expand and what factors fuel those expansions remains
poorly understood. This research will determine how the combined effects of
behavior and breeding between species – hybridization – enable a species to
expand its range by moving into and rapidly adapting to an entirely new habitat.
Understanding such range expansions is important to both address the risks of
invasive species and inform conservation planning and policy development for
preserving biodiversity under global climate change. Moreover, the proposed work
will support the PI’s educational activities, which will include mentoring K-12
teachers in research and developing lesson plans based on research activities,
training K-12 students and undergraduates in research, and public outreach
events at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, the largest natural
history museum in the southeastern USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species range
expansion is limited when populations at the range edge fail to adapt to novel
habitats before they go extinct. Behavior might facilitate range expansion if
behaviors that contribute to dispersal are linked to traits that promote success
in novel habitats, and behavior promotes gene flow from locally adapted
heterospecifics (via hybridization) that enables rapid adaptation to novel
habitats. Notably, the two factors are not independent: behaviors that promote
dispersal might directly promote hybridization or be linked to those that do.
This proposed work will evaluate the role of behavior in the expansion of a
grassland-adapted species of spadefoot toad into an entirely different
biome––the desert southwestern USA. Using laboratory experiments and field
surveys of natural populations, the work will achieve three aims: 1) evaluate
dispersal-promoting behaviors as a potential cause of range expansion into a
novel habitat; 2) determine whether dispersal-promoting behaviors are associated
with behavior that mediates adaptive hybridization with a congener, and 3)
examine if hybridization facilitates adaptation to a novel habitat. By achieving
these aims, the proposed work will establish whether behaviors that contribute
to dispersal into novel habitat are associated with behavior that enhances
success in that environment. The proposed work will further determine if
behaviors that mediate hybridization also promote expansion into, and adaptation
to, novel habitats. Taken together, this work will provide a critical test of
behavior’s hypothesized role in the evolutionary expansion of a species
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported between the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.