* 2217344
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Cultivating Indigenous Research Communities for Leadership in Education and STEM (CIRCLES) Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Philip Stevens, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,668,658.00

The Cultivating Indigenous Research Communities for Leadership in Education and
STEM (CIRCLES) Alliance builds on the collaborative efforts of an existing
partnership among six EPSCoR states - Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota,
South Dakota, and Wyoming - to address the severe underrepresentation of
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines and within the STEM workforce. Through
intentional collaboration with STEM and traditional knowledge holders, including
AI/AN students, faculty and staff, and Indigenous communities, this project aims
to develop and sustain a national model for centering Indigenous, culturally
responsive educational approaches and practices in STEM to enhance inclusivity,
increase participation, and build capacity among AI/AN STEM educators and other
professionals. The CIRCLES Alliance is establishing a system of place-based
educational resources and activities, teacher professional development, and
student supports to effect change in the awareness of, and support for,
culturally relevant STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has considered
the marginalization of AI/AN students in STEM due to an inherent epistemological
conflict between mainstream STEM educational contexts and AI/AN identity,
traditional knowledge, and ways of knowing. The CIRCLES Alliance is addressing
this challenge. The network of experts, institutions, and communities in these
six states, which represent 10.5% percent of the Nationâ€™s AI/AN population,
participate in a Networked Improvement Community to develop an evidence-based
model of working hand- in-hand with tribal communities to enhance STEM education
through the integration of Indigenous ways of knowing. Each of the CIRCLES
Alliance states has AI/AN representation and established relationships with
tribes, tribal colleges and universities, and professionals engaged in working
within tribal communities. This project will generate tangible resources and new
partnerships by building a repository of culturally relevant K-12 STEM
curricular materials and providing tailored supports and learning opportunities
for students, faculty, and staff involved in STEM disciplines and the STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion, and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The
Alliance is jointly funded by the NSF Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.