* 2217826
* BRC-BIO: Success in the Anthropocene: Evolutionary Ecology of the Common Wall Lizard in Ohio
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric Gangloff, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 476,342.00

Large changes to our planetâ€™s climate and ecosystems have presented challenges
to many organisms, yet some species are apparently thriving in these new
environments. One example is the Common Wall Lizard, a small, active lizard
species native to mainland Europe but recently established in the United
Kingdom, Canada, and the US. The research project described here seeks to
identify the reasons that this species has flourished in novel urban
environments on a new continent after an introduction of so few animals.
Specifically, this research will leverage field observations and lab experiments
including measures of behavior, physiology, and body dimensions to describe
responses to new climates and altered physical habitat structure. Additionally,
the research will employ new advances to identify genes related to these
specific traits and how these traits have helped lizards expand across the
landscape since their introduction. This information can then be leveraged in
management efforts to prevent the spread of potentially harmful invasive species
or to understand how organisms we want to protect may respond to changes in
their environment. The infrastructure and systems established here will form the
foundation of a long-term, sustainable research program for undergraduate
students that will be a model for other institutions, with a specific focus on
increased participation and success in STEM fields for underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will provide an
integrative understanding of the ecological context and evolutionary processes
that shape the successful establishment of a vertebrate ectotherm, the Common
Wall Lizard (Podarcis muralis), in a novel environment. The research will
provide insight into how complex organismal phenotypes are shaped by
evolutionary processes and how they respond to new ecological situations by (1)
quantifying thermoregulatory behaviors and thermally-dependent traits to assess
the relative influence of plasticity and adaptation in the ability of P. muralis
to thrive in urban landscapes; (2) identifying morphology-performance
relationships in ecologically-relevant contexts to test for morphological shifts
in time and space and then assess whether these shifts contribute to invasion
success and can predict future expansion; and (3) utilizing whole-genome
resequencing to test hypotheses regarding the impact of the founding event on
functional and neutral levels of variation at the genomic level and how this has
impacted key evolutionary processes. This work leverages recent technological
advances and will validate new approaches to provide resources for future
studies, including the use of infrared thermography, microsensor temperature
transmitters, novel application of movement modelling, and genomic sequencing
technologies and analysis pipelines. This holistic approach advances our
understanding of how organisms interact with novel environments and provides a
conceptual basis for characterizing the phenotypic and genomic qualities that
facilitate success in new or changing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.