* 2217427
* Exploring the Role of Adaptive Capacity on Democratic Performance (ERAC-DP): Governmental and Nonprofit Organizations in the Pandemic
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Thomas Bryer, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2025
* USD 199,999.00

This research project uses methods from several social sciences and comparative
analysis to study how COVID-19 response policies can increase inequality, foster
democratic governance, and political participation of vulnerable people. The
research project will answer four questions: (i) what inequalities emerged for
vulnerable populations during the COVID-19 pandemic? (ii) how did organizational
adaptive capacities affect outcomes for vulnerable populations? (iii) how did
adaptive capacities affect policy compliance of vulnerable populations? and (iv)
what digital tools will facilitate a sustained collaboration (domestic and
international) to enhance global and local action to reduce inequities and
increase policy compliance? The study is based on case studies from Atlanta, GA,
Montreal, Canada, Manchester, UK, and Warsaw Poland and uses a combination of
theories from several social science fields and rich data collection and
analyses. The results of this research project will help to answer important
questions as to why groups are differentially affected by policies designed to
help all and why policy compliance may differ across groups. The results could
guide policy formulation and implementation during pandemics and other
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses embedded case studies in
four countries---Canada, Poland, UK, and the US---to study how COVID-19 pandemic
policies affected inequalities, and how this in turn affected political activism
and policy responses of different groups. Specifically, the project will try to
answer four questions: (i) what inequalities emerged during the COVID-19
pandemic? (ii) how did adaptive capacities affect outcomes for vulnerable
populations? (iii) how did adaptive capacities affect policy compliance by
vulnerable populations? and (iv) what digital tools will facilitate sustained
collaboration to enhance global and local action to reduce inequities and
increase policy compliance? The research will answer these questions using a
methodology that combines theories from several social and behavioral sciences.
In addition to academic research, the PIs propose to engage diverse policy
makers to improve the policy impact of the research project. By addressing the
impact of policies on inequality and political participation, this research
project will make significant contributions to social and behavioral science
research on policy impacts generally. The research results of this research
project will provide inputs into policies to reduce inequalities as well as
enhance political participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.