* 2217493
* Conferences on Reproducibility and Replicability in Economics and the Social Sciences (CRRESS)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lars Vilhuber, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides partial support for a series of virtual and in-person
conferences on the topics of reproducibility, replicability, and transparency in
the social sciences. The purpose of scientific publishing is the dissemination
of robust research findings, exposing them to the scrutiny of peers and other
interested parties. Scientific articles should accurately and completely provide
information on the origin and provenance of data and on the analytical and
computational methods used. Yet in recent years, doubts about the adequacy of
the information provided in scientific articles and their addenda have been
voiced. This has been called the replication crisis. The conferences will
address the following topics: the initiation of research, the conduct of
research, the preparation of research for publication, and the scrutiny after
publication. The products of these meetings will be available to any non-
participant through videos, presentations materials, and manuscripts.
Undergraduates, graduate students, and career researchers will be able to learn
about best practices for transparent, reproducible, and scientifically sound
research in the social sciences. Research that follows the best practices
discussed in the various meetings will be more verifiable, and thus more
credible. These qualities are especially important for policy makers that wish
to implement evidence-based policymaking, and a public that wishes to understand
the foundations of such policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific practices
throughout the conduct of the research, during peer review, and after the
dissemination of results all interact to enable a discourse about the veracity
of scientific claims. The investigators will organize a sequence of conferences
discussing educational and procedural barriers slowing down adoption of best
practices, whether journals should be the verifiers of reproducibility, whether
(and how) scientists' work can be made to be reproducible at every stage of the
research process, and implications thereof for funding, technical
infrastructure, and the training of undergraduate and graduate students. The
topics chosen for the series are not usually part of disciplinary seminars or
conferences and will be brought to a broader audience here for the first time.
Most sessions will be held virtually (online), but others will be co-located
with or submitted as complete sessions to professional meetings. The
availability of permanent artifacts (presentations, recordings, manuscripts)
after the conferences will allow this to be a resource with persistent
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.