* 2217333
* RCN UBE: Connectomes for Undergraduate Education and Learning (CUNEL)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Divya Sitaraman, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2027
* USD 493,733.00

While it is understood that students experience tremendous educational benefits
from exposure to authentic research as part of their undergraduate coursework,
the availability of these experiences may be limited by high cost and difficult
implementation. The Connectomes for Undergraduate Neuroscience Education and
Learning (CUNEL) project seeks to provide students with access to cutting-edge
neuroscience research tools and provide the framework to integrate these tools
into their undergraduate education. The CUNEL project will accomplish this by
recruiting and training a network of neuroscience instructors who will implement
and assess laboratory protocols that provide authentic research experiences in
connectomics, the burgeoning field of neuroscience that seeks to create
comprehensive maps of synaptic connectivity, the ‘wiring diagram’ showing how
nerves connect within a nervous system. The broad outcome of the CUNEL project
will be to enhance both the quality and accessibility of neuroscience education,
while providing undergraduate students with real-world scientific experience
within an area of neuroscience at the forefront of the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUNEL project will create, implement, and assess
undergraduate laboratory materials that make use of the publicly available
Female Adult Fly Brain (FAFB) dataset and Collaborative Annotation Toolkit for
Massive Amounts of Image Data (CATMAID) software platform. The CUNEL team will
create instructional materials that facilitate adoption, implementation, and
assessment of FAFB/CATMAID laboratory modules in undergraduate classes at
diverse undergraduate institutions. These modules will be disseminated and
assessed through a user network of neuroscience instructors who will be
recruited, supported, and coordinated by the project leadership. Students who
work with laboratory materials created by the CUNEL project will have
opportunities to engage scientifically with students at other network
institutions and with the connectomics research community. The outcomes of this
project will include: 1) the creation of laboratory materials that can be
successfully implemented at a wide variety of undergraduate institutions to
provide authentic research experiences in connectomics as part of undergraduate
coursework, and 2) the creation and organization of a network of neuroscience
educators who will collaborate to enhance neuroscience education using these
authentic research tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.