* 2217474
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Nanoscale Interaction between Invertible Micellar Assemblies (IMAs) and Biopolymer Cargos under Varied Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Andriy Voronov, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2025
* USD 609,189.00

Research in drug delivery by polymeric carriers is still in its infancy. The
demanding challenge in this field is to find the right carrier architecture and
the optimum polymer chemistry that can facilitate controlled delivery and
release of therapeutic agents (drugs) to their targets. A unique carrier is
invertible polymer micellar assemblies, which are formed by the rapid self-
organization/assembly of polymers with alternated and repeated hydrophobic
(water-hating) and hydrophilic (water-loving) segments in a rod-like shape (tens
of nanometers long). Drugs and polypeptides/nucleic acids which can treat
various diseases but cannot be directly introduced to human body can be
incorporated into invertible micellar assemblies. Once the environmental
conditions are changed (i.e., when the assemblies from water “arrive” to the
cellular membrane), the invertible micellar assemblies reverse their dimensions
and geometry (shape) in a smart way to effectively deliver and release cargo
molecules to the targets (biological membranes) and, thus, treat relevant
diseases. Although the structure and dynamics of invertible micellar assemblies
have been understood to a certain level, the key questions that still need to be
answered are (i) what properties of cargo-loaded invertible micellar assemblies
make them efficient in treating diseases (ii) how significant is a fact of
unique change of shape (called “inversion” in this project) for efficient
delivery performance. Answering these questions require an in-depth
understanding on the interactions between drug cargos and invertible micellar
assemblies under varied environments at the molecular level, which is a
challenging task because most commonly seen techniques do not have a
sufficiently high resolution to “penetrate” the assemblies and probe biopolymer
cargos therein. In this project, researchers from the North Dakota State
University bridge this knowledge gap by labelling biopolymers and studying the
behavior of the labeled sites using a unique technique known as Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance spectroscopy. The obtained data will provide details on
how invertible micellar assemblies interact with the solvent environment and the
biopolymer cargos as well as how the cargos move and/or aggregate within the
interior of invertible micellar assemblies. This information not only answers
aforementioned questions but also assists in the rational design of new delivery
vehicles that better adapt/deliver biopolymers and/or drugs, broadening the
application of invertible micellar assemblies as general drug carriers to treat
various diseases. The research team will provide training to underrepresented
students including Native American students and local undergraduate and high
school students on nanotechnology and chemistry. The team will also offer
scientific educational opportunities for youths whose parents are deployed as
soldiers through the Operation Military Kids program in the state of North
Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the interactions
among the invertible micellar assemblies, cargo, and environment (solvent) at
the nanoscale, in order to reveal the mechanistic details in the interior of
invertible micellar assemblies when biopolymer cargos are loaded and released
due to environment polarity changes. This goal will be achieved via three steps:
(i) revealing the changes in the morphology, crowding, and polarity of
invertible micellar assemblies under varied solvent conditions, (ii) depicting
the impact of biopolymer cargo loading on the morphology, crowding, and polarity
of invertible micellar assemblies in water, and (iii) elucidating the movement
and aggregation state (if any) of the biopolymer within invertible micellar
assemblies upon environment polarity change. The key to acquiring this knowledge
is to covalently place an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance spin probe/tag at
specific locations/positions within the invertible micellar assemblies and on
biopolymers, followed by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance spectroscopy study of
(bio)polymer structure and dynamics. This research will provide maps of the
local crowding and polarity within the invertible micellar assemblies under
various solvent conditions and locate various segments of biopolymer cargos
(connecting which lead to cargo conformation) in the invertible micellar
assemblies based on the local crowding and polarity of the cargo. The obtained
knowledge offers a direct connection between the microenvironment of invertible
micellar assemblies and cargo structure/hydrophobicity/polarity to assess and
rationalize the relative strength of the interactions between invertible
micellar assemblies and cargos. This work will also use the information of cargo
location and cargo movement to depict the relative position of cargos upon
interacting with the invertible micellar assemblies. Lastly, this research will
elucidate the possible structural changes of cargos, if any, caused by the
interactions between invertible micellar assemblies and cargos. All of these
efforts will result in an in-depth understanding of the cargo uptake/release
performance and the interactions between invertible micellar assemblies and
cargos. This project will also provide training to students at various
educational levels (high school, undergraduate) from diverse backgrounds by
offering hands-on research experience in cutting-edge nanotechnology, biopolymer
engineering, and spectroscopy. The obtained knowledge and experimental
approaches from research activities will be disseminated through scientific
peer-review journal publications, national/international conferences, and local
science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.