* 2217830
* BRC-BIO: MediCARGO- Decoding peptide perception during Medicago-Sinorhizobium symbiosis using CRISPR-cas9 As a Reverse Genetics tool
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Walter Chazin, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 497,100.00

Bioactive small molecules play an important role in optimizing agricultural
systems, allowing plants to tolerate abiotic stresses like high temperature and
biotic stresses like disease-causing pathogens, while enabling interactions with
beneficial microbes. As our planet is faced with uncertain environmental
challenges, research seeking to understand roles of novel, plant-based small
molecules can provide much needed solutions. Small signaling peptides, or
peptide hormones, are genome-encoded bioactive molecules that plants naturally
deploy as signals to mediate physiological responses to their environment, such
as the absence of essential macronutrients, including nitrogen. This project
will use the model legume, Medicago truncatula, which is capable of interacting
with beneficial bacteria to help acquire nitrogen from the environment in the
absence of added nitrogenous fertilizers. This ability is mediated by detection
of peptides in the environment, although the mechanism is poorly understood.
Understanding this process in more detail could provide an avenue to the
potential use of chemically synthesized peptides as alternatives to nitrogen-
based fertilizers, which can be harmful to the environment. Thus, the outcomes
of this work could provide an affordable, non-GMO route to regulate plant
growth. The project will also have broad impact by providing career development
opportunities for a new faculty member at a Minority-Serving Institution;
mentoring and research training for graduate and undergraduate students; and
outreach to farmers, producers, and the general public on factors influencing
agricultural sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to understand how legumes perceive peptides during root nodule symbiosis by
genetically dissecting gene redundancy in the receptor class most commonly
associated with peptide binding, namely, Leucine-Rich Repeat Receptor Like
Kinases (LRR-RLKs). Molecular mechanisms of plant peptide signaling, and
perception are poorly understood. Several peptide hormones have been identified
in legumes; however, their cognate receptors remain elusive. The project will
use reverse genetics tools, primarily CRISPR-cas9 mediated gene editing, and
make use of the pre-existing Tnt1 insertion mutant collection in the model
legum, M. truncatula, to develop an in-house lrr-rlk mutant collection. Another
objective of the project will be to develop a working protocol to identify
peptide-receptor pairs using co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass
spectrometry. The development and curation of mutant lines in M. truncatula lrr-
rlks will serve as a vital resource for the legume research community,
facilitating investigation of peptide hormone function not only in root nodule
symbiosis and nitrogen uptake, but also in interactions with arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi, and responses to macronutrient deficiency. In the long term,
these resources will provide fundamental knowledge for understanding effects of
putative agrochemicals in control of plant-microbe interactions. This work using
the model legume M. truncatula will have a profound impact on the state of
knowledge in this nascent field and uncover roles of symbiotically expressed
receptors exclusively present in legumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.