* 2217685
* BPE-Track 3: Inclusive mentoring hub for enabling pathways from inner-city and rural Appalachian households to engineering in Kentucky and West Virginia
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* James Fox, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2027
* USD 799,445.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poverty and lack of education are
characteristics of both urban inner-city and rural Appalachian neighborhoods
which limit individual and community growth and cycle through generations. There
are few opportunities for overcoming these strong cultural barriers to success
which results in a loss of significant talent and intellectual capacity from our
STEM workforce. This project will reach directly into the university STEM
curriculum and the classrooms of inner-city and rural high schools to introduce
STEM concepts, research methods, and workforce opportunities to the future
engineers and scientists who are hidden in plain sight but do not know how to
proceed. By working with university and high school faculty, we will identify
students with the potential and interest to participate in engineering and STEM
fields and directly support them with mentoring and financial assistance. We
will specifically focus our efforts on reaching marginalized students who are
not at the top of the grading scale due to life struggles such as lack of family
support or poor base academic skills. We will encourage student growth through
relationships, by offering a supportive peer community, and mentoring by high
school (Teacher Fellows) and university faculty and students, and also through
introduction of technical content. This project directly aligns with the
Broadening Participation in Engineering program goals of not only supporting
research in science and engineering but of broadening participation and equity
in engineering sciences through collaborative endeavors which foster
professional development of a diverse and well prepared STEM workforce.
Throughout the program, the effectiveness of our methods will be evaluated to
build a strong model for breaking the destructive cultural barriers limiting
inner-city and rural Appalachian communities and facilitating a sustainable
pathway to the STEM sciences for students from these regions. Upon completion of
the project, this knowledge and the relationships we have established with
university and high school faculty will continue to provide a pathway for
students to our programs and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an
overarching goal of assisting students from the urban to rural gradient in
overcoming barriers to attaining engineering and STEM careers, we propose an
inclusive mentoring hub that is led by universities with service missions to
support these students, including the University of Louisville in Kentucky,
University of Kentucky, and Marshall University in West Virginia. We will
establish mentoring relationships across multiple levels including college
faculty, high school teachers, peer students, and between students from inner-
city neighborhoods and rural Appalachia with a goal of providing support for
marginalized students and providing scaffolding to support STEM development in
individuals and communities. Through developing relationships between university
and high school faculty, we will introduce technical concepts and potential
workforce opportunities in high school classrooms and recruit marginalized
students for mentoring and support opportunities. These students will
participate in a 10-month inclusive mentoring program designed to improve their
STEM understanding and support their transition to viewing themselves as capable
participants in the engineering and STEM workforce. Throughout the program, our
methods will be evaluated by learning and teaching professionals to improve all
aspects of our program design. During the 5-year program, we anticipate
impacting 35 undergraduate students, 35 graduate students, 35 high school
teachers, and over 800 high school students while developing a template and a
collaborative network for a sustainable pathway bringing inclusion and equity to
marginalized students from the inner-city and rural Appalachian
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.