* 2217307
* Partial Support of the Core Activities of the Committee on National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Brian Harris-Kojetin, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2028
* USD 200,000.00

This project will provide partial support for the Committee on National
Statistics (CNSTAT) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine. CNSTAT's mission is to advance the quality of statistical information,
contribute to the statistical policies and coordinating activities of the
federal government, and help provide a forward-looking vision for the federal
statistical system and national statistics more broadly in service of the public
good. Established in 1972, CNSTAT harnesses knowledge and expertise across
disciplines to provide trusted, independent advice to the nation on complex and
challenging data and statistical issues in the 21st century. CNSTAT conducts
much of its work through consensus studies carried out by panels of volunteer
experts, and their reports often are used to inform policy and practice,
establish a research agenda, or review specific statistical programs, measures,
and infrastructure. CNSTAT also advances the conversation around important
statistical and data issues by convening experts at public workshops and
seminars to engage in focused discussion and explore new ideas and solutions for
the benefit of the statistical and research community. CNSTAT’s flagship
publication, Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, is in
its 7th edition and is updated every 4 years. The guidance in this publication
helps protect the objectivity and credibility of federal statistics, educates
the executive and legislative branches of government on the important public
good provided by strong federal statistical agencies, and provides a code of
ethics for the agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNSTAT's activities will
contribute to improving the data and data infrastructure that are available for
economic and social science research applied to important national needs, such
as understanding the economy, technology and innovation, public health,
education, welfare, and other areas. Relevant, objective, high-quality, timely,
and accessible information produced by federal statistical agencies and offices
is critical for informing decisions by policy makers in federal, state, and
local governments as well as by private businesses, communities, and households.
Interacting with NSF, federal statistical agencies, relevant programmatic and
research agencies, and the social and economic sciences research community,
CNSTAT will identify priority issues for study involving federal and national
statistics, data, and statistical methods. Specific studies will continue to
build a vision for a 21st century data infrastructure for federal statistics and
social and economic research by exploring the implications of blending multiple
data sources for major survey programs, data equity, and approaches for data
governance and protecting privacy. Examples of work underway include integrating
federal statistics on household income, wealth, and consumption and examining
disclosure methods for protecting privacy in census and survey programs. CNSTAT
also will update Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency for
its 8th edition to be issued by early 2025.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.