* 2217951
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/ OI/ CY 2022 - CY 2024
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Sarah Fuller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 250,743.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation (OI) on R/V Atlantis, a
274’ general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a 238’
multidisciplinary vessel. Both are operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) as part of the U.S. Academic Research Fleet (ARF) which is
scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-art instrumentation, and
support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The vessels work in all the
world’s oceans supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies.
R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the
human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep
Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, WHOI
provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following OI:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Teledyne-RDI Lowered ADCPs
$154,860&lt;br/&gt;(1) OSIL Autosal Salinometer &amp; Accessories
$46,120&lt;br/&gt;(1) AML Oceanographic Moving Vessel Profiler
$408,897&lt;br/&gt;(1) McLane Large Volume Zooplankton Pump
$40,455&lt;br/&gt;(1) Hydroptic Underwater Vision Profiler $63,070&lt;br/&gt;(2)
RBR Concerto CTDs $61,204&lt;br/&gt;(1) McLane Imaging FlowCytobot
$128,250&lt;br/&gt; $902,856&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.