* 2217859
* BRC-BIO: Detection of Nicrophorus orbicollis indirect genetic effects critical for fitness
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kyle Benowitz, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2025
* USD 502,986.00

Anecdotally, most people can point to how a parent, sibling, relative, or friend
has influenced the person they have become. In many non-human species, of
course, the influence of relatives or other social partners on an individual’s
characteristics can also be important, and if those influences are genetic, they
can play a major role in determining the evolutionary fates of those species.
However, little is known about the specific genetic mechanisms by which social
partners can affect each other. Among organisms where social influences are
known to be critical are burying beetles, which provide advanced parental care
to their offspring through the regurgitation of partially digested carrion. This
project will use whole genome sequencing to identify the genes in mothers that
cause variation in a set of offspring traits that may be linked to fitness. The
project will train one graduate student and numerous undergraduates in modern
molecular, bioinformatic, and statistical techniques, and will generate
computational resources for the classroom previously unavailable to students at
Austin Peay State University. In addition, outside speakers will be brought in
to discuss how techniques like those used in this project have the potential to
affect everyday life through advances in medicine, agriculture, and social
science, giving students the chance to connect what goes on in the lab to the
broader world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social influences, known as indirect genetic
effects (IGE), are theorized to play especially important roles in phenotypic
evolution. However, the empirical study of IGEs has been hampered by a lack of
ability to find the specific alleles that generate them. Finding these alleles
can answer three major questions. First, is the architecture of IGEs largely
polygenic, or do any major effect alleles play a role? Second, what genes are
found to confer IGEs, and can any generalizable conclusions about molecular
mechanisms come from identifying these genes and the pathways in which they
operate? And third, what is the molecular nature of genetic correlations between
IGEs and more standard individual contributions of genotype to phenotpe (direct
genetic effects; DGE)? This project will generate 1500 families of the burying
beetle Nicrophorus orbicollis using cross-fostering, so that mothers rear
unrelated offspring. Each mother will be genotyped via low-coverage genome
sequencing, and a genome-wide association study (GWAS) will be used to predict
offspring phenotypes using maternal genotypes. Three offspring from each family
will also be sequenced so that DGEs can be estimated alongside IGEs, allowing
for estimation of genetic correlations between them. In addition to addressing
the questions raised above, the project will will enable functional genomic
studies using CRISPR/Cas9 and will generate new hypotheses for population
genetic studies of allele frequency change over space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.