* 2217348
* RCN-UBE: Networking Next Gen Biologists with Community College Educators
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jennifer Eklund, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,719.00

This RCN-UBE project seeks to network community college educators and biologists
using big datasets (next gen biologists) to promote data literacy in community
college students. Next gen biology has led to a huge increase in many types of
biological data making it important that all biology students have access to
educational experiences that build data literacy. However, due to the rapidly
evolving nature of skills needed to work with big data, many STEM educators lack
contemporary data literacy skills. Even fewer have training on how to use data
in the classroom in a way that is accessible to students and builds data
literacy skills. This project aims to improve undergraduate STEM teaching and
learning by increasing faculty capability with next gen biology data analysis.
To do this the network participants will create resources to engage diverse
undergraduates in cutting edge methods in introductory courses. The network will
also promote equity and diversity by enhancing participant awareness of issues
that impact student access to biological data literacy skills and quantitative
biology research methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together
next gen biologists from non-degree granting institutes and community college
faculty to engage in a series of professional learning experiences designed to
support all participants to build knowledge about students’ development of
biological data literacy and quantitative research skills. To promote
participants’ awareness and agency, discussions focused on diversity, equity,
and inclusion will be integral to each professional learning event. Following
the series of professional learning events, members of the network will co-
create curricular resources that equitably engage students in analyzing and
interpreting large datasets founded in authentic research contexts. The project
will generate robust instructional strategies and curricular resources founded
in contemporary quantitative biology research, a series of guides for
facilitating professional development workshops involving professionals from
education and scientific research fields, and an expanded network of
undergraduate biology faculty and scientists at research institutes engaging
students in quantitative biology skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.