* 2217753
* EEC Planning: Track 1 BPE for Development of Hypersonics Research Collaborations
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Sonya Teresa Smith, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,945.00

Hypersonic technology development is a key element of the re-emerging global
space race, and has the potential to revolutionize commercial air transport,
space access, and national defense. The U.S. space science and engineering
industry faces a large fraction of its workforce eligible for retirement in the
near future, a lack of younger workers with skills or experience to grow into
those roles, and a possible shortage of graduates qualified to conduct relevant
research and development. In the aerospace sector, improving diversity will be
critical towards achieving civilization-changing goals like interplanetary
travel, hypersonic flight, electric aircraft, and low-emission propulsion
technology. This project will provide an opportunity for a diverse coalition of
academic partners (including UTSA, Howard, &amp; MIT) to address these current
and future challenges in the aerospace workforce with a specific emphasis on
hypersonic research and workforce development. UTSA is a minority serving
institution, Howard is a historically black research university, and MIT is a
world-recognized leader in engineering education and research. This partnership
will leverage unique research infrastructure at these institutions (including a
new hypersonic wind tunnel at UTSA) to provide life-changing experiences to a
highly diverse group of students. This planning grant will enable the proposing
team to foster and grow this collaboration, leading to considerable future
research and development in hypersonics. Research activities will be tightly
integrated with educational outreach at each partner institution, serving as a
platform to engage a diverse group of students in aerospace research while
diversifying the future aerospace workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Velocities
faster than five times the speed of sound or Mach 5—approximately 4,000 miles
per hour—are generally considered to be hypersonic. Hypersonic system designs
are currently limited by a lack of experimental data for high-speed flows,
representing a critical need for validation of computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) models. For example, several fundamental physical phenomena that can
significantly impact hypersonic vehicle performance and structural
integrity—including shock-wave/boundary-layer interactions, turbulent
transition, and non-equilibrium chemistry effects—continue to pose problems for
the development of predictive CFD models for hypersonic flow, requiring
additional research efforts grounded in basic science. The assembled team has
identified this unique opportunity to bring together a collection of scientists
and researchers with expertise in both experimental and computational hypersonic
aerodynamics. UTSA has also recently constructed a world-class Mach 7 wind
tunnel for unique experimental measurements, while each of the partner
institutions possess considerable computational resources. This technical
capability, coupled with the engineering education background provided by Dr.
Karina Vielma, positions this group to offer valuable research experiences to
under-represented students in the in-demand field of hypersonics. With this
planning grant, the PI team will explore the exciting potential of this
collaboration and develop a concrete framework for fostering growth of
hypersonics research at these institutions, including developing future
submissions to NSF programs. The UTSA-Howard-MIT team will complete a number of
activities to accomplish these objectives. Activities will include monthly
meetings with the collaborating team, student and faculty exchanges &amp; site
visits, engagement with NSF program managers, joint seminars, preliminary data
collection, collection of feedback and surveys from impacted student groups, and
development of future NSF proposals. It is expected that this effort will lead
to a long-lasting partnership that will mutually benefit all parties involved.
In the short term, the planning grant to solidify this partnership, exchange
ideas, visit respective campuses, and write proposals to NSF
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.