* 2217100
* RaMP: Collaborative: From genome assembly to genomic novelty to phenotype: an integrated training framework
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Elizabeth Jockusch, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,999,886.00

Whole genome sequencing across the tree of life has shown that new genes arise
frequently in evolution. However, relatively little is known about the function
or evolutionary importance of these genes in the derivation of novel phenotypes.
This project will recruit postbaccalaureate trainees to engage in a cohort
project to describe the genomes of species that are not well studied and to
identify potentially new genes in these genomes. In addition, trainees will
engage in individual projects in a network of labs to characterize the function
of novel genomic elements and their potential links to new traits in diverse
taxa. These research projects will promote integrated research opportunities in
molecular and computational biology. The program will support the training of a
diverse set of 30 postbaccalaureate mentees, enriched for members from groups
underrepresented in biology, for future success in STEM. Integral to the program
are the broader impacts that include mentor training for PIs and co-mentors;
training, mentoring, and networking opportunities; public outreach about
genomes; and connections across departments, institutions, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in biology is determining how
information encoded in the genome generates individual phenotypes and thus how
differences in that information lead to unique phenotypic outcomes. Comparative
genomic studies identified a highly conserved ‘toolkit’ of developmental genes
that predates the diversification of major clades. One way that morphological
novelty originates is through regulatory tinkering with these ancient toolkit
genes. More recently, comparative studies have identified a profusion of new
‘taxon-restricted genes,’ which may also be important in the origin of
phenotypic novelty. The functional characterization of genomic novelty in
diverse taxa and diverse subfields of biology will be leveraged as the
intellectual focal point for a new postbaccalaureate research training program.
Individual research projects will address specific questions about the function
of new genes in diverse taxa. Collectively, these projects address broader
question about the role of new genes in evolution and development. Sequencing,
assembly, and annotation of genomes will be done in collaboration with
researchers at regional partner institutions. This project will help build a
cross-institutional research network, provide trainees with bioinformatics
training, and disseminate training materials for genomics. The training program
will deploy individualized mentoring networks, cohort training workshops,
professional development and networking opportunities, and interactions with
PIs, mentors, peers and near-peers to help trainees identify and meet their
professional goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.