* 2217033
* Collaborative Research: EnCORE: Institute for Emerging CORE Methods in Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Raghu Meka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2027
* USD 365,413.00

The proliferation of data-driven decision making, and its increased popularity,
has fueled rapid emergence of data science as a new scientific discipline. Data
science is seen as a key enabler of future businesses, technologies, and
healthcare that can transform all aspects of socioeconomic lives. Its fast
adoption, however, often comes with ad hoc implementation of techniques with
suboptimal, and sometimes unfair and potentially harmful, results. The time is
ripe to develop principled approaches to lay solid foundations of data science.
This is particularly challenging as real-world data is highly complex with
intricate structures, unprecedented scale, rapidly evolving characteristics,
noise, and implicit biases. Addressing these challenges requires a concerted
effort across multiple scientific disciplines such as statistics for robust
decision making under uncertainty; mathematics and electrical engineering for
enabling data-driven optimization beyond worst case; theoretical computer
science and machine learning for new algorithmic paradigms to deal with dynamic
and sensitive data in an ethical way; and basic sciences to bring the technical
developments to the forefront of health sciences and society. The proposed
institute for emerging CORE methods in data science (EnCORE) brings together a
diverse team of researchers spanning the afore-mentioned disciplines from the
University of California San Diego, University of Texas Austin, University of
Pennsylvania, and the University of California Los Angeles. It presents an
ambitious vision to transform the landscape of the four CORE pillars of data
science: C for complexities of data, O for optimization, R for responsible
learning, and E for education and engagement. Along with its transformative
research vision, the institute fosters a bold plan for outreach and broadening
participation by engaging students of diverse backgrounds at all levels from
K-12 to postdocs and junior faculty. The project aims to impact a wide
demography of students by offering collaborative courses across its partner
universities and a flexible co-mentorship plan for truly multidisciplinary
research. With regular organization of workshops, summer schools, and seminars,
the project aims to engage the entire scientific community to become the new
nexus of research and education on foundations of data science. To bring the
fruit of theoretical development to practice, EnCORE will continuously work with
industry partners, domain scientists, and will forge strong connections with
other National Science Foundation Harnessing Data Revolution institutes across
the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EnCORE as an institute embodies intellectual
merit that has the potential to lead ground-breaking research to shape the
foundations of data science in the United States. Its research mission is
organized around three themes. The first theme on data complexity addresses the
complex characteristics of data such as massive size, huge feature space, rapid
changes, variety of sources, implicit dependence structures, arbitrary outliers,
and noise. A major overhaul of the core concepts of algorithm design is needed
with a holistic view of different computational complexity measures. Faced with
noise and outliers, uncertainty estimation is both necessary, and at the same
time difficult, due to dynamic and changing data. Data heterogeneity poses major
challenges even in basic classification tasks. The structural relationships
hidden inside such data are crucial in the understanding and processing, and for
downstream data analysis tasks such as in visualization and neuroscience. The
second theme of EnCORE aims to transform the classical area of optimization
where adaptive methods and human intervention can lead to major advances. It
plans to revisit the foundations of distributed optimization to include
heterogeneity, robustness, safety, and communication; and address statistical
uncertainty due to distributional shift in dynamic data in control and
reinforcement learning. The third and final theme of EnCORE proposes to build
the foundations of responsible learning. Applications of machine learning in
human-facing systems are severely hampered when the learned models are hard for
users to understand and reproduce, may give biased outcomes, are easily
changeable by an adversary, and reveal sensitive information. Thus,
interpretability, reproducibility, fairness, privacy, and robustness must be
incorporated in any data-driven decision making. The experience and dedication
to mentoring and outreach, collaborative curriculum design, socially aware
responsible research program, extensive institute activities, and industrial
partnerships would pave the way for a substantial broader impact for EnCORE.
Summer schools with year-long mentoring will take place in three states
involving a large demography. Joint courses with hybrid, and fully online
offerings will be developed. Utilizing prior experience of running Thinkabit lab
that has impacted over 74,000 K-12 students so far, EnCORE will embark on an
ambitious and thoughtful outreach program to improve the representation of
under-represented groups and help create a future generation of workforce that
is diverse, responsible, and has solid foundations in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.