* 2217955
* Exploring Long Term Adaptation to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* JESSI HALLIGAN, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,640.00

Researchers will undertake both underwater and terrestrial research to
understand how foraging peoples in the Americas made decisions that enabled them
to adapt to the rapid environmental changes that occurred over multiple
millenia. During this time, dozens of animal species had recently gone extinct
or were dying out or migrating to new lands, plant communities completely
transformed, lakes were forming, rivers were flooding, and sea levels rose at
least 40 meters. Nevertheless, archaeological data show that people not only
adjusted to these transformations, but seem to have thrived, as there are ever-
increasing numbers of sites and artifacts appearing throughout this span.
Although these groups were entirely reliant upon hunting, gathering, and
managing resources available in the world around them, they seem to have met the
challenge of extremely rapid and dramatic environmental changes with aplomb.
Researchers have long wished to understand how human social, economic, and
environmental systems are or are not resilient, and archaeology is particularly
well placed to provide relevant insight because it can trace human systems over
centuries and millennia. Nuanced understanding of how these forager societies
managed to adjust to near-constant change over nearly 5,000 years of rapid
environmental fluctuations can provide insight into ways to make human systems
more resilient. However, nearly all the known sites contain only lithic
artifacts, often in semi-disturbed contexts, severely curtailing what can be
learned about social resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some submerged Florida
sites however are an exception. Hundreds of osseous and lithic tools have been
recovered from the river, and some mid-channel sinkholes have extensive
archaeological remains within intact, dateable deposits. The research team will
conduct fieldwork at three sites: two adjacent submerged sinkholes and one
interior terrestrial site. The two submerged sites have dateable organics and
intact sediment sequences. The terrestrial site will likely not have good
organic preservation compared to the sinks, but it will provide data about an
area where people were not maximizing access to freshwater. Exploring human
relationships with the dynamic land and waterscape entails three research and
one pedagogical component: 1) creating a diachronic model of resource
availability through time; 2) generating predictions for site distributions by
modeling potential resource maximization strategies; and 3) assessing the
archaeological record of the basin in light of these frameworks. Data from prior
excavations will be combined with the new excavation data to test the utility of
central place foraging models . Macro-level (geospatial modeling and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction) and micro-level (intrasite analysis of
features, lithic artifacts, and preserved organics) will be combined to discuss
human use during the terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene. Equally important,
this project will train some of the next generation of geoarchaeologists,
teaching them how to investigate landscapes in their totality and see the
waterline as an opportunity, rather than a boundary, giving them the tools to
understand and manage submerging and submerged cultural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.