* 2217466
* Collaborative Research: A new subsurface framework for the Cascadia subduction zone derived from integrated analyses of the CASIE21 long-offset multi-channel seismic experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Shuoshuo Han, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 354,309.00

The Cascadia Subduction Zone in the Pacific Northwest is a region of great
national interest and growing public awareness because of its high earthquake
and tsunami hazard. The Cascadia margin has low levels of recorded seismicity,
which reduces what is known of the properties of the earthquake zone. This
project aims to identify variations in the structure and properties of the
Cascadia margin to better understand the earthquake and tsunami risk to the
Pacific Northwest. This project will work with other groups to build a new
3-dimensional picture for the margin. The project will support for four graduate
students, two postdoctoral researchers, and three early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From June 1 to July 11, 2021, a regional-scale
multi-channel seismic study of the Cascadia Subduction Zone was collected using
the state-of-the-art long-offset capabilities of the R/V Marcus G. Langseth as
part of the CAscadia Seismic Imaging Experiment 2021 (CASIE21). During the
expedition, 5,347 km of high quality 12-15 km streamer data were acquired in a
50-75 km spaced grid of seismic lines spanning the margin from the northern
Gorda plate at 42Â°N to the end of subduction offshore Vancouver Island and from
~50 km seaward of the deformation front to near the coastline. This new survey
represents the first regional-scale study conducted at Cascadia, spanning most
of the subduction zone and filling important gaps in data coverage. This project
utilizes the CASIE21 dataset in order to study nearly the whole Cascadia margin
and will yield unique insights into three core questions: (1) What is the
geometry of the plate interface along the margin, where is significant sediment
subduction occurring, and how do plate interface properties including
reflectivity and roughness vary along the margin and down dip? How do plate
interface properties relate to incoming plate and upper plate structure and
megathrust rupture segmentation? (2) How do the structural style and evolution
of the upper plate vary along strike and how are they related to megathrust
strength, backstops, and fluid migration? (3) How does the lithostratigraphic
architecture of the sediment section, and structure, deformation and hydration
potential of the shallow-most oceanic crust of the incoming plate associated
with bend faulting, distribution of seamounts and propagator shear zones vary
along the margin and how do these properties contribute to wedge evolution and
megathrust rupture segmentation? This study will result in construction of a new
regional-scale structural interpretation of the offshore Cascadia region from
seismic images as a primary product along with select studies making use of
reflectivity, velocity models, and strain analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.