* 2217523
* Collaborative Research: Research: Collaboration in Engineering Student and Practitioner Teams:  A Study of Beliefs about Effective Behaviors
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nicole Pitterson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2025
* USD 264,627.00

Effective collaboration is a key aspect of engineering learning and practice.
Researchers in the field of engineering education have put considerable
attention on understanding the nature of team behaviors, structures, and
dynamics and their effects on design quality and problem solutions. However, we
know little about why engineers choose to perform collaborative behaviors or
not. This project aims to uncover 1) similarities and differences between
engineering students and practitioners in the performance of effective team
behaviors, 2) understand the reasons why engineering students and practitioners
choose to perform particular effective behaviors or not when working in
engineering design teams, and 3) examine similarities and differences between
engineering students and practitioners in their reasons for choosing to perform
particular behaviors or not . Effective team behaviors in collaboration settings
are central to any engineerâ€™s formation as a professional.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will 1) identify which effective team
behaviors are performed least frequently by students and practitioners in
engineering design teams (target behaviors), and 2) characterize why a diverse
sample of engineers chooses to perform those behaviors or not. The project
findings will provide necessary insight into how to support engineers to become
even more effective collaborators in both academic and professional contexts.
Also, research products will enhance understanding of how engineers'
collaborative behaviors (and reasons for performing particular behaviors or not)
are similar or different in school and work contexts. Extending the current
literature, we will provide a nuanced characterization of why the target
behaviors are not performed in engineering teams, focused at the level of
individual beliefs and also considering the role of social, cultural, and
political factors that inherently matter in design
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.