* 2217708
* Collaborative Research: BPE Track 3 Minority Mentoring for Advancement and Participation in Engineering Hub
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Clay Gloster, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2027
* USD 165,305.00

This NSF Track 3 Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) project aims to
address the resilience, identity formation, and academic outcomes of minorities
in engineering through the "Minority Mentoring for Advancement and Participation
(Minority-MAP) in Engineering Hub’s infrastructure, resources sharing, community
engagement, and evidence-based inclusive mentoring. The hub will leverage an
all-access, open-platform called the Inclusive Mentoring to Advance
Participation Hub (iMAP Hub) to dynamically foster inclusive mentoring through a
community of practice in engineering. The project’s catalytic activities are
expected to democratize minority representation in engineering through the hub’s
data and technology ecosystem that will connect student mentees with faculty and
industry mentors and employers in the Minority-MAP network. The iMAP Hub will
positively impact the completion rates of students pursuing engineering degrees
and improve the career preparation of engineering students at participating
minority serving institutions, thereby enhancing the diversity of the US
engineering workforce. The project will employ the interest of HBCUs, leading
companies, and non-profit organizations to collaboratively transform the human
capital via inclusive mentoring, thus creating a culture change towards an
impactful, resilient career. This effort aligns with the NSF Broadening
Participation in Engineering’s mission to strengthen the future U.S. engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be led by Center for
Engineering Excellence at Morgan State University, in collaboration with North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Jackson State University,
STEMconnector, and Ziker Research. The goals of the project are to: 1) recruit
100 student mentees and faculty or industry mentor pairs by 2024, to test and
refine an innovative mentoring platform called Inclusive Mentoring to Advance
Participation Hub (iMAP Hub); 2) curate, develop, and expand inclusive mentoring
resources and activities to include 300 student mentees at 10 minority-serving
institutions by 2027; 3) develop and implement a framework to identify gaps in
the hub’s inclusive mentoring practices through formative and summative
evaluations; 4) provide professional development to support implementing
culturally responsive, inclusive mentoring practices at annual Summer
Institutes, and develop and refine online student, faculty, and industry
training resources for evidence-based inclusive mentoring practices delivered
through an online repository that is integrated into the iMAP Hub platform by
2024; and 5) share findings and presentations during annual Summer Institutes,
STEMconnector's Annual STEM Summits, Million Women Mentors Summits, and annual
Post-Secondary Innovation Labs as a strategy for growing the network and
expanding iMAP Hub services. Proposed research efforts will investigate the
aspects of mentoring that promote the development of an engineering identity and
have the potential to improve the persistence and retention of underrepresented
groups in engineering. Methods will include data collection from multiple
sources, including data analytics using iMAP usage data, survey reports from all
participants, and observations of mentor-mentee activities. Outcomes related to
changes in engineering identity, career awareness, and professional skills will
be measured through pre- and post-surveys informed by the Engineer Identity
Survey (EIS), interview protocols, and observations. The iMAP Hub’s resources
and research findings will be disseminated through a dedicated website,
conference presentations, workshops, newsletters, publications, and social
media. The project team will scale the network of mentors and mentees by working
with STEMconnector's membership which includes over 100 industry partners and
MSI universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.