* 2217460
* Advancing Methods to Trace and Contextualize Space-Time Interaction Patterns in Movement Data
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Somayeh Dodge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 229,996.00

This research project will advance computational approaches to trace and
characterize interactions and critical encounters between agents in a mobile
network. Examples of networks include people in a city, a group of animals in an
ecosystem, or a fleet of vessels. Despite the advances in tracking technologies,
computational movement analysis methods remain limited in quantification and
characterization of dynamic interaction patterns in large mobile networks. As
the decade turned to the 2020s, society witnessed the widespread transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 through respiratory droplets via close contacts and or lagged
interactions between individuals. This led to a set of unprecedented non-
pharmaceutical interventions including digital contact tracing to mitigate the
spread of the COVID-19. However, current techniques are inefficient for tracing
and detecting critical or risky encounters or temporally lagged interactions
between healthy and potentially infected individuals. Using movement
observations, this project will provide data-driven results about interactions
between moving agents. The results will enhance contact-tracing technologies for
examining potential human exposure to health risks or infectious agents. More
generally, the methods to be developed will enable scientists to model social
behaviors in human and animal networks. The project will create open-
access/open-source analytical tools which will make spatial data science more
accessible to researchers, educators, and students in geography and other
fields. The project will provide training and research experiences for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop and evaluate novel
context-aware time-geographic analytical methods through optimized computational
algorithms to (1) trace dynamic interactions and measure the duration and
frequency of encounters between individuals using large movement data sets, and
(2) to contextualize encounters, concurrent interactions, and lagged
interactions to better identify critical or risky contacts. The research will
investigate three overarching research questions: (1) How can we best leverage
statistical approaches and time geographic methods for better estimation of
contact through movement? (2) Given large movement observations, how can we
effectively and efficiently trace and identify 'risky' or 'interesting'
encounters between individuals? (3) Can interaction analytics be used to
understand collective movement patterns in social networks of humans and
animals? A set of case studies and open analytical tools will be developed to
demonstrate the efficacy of the analytical framework using real GPS observations
of people and animals. The analytical methods to be developed in this study will
be generalizable to understanding interaction in both social and ecological
systems, contributing new knowledge about social behavior of humans and
competition of keystone species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.