* 2217769
* BRC-BIO: Defining metabolic complementation within the sea anemone microbiome
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Emilia Sogin, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 502,071.00

Most animals house a complex assortment of microbial species, collectively known
as a microbiome. Yet, it is unclear how these microorganisms cooperate to
elevate the fitness, health, and survival of eukaryotic hosts. This proposal
seeks to advance the understanding of metabolic cooperation within the
microbiome of the sea anemone, aiptasia. Aiptasia is an important models system
for studying cnidarian-algal symbioses and is commonly used to better understand
bleaching phenomena on coral reefs. One expected outcome of this research is to
develop an integrative understanding of the role of the microbiome in cnidarian
symbiosis. Considering the rapid decline of coral reefs and the increasing
attention towards engineering the microbiome to better protect and enhance the
survival of these iconic ecosystems, the proposed work will help to guide
probiotic solutions that are currently being implemented in reef restoration
efforts. This project will also provide both short and long term training for
young researchers across career stages. Student researchers will be recruited
from the student population at the University of California, Merced which is a
Hispanic Serving Institution. As a centerpiece to the proposed work, the
research activities will be directly integrated into a course undergraduate
research experience (CURE) that will provide training to approximately 40
undergraduates in microbial ecology research. Long term support is provided to
three undergraduates and one graduate student. Finally, the project will support
one beginning faculty member by creating the needed infrastructure to support a
sustainable research program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The microbiome is a
collection of sentinel, microscopic species that interact with one another and
their hosts, effectively forming a metaorganism. At the basis of microbial
interactions within a microbiome, lies an complex web of metabolic pathways
mediated by the exchange of small molecules. One gap in the understanding of how
microbiomes work to benefit the overall health and wellbeing of a metaorganism
is identifying the metabolic exchanges, or syntropies, between cellular
organisms. The overall goal of this project is to identify which combinations of
microbial species are essential towards maintaining the health and survival of
the sea anemone, Exaiptasia diaphana. Specifically, the proposed research will
(1) quantify the impact of the microbiome on host fitness by generating
gnotobiotic sea anemones, (2) reintroduce varying combinations of microbial
isolates back to the host to determine which partners are required to rescue and
maintain host fitness and (3) compare shifts in metaorganism metabolism using
‘omics techniques before and after the re-introduction of select combinations of
microbial species. Resulting meta’omic and physiological data will be integrated
using a systems biology approach to better explore metabolic interactions
between eukaryotic hosts and their microbiomes. This research will advance
microbial ecology theory by undercovering mechanisms, via the integration of
cellular metabolisms, that enable complex microbiomes to contribute to the
health of the metaorganism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.