* 2217812
* BRC-BIO: The evolutionary demography of a social mammal
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Raisa Hernandez Pacheco, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2025
* USD 452,989.00

The social environment is thought to play a major role in the fate of social
mammals, including humans. For example, socially advantaged individuals often
have more access to resources resulting in better health, more offspring, and
longer lives, relative to socially disadvantaged individuals who often
experience harsher environments. However, it is still unclear how social aspects
in the life of mammals affect the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of their
populations. This knowledge gap deepens for mammals with complex social
behaviors, long lifespan, and flexible cognitive abilities such as primates.
This project seeks to understand whether the effects of sociality on individual
fates ultimately translates into population-level processes using data of rhesus
macaques, a nonhuman primate. This goal will be accomplished by establishing a
research team built on a foundation of education and training aimed at
broadening opportunities for quantitative and field research for students at a
Primarily Undergraduate and a Minority-Serving Institution where over half of
the total student body also comes from first-generation college, low-income
backgrounds. In this way, this project will contribute to the national
initiative of increasing diversity of the STEM research workforce by integrating
training and mentorship to broaden access to interdisciplinary biology and
quantitative skills to mentees from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify how and why
socially driven individual differences have direct and significant effects on
the eco-evolutionary dynamics of a primate population, linking current research
in the social determinants of individual variability to evolutionary demography
approaches to the fundamental rules of life history evolution. The project will
take an interdisciplinary approach by jointly examining empirically collected
behavioral, physical, and cognitive factors within a single system, and then
using this data to test the eco-evolutionary consequences of the social
environment in a large population of rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) at Cayo
Santiago, Puerto Rico. The first aim is to characterize the distribution of
socially driven individual phenotypes, comprising both physical and cognitive
traits, across the lifespan. This will be used to test whether physical and
cognitive phenotypes vary across individuals in relation to their social status.
The second aim is to quantify phenotype-dependent demographic performance across
the populationâ€™s social structure. Here, a demographic model will be formulated
using the observed associations between individual phenotypes and sociality from
Aim 1. The third aim is to test whether sociality generates selection gradients
on demographic and life history descriptors by examining how the strength and
direction of selection varies across social stratification. For this, the
parameterized demographic model from Aim 2 will be used to carry out joint
perturbation analyses on phenotype-demography functions. This framework will be
used to evaluate whether sociality supports the emergence and maintenance of
individual phenotypes driving eco-evolutionary processes within
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.