* 2217976
* Investigating the crustal structure and fault geometry of the 2021 Haiti earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Roby Douilly, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 151,263.00

Haiti is extremely vulnerable to large earthquakes. The M7.0 2010 and M7.2 2021
earthquakes in Haiti caused more than 200,000 and 2,000 deaths, respectively.
The better we understand past earthquakes, identify active faults, and pinpoint
locations with possible strong ground shaking, the more we can do to prevent
future tragedy. This project will allow seismologists at the University of
California, Riverside to clearly identify which faults ruptured during the 2021
earthquake, and find areas where strong ground shaking is most likely to occur
during future large earthquakes. Detecting and locating aftershocks will help
delineate the faults that ruptured in 2021, as well as other active faults.
Mapping out how seismic velocities in the crust vary in 3D will bring to light
regions with unusually slow seismic velocities, which indicate softer rocks and
hence amplified shaking during an earthquake. This project will engage local
Haitian scientists to have a lasting impact on local earthquake monitoring for
seismic hazard assessment. The project will also engage young Haitian students,
in the hope that some will be inspired to pursue careers in the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021 M7.2 Haiti earthquake, which struck a decade
after the devastating 2010 earthquake, occurred within the network of faults
comprising the Enriquillo Plantain Garden Fault Zone (EPGFZ) in southern Haiti.
Preliminary geodetic observations suggest that this earthquake is similar to the
2010 event where left-lateral strike-slip occurred on the western part of the
rupture and reverse slip on the eastern part. Initial aftershock locations from
the regional seismic network are too diffuse to confirm this hypothesis, and it
is not clear whether this event occurred on the main fault or on secondary
faults. Furthermore, considering that heavy damage from the 2010 earthquake
occurred primarily in a sedimentary basin with low seismic velocities that
amplified seismic shaking, it is possible that areas experiencing high levels of
damage from the 2021 earthquake are also underlain by such material. Using newly
available data from seismic stations that were deployed following the 2021
earthquake, we will apply innovative techniques to detect and locate the
aftershocks with high precision, and investigate the 3D crustal velocity
structure in that region. This project will directly impact research and
education by offering research opportunities for local undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups within the U. C. Riverside community. The project
will also benefit the people of Haiti by engaging local Haitian scientists to
have a lasting impact on local earthquake monitoring for seismic hazard
assessment, and providing opportunities to young Haitian students so that they
can inspire future generations to pursue careers in
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.