* 2217675
* Conference: Society for Research on Biological Rhythms: From Molecules to Policy
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Ilia Karatsoreos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2023
* USD 22,463.00

Nearly all organisms have evolved molecular, cellular, physiological and
behavioral adaptations to predict regular oscillations in the environment. As
such, biological rhythms are a core component on life on Earth, and run the
gamut from oscillations occurring on the scale of seconds, and those on the
scale of the seasons. The study of biological rhythms over the past century has
led to the discovery of an exquisite cellular and molecular timekeeping system,
which impacts everything from physiology to behavior. Indeed, in 2017 a group of
pioneers in our field were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine
for their groundbreaking work unravelling this molecular puzzle. While
biological clocks are a fundamental aspect of life, their effects on a wide
range of biological processes are finally being appreciated. Our growing
understanding of how biological rhythms impact many areas of the life sciences
is starting to inform how we think about public health, labor and education
systems, and the consequences of the built environment. The objective of the
Society for Research on Biological Rhythms (SRBR) 2022 meeting is to foster
discussion from “molecule to policy”, and highlight the groundbreaking work of
both senior and junior scientists. The activity includes expansion of the
mentoring and training efforts that SRBR has worked hard to establish. Emphasis
is placed on recruitment and retention of members from underrepresented minority
populations and increasing the diversity of our community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration between experts in biological timing and
other scientists, engineers, and policy makers is critical to increase awareness
of the global impact of biological rhythms. The theme for the 2022 SRBR meeting,
“From Molecule to Policy”, will directly embrace this challenge. Comparative
approaches are a critical component of this meeting, with inclusion of both
model and non-model organisms, as well as both laboratory and field studies, in
microbes, plants, humans and in non-human animals. The program includes topics
such as the neural networks of timekeeping, rhythms in bacteria and microbes,
mathematical models of oscillatory systems, analysis strategies for rhythms in
“Big Data”, chronotherapeutics, effects of rhythms on metabolism, and even the
intersection of biological rhythms and the COVID-19 pandemic. The scientific
program is inclusive, diverse, and timely. SRBR 2022 fosters and strives to
maintain a diverse and inclusive scientific community. A key component of this
proposal is the support of the day-long Trainee and Professional Development
event, which includes dozens of formal workshops and training events targeted at
trainees and junior faculty. In addition to formal and informal mentoring and
training events during the conference, this day-long event sets the stage for
trainees’ active participation in the meeting. SRBR 2022 promotes increased
attendance of underrepresented groups and researchers from low-income countries
through a variety of awards and fellowships, with the goal of increasing
participation as well as improving retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.