* 2217772
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Developer Implementation of Privacy in Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jon Atwell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 310,645.00

Recent years have seen a surge in privacy regulations across the globe. The main
objective of these regulations is to protect user data and users’ rights by
providing guidelines for organizations to follow. The assumption is that such
guidelines will provide developers with a clear and concise framework for
writing privacy-conscious code. However, even after the introduction of these
regulatory frameworks, software regularly fails to protect user privacy. This
often happens because the developer is responsible for ensuring that the legal
framework is implemented correctly in the code, but writing privacy-conscious
code requires developers to develop a thorough and nuanced understanding of the
regulatory demands. To further such an understanding and develop solutions, this
project explores the interaction between new privacy regulations and the
software developers tasked with complying with them. The project team will look
at how developers react to privacy regulations, analyzing discussions among
developers in the face of new privacy regulations, code changes they make in
response to shifting regulatory frameworks or new case laws interpreting
existing regulations, and developer reactions to widely publicized privacy
breaches. After identifying these interactions, this project aims to propose
software development tools and methodologies to support the effective alignment
of regulatory constraints and development practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project brings together computer scientists experts in security, privacy, and
usability, and legal and organizational behavior scholars with expertise in
privacy law, algorithmic fairness, network consensus mechanisms, and
computational linguistics. The team will study how new privacy laws are
impacting software systems by examining the discussions developers are having
among themselves, in public code repositories, bug tracking systems, and online
fora. These discussions and related code updates in public repositories will be
compared with the language of privacy used in the laws and regulations
themselves, the public comments around the laws, and the broader public
conversation on privacy, in order to understand privacy regulations that raise
particular confusion, concerns, and errors. These comparisons will lead to a
rigorous analysis of the impacts of new privacy regulations on software
development and offer recommendations for improvements in terms of both
regulation and software development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.