* 2217692
* Solid Solution Enhanced Synthesis of Multi-Principal Component Alloys via Oxide Reduction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 725,074.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-principal component alloys
(MPCAs) are a radical new class of alloys that consists of approximately equal
mixtures of four or more metallic elements. These materials can possess novel
and exciting combinations of physical properties. In particular, a sub-group of
these alloys, so-called refractory MPCAs exhibit high temperature mechanical
properties that surpass those of the alloys currently in use. The application of
these new alloys in turbine engines could therefore result in higher efficiency
and reduced greenhouse emissions. Current methods used to fabricate refractory
MPCAs utilize extremely high temperatures, and can result in compositional
variations within the alloy. This program seeks to explore a new process whereby
the metallic alloy is produced by reducing a mixture of the metallic oxides.
This is achieved by heat-treatment in a hydrogen environment. Not only is this a
novel technique, but prior work has shown that it is possible to convert certain
oxides that normally would be extremely stable. The research seeks to understand
this unexpected aspect of the oxide reduction process. A rationale is suggested
whereby the reduction is enhanced by the compositional environment. This model
is tested by studying the reduction behavior of a range of MPCAs composed of
different elemental combinations. Computer modelling is used to help identify
alloy combinations with thermodynamic characteristics that show promise based on
the model. These research findings could lead to enhanced processing of tailored
MPCA compositions, with potential for significant societal impact in many
technological areas, including energy storage and generation, transportation,
and medical devices. Outreach activities relating to alloy design and forming
focus on encouraging under-represented minorities to pursue opportunities in
STEM fields, and to increase awareness of materials engineering amongst middle-
and high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this program is to develop a scientific
framework for understanding the complex reduction behavior of a mixture of oxide
materials, and hence establish composition-based strategies for the processing
of technologically important multi-principal component alloys (MPCAs). This
research builds on prior work that demonstrated that MPCAs can be fabricated via
the reduction of a compacted metal-oxide mixture. Alloys composed of Co, Cr, Fe,
Ni and Mn have been successfully synthesized by this route, using relatively
mild heat-treatment conditions for which the reduction of MnO would not be
expected. A model is proposed whereby the thermodynamic driving force for
reduction is enhanced due to the formation of the alloy solid solution.
Electronic structure calculations of the enthalpy of mixing guide the selection
of elemental combinations for testing. The reduction behavior of these oxide
compositions are studied under controlled conditions of temperature and oxygen
partial pressure (pO2). The sequence of reactions and phase evolution is
revealed by the characterization of partially reduced samples using scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
techniques, as well as in-situ x-ray diffraction reduction studies using a
synchrotron light source. Identification of the nucleation mechanisms of the
metallic phases, role of transient phases, and rate-controlling transport
mechanisms is of broad fundamental interest, and benefit related research on
catalysis and oxygen looping. The enhanced processing of tailored MPCA
compositions, both bulk and powder, is expedited by the development of the solid
solution model, since it will help identify the heat treatment and compositional
parameters that are critical to the process. The research also benefits the
research community by generating Reduction-Composition diagrams for select MPCA
elemental combinations. Outreach activities relating to alloy design and forming
include CHOICES (Charting Horizons and Opportunities In Careers in Engineering
and Science), which is dedicated to encouraging middle-school girls to consider
careers in science and engineering, and the ASM Teacher and High School
Materials Camps, designed to increase awareness of materials engineering amongst
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.