* 2217757
* BRC-BIO: Investigation of the role of the plant hormone, abscisic acid, in stomatal formation using a novel drought-tolerant mutant
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* xingyun qi, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 445,676.00

In the wake of changing climate, drought has become a major environmental threat
that impairs crop productivity worldwide. Stomata, micro-pores on the leaf
surfaces of terrestrial plants, can open and close to allow carbon dioxide into
the leaf and water vapor to escape. Water evaporation via these structures is
estimated to explain over 90% of water loss from plants. Thus, a detailed
understanding of how plants respond to drought to mediate water loss can inform
approaches to reduce crop loss due to drought. Stomatal conductance is an
overall measure of the exchange of carbon dioxide or water vapor via the
stomata; it responds to both the number of stomata and how open they are, thus
providing an indicator of drought stress. The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA)
is a stress-related hormone that directly responds to drought stress by
regulating stomatal conductance. While the role of ABA in signaling stomata to
close has been extensively explored, the mechanisms by which ABA signals the
plant to increase or decrease the number of stomata remains elusive. The
research aims of this study are designed to provide insight into plant drought
tolerance by exploring the ABA function in stomatal formation. Much of the
research will be conducted by four undergraduate students from underserved
communities. These students will be mentored by the PI and a graduate student
and will serve as peer mentors to each other. Production of the genetically
engineered plants generated in this study, and the phenotypic analyses thereof,
will serve as the basis for development of a new undergraduate laboratory
course. Students taking this course will receive extensive hands-on training in
a complete set of widely used techniques, which will promote their science
identity and better prepare them for professional STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIâ€™s group has identified a drought-tolerant
mutant, which produces stomata more slowly under drought conditions than when
well-watered. Analysis of the mutant under drought stress has revealed that ABA
signaling is enhanced and a transcription factor that promotes stomatal
formation is preferentially inhibited. The PI hypothesizes that ABA mediates
drought-triggered stomatal inhibition by targeting stomatal-associated
transcription factors in the mutant. This hypothesis will be tested by two aims
to: 1) examine the role of ABA in drought-triggered stomatal inhibition in the
mutant, and (2) identify the transcription factor targeted by the ABA signal in
the stomatal developmental pathway in the mutant. The results have the potential
to provide new insights into how drought controls stomatal
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.