* 2217317
* IntBIO: Integrative Wildlife Nutrition: From Molecules and Microbes to Macro-Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jessica Rothman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,188,601.00

Food availability often varies extensively in different habitats and across time
(i.e., seasons and years). To obtain sufficient nutrients and energy to survive
and reproduce, animals must adjust their feeding and nutritional strategies.
Most animal feeding ecology research only provides insight into part of an
animal’s strategy, but this team will integrate their diverse research
expertise—ranging from molecules to behavior to ecosystems—to provide a more
holistic understanding. More specifically, the investigators will study six
species of primates across seasons in two tropical forests and will integrate
data that quantifies how each individual moves through their habitats to find
food, what foods it chooses, how the food is digested by the animal itself and
by microbes that live in its gut, and how this ultimately affects its physiology
and health. Ultimately, the researchers aim to identify a unified principle of
animal nutrition that can improve our understanding of how animals respond and
adapt to food scarcity. In addition, it will also advance knowledge of microbe-
microbe interactions and host-microbe interactions in wild animals and provide
new applications for multi-scale data analysis tools. The project will provide
hands-on interdisciplinary training to postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students, park wardens, and community members, the majority of
whom will belong to underrepresented groups in STEM. This project will also
involve multiple outreach activities, including workshops on primate ecology,
microbiology, genomics, nutrition, and conservation for public urban middle
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will target six species of
wild frugivorous primates--pig-tailed macaques (Macaca nemestrina), redtail
monkeys (Cercopithecus ascanius), grey-cheeked mangbeys (Lophocebus albigena),
blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis), orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii), and
white-bearded gibbons (Hylobates albibarbus)--occupying two long-term field
sites (Tuanan Biological Research Station, Indonesia and Kibale National Park,
Uganda). Leveraging data collected continuously across seasons at each site for
two years, the project will determine the extent to which feeding behavior,
nutrient intake, physiology, and microbiome function shift in response to food
availability in individual wild, non-human primate species over time (Intra-
species Level), compare the relative importance of behavioral, physiological,
and microbial strategies for modulating nutrition among sympatric non-human
primate species (Inter-species Level), and determine the extent to which non-
human primate strategies for modulating nutrition are conserved between forests
with different patterns of food availability (Ecosystem Level). The project will
facilitate the development of improved models of primate nutrition that can be
used to identify unified principles of nutrition that can be tested and applied
across a range of ecological contexts and scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.