* 2217538
* BRC-BIO: Polyamine regulated morphogenesis in Candida albicans
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ruvini Pathirana, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,902.00

In certain fungi a family of small positively charged molecules called
polyamines modulate a transition from oval yeast-like shapes to filamentous
elongated cell types. This shape change has been implicated in the pathogenicity
of yeasts such as Candida albicans, the focus of this project. Despite the
important role they play in this process, the molecular mechanisms by which
polyamines regulate fungal growth and morphogenesis remain enigmatic. This
project will use a broad range of research tools to investigate how polyamines
in yeasts regulate their own production and affect cell morphogenesis. The
knowledge gained will be both of fundamental value and helpful in the
identification of drug targets to control human and plant disease-causing fungal
growth. Under the direct supervision of the Principal Investigator, the majority
of the work will be conducted by undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds at a predominantly Hispanic Serving Institution.
The participating students will receive invaluable collaborative and multi-
disciplinary training in molecular microbiology, genetics, biochemistry, and
bioinformatics. They will thereby become competitive for entry into the
biomedical field, broadening the inclusivity and diversity in the STEM
workforce. This project reinforces the NSF mission to enhance research
productivity in teaching-intensive institutions and broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in biological science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
dimorphic fungi the cellular production of polyamines significantly affects
their morphological transition from yeast to filamentous cell types, but the
molecular mechanisms mediating this transition are largely unknown. This project
will investigate the molecular relationship of intracellular polyamine pools and
fungal dimorphism using C. albicans as the model organism. The preliminary
observations confirmed the necessity of ornithine decarboxylase and
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase enzyme activities for yeast morphogenesis;
these enzymes are encoded by the SPE1 and SPE2 genes, respectively. A reverse
genetics approach will be used to further explore polyamine biosynthesis and
regulation in this yeast. Using a variety of morphogenetic assays, metabolic
profiling, gene expression analysis, protein expression assays, RNA-Seq based
transcriptional profiling, and computer-aided gene annotations, this study will
characterize the SPE1 and SPE2 coregulatory function in C. albicans
morphogenesis and de novo polyamine biosynthesis. Furthermore, this study will
uncover the polyamine-induced filamentation signaling pathways that could be
harnessed to identify targets of control to combat the infections caused by this
opportunistic plant and human fungal pathogen. Overall, this study will
contribute to bridge the knowledge gap between polyamine metabolism and fungal
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.