* 2217731
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Language Contact on Relative Clauses in Two Signed Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,05/31/2024
* David Quinto-Pozos, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2024
* USD 18,847.00

In communities with extensive spoken language bilingualism, the grammars of the
languages speakers use can converge, becoming more similar to each other over
time. Very little is known about what happens in communities where more than one
signed language is used. Do signed languages in contact converge over time? The
goal of this dissertation research is to document and describe how monolingual
and bilingual signers in different communities differ in their use of
grammatical structures in their languages. The project seeks to shed light on
the grammatical properties of vulnerable and understudied signed languages, as
well as provide insight into how multilingualism impacts the structure of
language more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on
the use of relative clauses in predominantly monolingual and bilingual signing
communities. Relative clauses are sentences that modify nouns to help
distinguish a person or thing from a group or add more information about it. For
example: "The girl who read the book" or "The cat that I was petting" are nouns
with relative clauses that provide more information about those nouns. How
languages mark relative clauses varies: with a specialized linking word such as
"who" or "that", with changes in word order, or with prosody/tone. In spoken
languages, grammatical structures like relative clauses can be impacted by
extensive language contact and multilingualism, leading to new varieties of the
languages in contact that are distinct from monolingual language varieties.
However, relative clauses are under researched in signed languages, as is
bilingualism and language contact. This project uses existing assessment tools
to determine if relative clauses in two signed languages are becoming more
similar to each other in communities with high levels of bilingualism in those
signed languages. Narrative, conversation, description, and grammaticality data
from two signed languages will be collected with monolingual and bilingual
signers in different communities. Relative clause grammatical structure and use
will be compared across monolingual and bilingual signers in each language in
order to identify community-specific grammatical patterns and to determine
whether any differences between monolingual and bilingual language use are due
to grammatical convergence in bilingual communities. Together, this project aims
to tease apart subtle distinctions in the use of grammatical structure to
identify outcomes of signed language bilingualism on grammar. This research
contributes to our understanding of language as a human faculty by increasing
scientific knowledge about signed languages and how they are used by communities
and individuals, as well as increasing language
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.