* 2217227
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Alliance Supporting Pacific Impact through Computational Excellence (ALL-SPICE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Kelly Gaither, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Adrienne Dixson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

ALL SPICE Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF INCLUDES Alliance Supporting
Pacific Impact through Computational Excellence (ALL-SPICE) proposes efforts to
harness the data revolution to support sustainability, economic development, and
social justice in the Hawai'i-Pacific region. ALL-SPICE, led by Chaminade
University of Honolulu with partners at the University of Texas Austin, Texas
Advanced Computing Center, and the University of Hawai'i, will focus on the
development of regional data science capacity in support of Hawai'i-Pacific
progress towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). ALL-
SPICE will build educational and research capacity in data science for community
impact in Hawai'i and the U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands (USAPI), adapting data
science curriculum for online deployment to reach rural, neighbor island and
USAPI participants, enhancing faculty research capacity in data science,
developing new undergraduate data science research experiences, and producing
new Pacific-focused data science courses for broad deployment across the
Alliance. Additionally, ALL-SPICE will curate a ‘Wayfinding to Data’ (W2D)
portfolio of data science training opportunities spanning K-20 and targeting
marginalized populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a robust data
science infrastructure, regional expertise in analytics, and strong linkages to
decision support cyberinfrastructure will empower Hawai'i-Pacific communities to
provide Pacific perspectives rooted in Pacific experiences and epistemology in
global opportunities for STEM, data science and policymaking. ALL-SPICE is
positioned for collective impact on Hawai'i-Pacific data science through the
backbone organization (Chaminade University of Honolulu, Texas Advanced
Computing Center, and the Hawai'i Data Science Institute at the University of
Hawai'i) and a wide coordination network that spans Hawai'i and the (USAPI). The
Coordination Network comprises major partnerships with the East West Center, the
NSF Islands of Opportunity LSAMP Alliance (two- and four-year colleges across
Micronesia, American Samoa, Guam, the Marshall Islands, and the Northern
Marianas) and social sector partners with a shared agenda of strengthening
communities and progress towards the SDG in the region. The STEM Educational
Research (SER) knowledge base for inclusive Hawai'i-Pacific data science
education will be enhanced by research conducted on social justice-oriented
approaches to enculturation of data science pedagogy, and approaches that foster
self-efficacy and sense-of-belonging for Hawai'i- Pacific data science students.
Alliance products will contribute to a new collaborative infrastructure for data
science education in Hawai'i (including rural/ neighbor island locales) and the
USAPI. Data products will inform policy and provide decision support for
Pacific-led environmental, economic, and social justice strategy. Broader
impacts include increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in data
science. ALL-SPICE activities are expected to positively impact workforce
development and employment pathways in data science for Hawai’i and the USAPI.
As a result, the region will be strengthened by data-driven decision support
capacity related to the SDGs, particularly in environmental resilience, health,
poverty reduction and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Alliance is funded
by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The Alliance is also funded by the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), the Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program, which assists universities and colleges
in diversifying the STEM workforce, and the NSF Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.