* 2217717
* BRC-BIO: Evolutionary Genomics of Atadenoviruses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anthony Geneva, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 502,001.00

Improving our knowledge of viral evolution is critical to predicting which
viruses pose a threat to human and animal health. Viruses that are capable of
infecting diverse host species are of particular interest because they may have
the greatest potential to move among a broad array of species. The goal of this
project is to gain new insights into the evolution of Atadenoviruses – a group
of viruses known to infect reptiles, mammals, and birds. This work will be
accomplished by using and developing new genomic sequencing techniques and by
performing computational evolutionary genomics analyses. The potential impact of
this research will be two-fold. Individual Rutgers–Camden students will benefit
from both direct access to advanced genomics research and the development of a
new hands-on Evolution course that will expose undergraduate students to modern
evolutionary genomics research. The proposed work will also serve to advance our
understanding of Atadenovirus evolution and the relationship between ecological
community and natural selection on viruses. The results of this work will
tremendously increase the genomic data available for this group of viruses,
enabling further basic and applied research
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust, genome-scale phylogenies from well-
sampled viral clades are necessary to make inferences about the rate of host
switching. While Adenoviruses are generally believed to co-evolve with their
hosts, one genus within this group – the Atadenoviruses - buck this trend and
infect a disparate collection of vertebrate hosts. This project includes three
aims, to 1) evaluate the true breadth of Atadenovirus hosts, 2) infer the
phylogeny of this genus and the rates of host switching within it, and 3) extend
these analyses to detect molecular signatures of natural selection and test for
accelerated adaptive molecular evolution in Anolis lizards, a group that may be
particularly prone to Atadenoviruses host switching. To evaluate the breadth of
hosts infected by Atadenoviruses, samples from across the squamate tree of life
will be collected, tested for presence of Atadenoviruses, and used to generate
whole genome sequences from hundreds of samples. To infer the phylogeny of
Atadenoviruses, genome sequences will be aligned, and relationships inferred
using species-tree phylogenetic analyses. Phylogenetic comparative methods will
then be used to test predictions about the rate of host switching in
Atadenoviruses. To characterize the evolutionary genomics of Atadenoviruses and
their hosts, the phylogenetic trees and alignments described above will be used
to perform independent tests of natural selection in Atadenoviruses and their
reptile hosts. These analyses will be used to test the prediction that the high
density and species richness of anoles has led to accelerated viral and host
receptor evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.