* 2217990
* STS: Informing Klamath River Restoration Planning with Indigenous spatial analysis and community-identified relational values: Pêeshkeesh Yáv Umúsaheesh
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Cleo Woelfle-Erskine, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 504,991.00

This project generates new ways of remixing Western and Indigenous knowledge
systems to support Tribal sovereignty in river management and informs protocols
for building and sharing knowledge to guide river restoration practice. The team
--comprising Karuk cultural practitioners, Karuk Tribal agency staff, and non-
Karuk academic researchers--will design, participate in, and evaluate an
intervention into river governance to develop a plan to restore the river. The
team will also interview Native and non-Native natural resource scientists to
investigate how Karuk-led and Western-science-led approaches to riverscape
planning. The study will be attentive to the differing ways of knowing and
decision-making and how they interact with each other. Findings will be
presented in a public forums and workshops as well as K-12 curriculum materials.
The research will inform pressing debates about who should guide, fund, and
benefit from ongoing Klamath River restoration once dam removal is complete and
be of interest to policy makers, educators, citizens, and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will weave together science and technology
studies (STS), critical physical geography (CPG), and Indigenous studies to
contribute to reparative approaches for Indigenous-led and place-based river
restoration theory and practice. By mapping field research projects with
intergenerational knowledge exchanges between Native youth and elders and
interviews with Native and non-Native natural resource scientists the project
will investigate how Karuk-led and Western-science-led approaches to riverscape
planning may conflict with and complement each other due to differing
epistemologies and governance structures. It will focus on Karuk knowledge-
making practices that integrate geospatial, and ethnographic data with place-
based understandings of ecological processes. The team--comprising Karuk
cultural practitioners, Karuk Tribal agency staff, and non Karuk academic
researchers--will design, participate in, and evaluate an intervention into
river governance to develop a riverscape restoration plan. The work will
culminate in public presentations of findings and analysis of broader river
governance processes that implement and maintain a community focused restoration
plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is being provided by
Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA supports
projects that address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing
Arctic, empower new research partnerships, diversify the next generation of
Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal and informal education, and
integrate the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award aligns
with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional co-funding of this award is
provided by EcoSystem Science, Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics, Hydrological
Sciences Program and Science of Broadening
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.