* 2217856
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Computational Investigation of Solvent Effects on Enzyme Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Gerardo Cisneros, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 96,219.00

Enzymes are specialized proteins that catalyze chemical reactions in biological
systems. Changes in temperature, pressure, or composition of the environment
surrounding the protein, among many other factors, can have significant effects
on enzyme catalyzed reactions. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program of the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. G. Andres Cisneros from the
University of North Texas and Dr. Pengyu Ren from the University of Texas at
Austin to develop computational methods and software to accurately predict the
effects that charges in the surrounding solvent have on enzymatic catalysis.
Detailed understandings for how enzymes function in highly charged solvents
(ionic liquids) potentially lead to the development of new bio-inspired
catalysts for biotechnology and bioengineering applications. The state-of-the-
art computational methods from this project are used to investigate the reaction
mechanisms of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in different charged solutions.
Peroxidases are important enzymes that help prevent oxidative damage in aerobic
organisms. The newly developed methods and source codes for programs are made
freely available, which impact the ability of the scientific community to
predict the behavior of enzymes in a variety of environments. In addition, the
project engages school students and teachers from underrepresented minority
groups in the sciences through various outreach and mentoring programs at the
two participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main premise of this
project is that differences in temperatures at which homologous enzymes show
maximum activity arise from differences in the balance between enthalpic and
entropic contributions to the free energies of activation, even when these free
energies are similar. This difference in enthalpic-entropic balance is due to
differences in flexibility of surface residues. Alternatively, effects on the
flexibility of surface residues from interactions with the solvent may exert
long range-electrostatic effects on the active sites. Therefore, the main goal
of this study is to apply quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM)
simulations to investigate the effect of highly charged ionic liquid (IL)
solutions on the enthalpic-entropic balance for enzymatic catalysis. This
project continues the development of the AMOEBA-IL (atomic multipole optimized
energetics for biomolecular applications in ionic liquids) force field and
implements enhanced sampling methods in the QM/MM code of the LICHEM (Layered
Interacting Chemical Models) package and its interface to TINKER-OpenMM
molecular mechanics/dynamics sortware package. These tools are used to
computationally model the reaction mechanism of horseradish peroxidase in
different IL solutions. Arrhenius plots calculated for the various IL solution
systems determine the enthalpic-entropic balance for each tested system to
ascertain the effect of the different solvent environments on the reaction
pathway. Results from this work provide fundamental insights into the role of
solvents on enzyme catalysis and the role/impact of surface-residue flexibility
on enzymatic reaction mechanisms. Additionally, this project develops new
methods and parameters for AMOEBA, and these are made available to the broad
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.