* 2217504
* I-Corps: Customer Discovery for Transmission Line Fault Location Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Pablo Gomez, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology with the potential to substantially reduce downtimes
and associated costs to electricity customers following power outages. This
includes the cost to industrial consumers, such as production lines shutting
down, as well as property/goods damage or life-threatening conditions to
residential and commercial consumers (e.g. loss of heating system or
refrigeration unit during a natural phenomenon). In addition, our technology
provides a rich ground for scientific and technological advancement in the field
of power system protection given its versatility and accuracy features. The
proposed fault location technology is applicable in different research areas
including transmission, distribution, microgrids and hybrid systems for overhead
lines and underground cables. Furthermore, the unique visualization capabilities
of our technology pave the way for its utilization outside of the realm of fault
location and detection, such as for conditioning monitoring, fault prediction,
and preventive maintenance, all crucial aspects for reliable and continuous
delivery of electricity to consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a method that reconstructs the complete fault
line and produces a visually rich colormap in the space-time plane. This
colormap clearly illustrates not only the fault location, but also the fault
type and severity. The comprehensive data provided by this colormap is further
processed to obtain a very accurate fault location estimation. Unlike existing
methods, our method is not restricted to certain types of systems or fault
conditions and, given its visual capabilities, it does not require the amount of
time needed by existing tools to identify a fault. The technology relies on the
combination of: versatility: applicable to any type of transmission system under
any type of fault; accuracy: the reconstruction of the complete fault condition
along the line allows exact pinpointing its position; and speed: its
visualization features enable very fast fault location with low sampling rate,
which translates into low computational burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.