* 2217188
* Zwitterionic polymer-based electrolyte engineering for alkali metal ion batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Panzer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,067.00

Lithium-ion batteries are ubiquitous in modern society, powering everything from
wearable/handheld devices to electric vehicles. Securing the future of reliable
and cost-effective electrochemical energy storage, however, will depend on using
a variety of battery chemistries, including those that utilize more abundant
alkali metal ions such as sodium. For every battery that is developed,
maximizing the motion of certain target ions and ensuring a high degree of user
safety are two critically important goals. In this project, the investigators
will examine the ability of a class of highly stable polymers featuring
zwitterionic side groups to promote increased selective transport of sodium and
lithium cations. Zwitterions are a class of molecules which contain both a
positive and a negative charge. Moderate amounts of a nonflammable, room
temperature molten salt (an ionic liquid) will be co-formulated in these
electrolytes to enhance overall ionic motion while maintaining safe operation.
This study will produce important new insights into the roles of zwitterion
chemistry, ionic liquid content, and alkali metal cation identity in determining
ideal chemical compositions for future battery electrolytes. Through mentored
undergraduate and graduate research experiences for underrepresented students
and participation in K-12 outreach activities, this project will also benefit
society by enabling transformative educational and training experiences for a
diverse group of students at multiple experience
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to examine
the intermolecular interactions and selective alkali metal cation (lithium,
sodium) transport within zwitterionic polymer/salt electrolytes that contain
ionic liquid (IL) mass fractions of approximately 5-80 wt.%. This is an
underexplored compositional space that exists between conventional polymer
electrolytes and IL-rich ionogels. The research objectives will be accomplished
by pursuing multiple synthetic strategies to prepare such electrolytes, probing
interactions between the various charged species using several multinuclear NMR
and FTIR/Raman spectroscopy techniques, measuring total ionic conductivities and
alkali metal cation transference number values via AC impedance spectroscopy and
DC polarization tests, and interrogating electrochemical stability upon repeated
strip-plate cycling in symmetric alkali metal electrode cells. It is
hypothesized that high-mobility pathways for alkali metal cation transport may
be created along the pendant zwitterionic functional groups on the polymer,
which provides a motivation for examining the effects of reducing the IL content
among this novel class of electrolytes. This project will be among the first to
directly compare sodium versus lithium cation transport using different
zwitterionic polymer chemistries, which will provide useful information for the
future design of polymer-based electrolytes for “beyond-Li ion”
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.