* 2217752
* LTREB: A Mechanistic Understanding of Ecosystem Resilience and Recovery In Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest Experiencing Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* David Medvigy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 09/30/2027
* USD 236,603.00

Tropical forests provide habitat for countless organisms and help to protect the
Earth’s climate by storing large amounts of carbon in trees and soils. Many of
these forests are secondary forests that have regrown after being cleared for
cropping or grazing. Secondary forest regeneration in the tropics is not fully
understood. This makes it difficult to predict how the characteristics of
tropical forests change over time and how quickly they regain important
functions like biodiversity conservation and carbon storage. Long-term studies
that track the birth, growth, and death of trees and measure other changes as
forest ecosystems regrow are necessary to understand how forests change as they
develop. This project extends long-term field measurements of forest
regeneration in plots of seasonally dry forest in Costa Rica that have different
ages and soil types, and then uses these insights to improve biologically
realistic simulation models of forest growth. These results have a wide range of
applications, from improving restoration projects for carbon storage to
simulating the future state of tropical forests under a range of climate
scenarios. The core data from this project will be used in an online learning
module about tropical ecology for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term data are critical for understanding
ecosystem change over time. Eighteen forest plots were established across
successional and soil gradients in Guanacaste, Costa Rica, and have been
measured continuously since 2008. The plots encompass spatial gradients in soil
characteristics and large inter-annual variability in climatic conditions,
including the strongest drought on record. Forest plots experienced variable
mortality in response to the extreme drought of 2015 and are in various stages
of recovery. This project extends measurements of the key response variables of
biomass, litterfall, tree and woody vine composition and demography, soil
biogeochemistry, and frass fall (as an indirect proxy for Lepidoptera larvae
abundance) to test five hypotheses addressing biotic and abiotic controls on
successional processes as well as the resistance and resilience of dry forest to
extreme climate events. This project will generate new fundamental knowledge on
how tropical dry forests change through time and space in response to
disturbance from land use and drought as well as the roles of two key groups,
nitrogen-fixing legume trees and woody vines in mediating these processes. All
data, model output, and model code will be freely available to the scientific
community in online repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.