* 2217654
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Transitioning open-source software projects to accountable community governance
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Nathan Schneider, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 129,927.00

Open-source software (OSS) underlies critical infrastructure around the US, and
has a hand in every aspect of digital life. However, most OSS projects are run
as “benevolent dictatorships” with no formal accountability to their community
or society. Fortunately, increasing numbers of prominent OSS projects are
voluntarily transitioning out of founder-ownership into democratic community
ownership. By understanding how these transitions proceed, and how often they
succeed, critical OSS projects will face fewer risks as they navigate a dynamic
policy landscape and shifting community needs. By addressing these challenges,
this team can capture the institutional context of accountable OSS design, and
develop general tools for transitioning software projects to accountable
governance. To leverage the social benefit of serving the OSS ecosystem, and
improve its accountability to community members and other stakeholders, we will
host workshops and publish a guide on how to transition OSS projects to
community governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research pursues three research
questions. The first is using data science to explore the accountability systems
that OSS communities define for themselves, and how they co-evolve with their
code and contributor network. The second is using case studies to develop a deep
understanding of the range of governance-transition processes. The third is
engineering software for helping OSS projects design their transition to
community accountability. The work is providing the following main innovations:
(1) advances in the computational representation of policy texts, (2) an
extension of theories of governance dynamics into discontinuous governance
transitions (i.e., transitions to community governance), (3) an extension of
community governance processes to the OSS context, and (4) theoretically-
informed governance design tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.