* 2217429
* BRC-BIO: Toxicity in the city: the cumulative effects of heavy metals on the behavior and physiology of urban-adapted birds
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sarah Guindre-Parker, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 422,855.00

Urbanization is increasing globally, and one of the major ways in which humans
are altering the environment is through increased pollution. Heavy metals are
one type of pollutant that is known to cause harm to organisms, including
humans. For example, heavy metals—which include elements like lead, mercury,
cadmium, chromium, arsenic, and many others—are toxic even at very low
concentrations. Heavy metals are released into the environment by activities
such as construction and transportation, and so are commonly believed to be
found in greater concentration in urban or human-impacted areas than in rural
locales. This project evaluates that assumption by monitoring the accumulation
of heavy metals in the blood and feathers of a common bird, the European
starling, sampled from locations across 10 Georgia counties that range from
predominantly urban to predominantly rural. The research also focuses on
understanding the effects of experienced levels of heavy metals on the
physiology and behavior of the birds, to understand the sublethal effects of
exposure. Ultimately, this project will inform our understanding of typical
heavy metal exposure, its association with urbanization, and the consequences of
that exposure for bird behavior and physiology. The results of this study will
lead to new hypotheses about the potential effects of heavy metal exposure in
humans that inhabit the same areas. The project will further benefit society by
training diverse students—including undergraduate and graduate students—through
creating paid research opportunities in metropolitan Atlanta, as well as
incorporating research into the classroom at Kennesaw State University. The
research team will engage with high school students through visits to classrooms
across the urban-to-rural study sites to share research findings and test school
soil heavy metal concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
three knowledge gaps on the links among urbanization, heavy metal pollution,
animal behavior and physiology, and public health. PI Guindre-Parker will
characterize heavy metal exposure along an urban-to-rural gradient by screening
blood and feather tissues of free-living European starlings (Sturnus vulgaris).
Starling populations will be sampled across 10 counties in Georgia that differ
in their degree of urbanization, including metropolitan Atlanta. Next, PI
Guindre-Parker will examine the sublethal effects of heavy metal exposure on the
physiology and behavioral coping styles of starlings. Methods include immune and
endocrine assays to characterize physiology, as well as open field tests to
assess behavior. Importantly, this work will explore how exposure to multiple
heavy metals simultaneously shapes animal phenotypes under free-living
conditions. Finally, PI Guindre-Parker will investigate whether starlings can
serve in biomonitoring heavy metals via mapping results from starlings onto
published data in humans. Heavy metal poisoning continues to be a concern in
many Georgia counties, including in metro-Atlanta, and results from this work
would benefit ongoing initiatives to monitor heavy metals in the state. This
award would also create 2 fully funded graduate positions, 3 paid undergraduate
research positions, and would allow 144 biology majors to participate in
classroom research via course-based undergraduate research experiences (CURE) in
PI Guindre-Parker’s annual Vertebrate Zoology course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.