* 2217886
* EAGER: C2DIT: Community Continuous Distributed Internet Traffic Datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Christos Papadopoulos, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,582.00

This project will make available to the general networking community continuous,
distributed, and multimode datasets currently being collected at three Research
and Education Networks (RENs). The data is well-suited for cybersecurity
research, anomaly detection, evaluation, and classification tasks such as
detecting DDoS and other network attacks, route hijacking, encrypted application
traffic and quantifying network resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide both anonymized and non-anonymized data, the latter accessed
through the projectâ€™s existing infrastructure. The uniqueness of the data lies
in its continuous, distributed, uniform and multimode nature. The data is
continuous because traffic capture happens 24/7. This is important because
interesting phenomena can happen at any time. The data is distributed and
uniform because the same capture process runs at all locations simultaneously.
This is important because attacks and other anomalies may be distributed and
observing them at multiple networks at the same time facilitates easier
correlation. Uniformity is important to access data in a consistent and familiar
environment. Finally, the data will be presented in multiple modes: unsampled
flows, sFlow, Netflow, and in some locations, accompanied by commercial
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) alerts. Each of these modes has its own
advantages: unsampled flows are needed to discover needle-in-a-haystack
phenomena; sFlow and Netflow summarize traffic making datasets smaller and
easier to handle; and IDS alerts provide external DDoS
labeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to benefiting researchers in
cybersecurity, the data will benefit the broader networking community working on
routing, censorship, traffic correlation, characterization and engineering,
machine learning, privacy, and other areas. The data has been used in hackathons
and in the classroom to build exercises and demonstrations. Finally, the data
will also have a broad societal impact given the increasing use of the Internet
for work, education, and entertainment. Datasets may be requested at
https://ant.isi.edu/classnet/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.