* 2217161
* Charge transfer at abiotic-biotic interface for photosynthetic biohybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Peidong Yang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2026
* USD 755,000.00

This award is Co-Funded with ENG/CBET Electrochemical Systems
program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge transfer at the abiotic-biotic interface for
photosynthetic biohybrids&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;A
rapidly developing industrial world requires creative and sustainable strategies
for dealing with the unidirectional carbon cycle. The conversion of CO2 to
value-added products powered with solar energy is an ideal solution. Combining
single-cell microorganisms with light-harvesting nanomaterials into
photosynthetic biohybrid systems (PBS) represents a promising approach.
Biological microorganisms engage a collection of enzymes and reductive pathways
to produce long-chain hydrocarbons from simple building blocks, including CO2,
N2, and H2O. Semiconducting nanomaterials are highly configurable with tunable
broadband light absorption and surface charge, pair well with microorganisms and
enable significant sunlight capture, hence solar-to-chemical conversion. These
photosynthetic biohybrids boost the best functions of biological whole-cell
catalysts and semiconducting nanomaterials. However, the fundamental electron
transfer and energy transduction pathway in these emerging photosynthetic
biohybrids remains largely unexplored due to the complex nature of the
biotic/abiotic semiconductor/bacteria interfaces. The purpose of this project is
to examine this energy transduction pathway, starting from solar light
absorption by the semiconductor nanostructures, electron generation and transfer
from the semiconductor to microorganism, and then CO2 reduction by the
microorganism using transferred electron. By reducing CO2, the major byproduct
of fossil fuel combustion, into value-added fuels using renewable energy sources
(i.e., solar energy and artificial photosynthesis), one can help close the
carbon emission loop, mitigate CO2 emissions, and make our society more
sustainable. Starting from the simple molecules produced by photosynthetic
biohybrid systems, more complex substances, like fertilizers, industrial and
commodity chemicals, polymers, and pharmaceuticals, among others, can be
constructed, all originating from capturing atmospheric CO2. Integrated with the
research effort, the PI also proposes an educational project that stimulates and
prepares pre-college students for careers in materials science and energy
research, including outreach efforts at local middle-high schools (Bay Area
Scientists in Schools, and summer STEM
internship).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Liquid sunlight
represents a new form of chemical energy converted and stored in chemical bonds
from solar energy. Photosynthetic biohybrids produce liquid sunlight through a
“photon-in, chemical bond-out” materials/biology interface that can be probed
through spatiotemporal imaging, and spectroscopic analyses. Photosynthetic
biohybrid systems (PBS) combine the best attributes of biological whole-cell
catalysts and semiconducting nanomaterials. Enzymatic machinery enveloped in its
native cellular environment offers exquisite product selectivity and low
substrate activation barriers while semiconducting nanomaterials harvest light
energy stably and more efficiently than biomolecules. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that a collection of value-added chemicals, such as liquid fuels,
biodegradable polymers, and other complex natural products can be directly
produced from CO2 using these photosynthetic biohybrids. However, the
fundamental electron transfer and energy transduction pathway in these emerging
photosynthetic biohybrid systems remains unexplored due to the complex nature of
the biotic/abiotic semiconductor/bacteria interfaces. Fundamentally, the
photosynthetic function of these PBSs originates from a “photon-in, chemical
bond-out” materials/biology interface that spans multiple orders of magnitude
both in the length and time scale. The objective of this research is to design
and explore the fundamental abiotic-biotic interfaces of a model system for
inorganic-biological artificial photosynthesis through studies on interfacial
charge transfer and biogenic mineralization of inorganic photosensitizers. This
model system study will require three phases: 1) elucidation of charge transfer
between photosensitizers and biological participants in the Wood-Ljungdahl
Pathway; 2) a detailed study of photosensitizer biomineralization and
photosensitizer-whole cell charge transfer; and 3) development of a functional
whole-cell photosensitized system and screening the effects of mineral precursor
and hole scavenger on system productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.