* 2217618
* Collaborative Research: Forced Trends in the Tropical Pacific and Global Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Richard Seager, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2025
* USD 830,233.00

The temperature contrast between the "warm pool" region of the western
equatorial Pacific and the "cold tongue" in the east is remarkable: visitors to
the Solomon islands find sea surface temperatures (SSTs) above 80F while
visitors to the Galapagos don wetsuits to go snorkeling. Naturally the
temperature contrast has a variety of effects on the weather and climate of the
tropics, one of which is the relative abundance of hurricanes (also called
typhoons and TCs, for tropical cyclones) which are more abundant in the western
Pacific than anywhere else in the world. The influence of the SST contrast can
be seen in comparisons between El Nino events, in which the contrast weakens due
to warming in the cold tongue region, and La Nina events, which strengthen the
contrast. El Nino years feature fewer TCs in the western Pacific and more in the
central and eastern Pacific, with the opposite pattern in La Nina
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of El Nino and La Nina on TCs and
other aspects of tropical weather and climate begs the question: will the
equatorial Pacific SST contrast be strengthened or weakened by greenhouse gas-
induced global warming? The evidence is mixed since climate models generally
show weakening as the earth warms but observations show strengthening over the
past few decades. The mismatch could be due to the internal variability of the
climate system, which operates even as greenhouse gas increases warm the world.
But it is also possible that climate model biases, in particular the bias of a
cold tongue which is too cold and too extensive, lead to incorrect simulations
of the effects of greenhouse warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award
addresses the possible effect of the cold tongue bias on the simulated SST
contrast change using a technique called flux adjustment, in which the exchange
of heat and moisture between the atmosphere and ocean is modified to eliminate
the cold tongue bias in present-day climate simulations. The flux-adjusted
climate model is then used to simulate the response of the SST contrast to
greenhouse gas increases. The work is carried out with the Community Earth
System Model version 2 (CESM2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of an El Nino-
like or La Nina-like SST warming pattern on tropical cyclones is difficult to
assess from climate model simulations because the resolution of climate models
is not typically high enough to simulate TCs. One strategy pursued here is to
simulate TCs using shorter simulations from a high-resolution atmosphere-only
model which is run over the SST warming pattern produced by the climate model.
Another is to use the Columbia HAZard model (CHAZ), an empirical TC model
developed by the lead Principal Investigator (PI). CHAZ uses large-scale
atmospheric conditions from the climate model or observational datasets to
predict the tracks and intensities of "synthetic" TCs that are initiated at
random based on a TC genesis index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal
as well as scientific value given the consequences of warming-induced changes in
TC behavior. It is clear that warming causes the most intense hurricanes to
become stronger and more destructive, thus efforts to anticipate changes in the
distribution of TCs across the Pacific are valuable for climate adaptation and
disaster risk reduction. The PIs have strong ties to the World Bank, the
reinsurance industry, and other relevant stakeholders through the Columbia World
project. They also conduct extensive media outreach on climate change-related
topics including TC risk. In addition, the project supports a postdoctoral
fellow and a graduate student, thereby promoting the future workforce in this
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.