* 2217231
* Travel Support for Orthopedic Research Society (ORS) Musculoskeletal Biology Workshop; Snowbird, Utah; 23-27 July 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Alexander Robling, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The award will provide travel support for junior investigators to attend the
49th annual meeting of the Orthopedic Research Society (ORS) Musculoskeletal
(MSK) Biology Workshop in Snowbird, Utah, 23-27 July 2022. These workshops
promote interdisciplinary communication between biologists, engineers, and
clinicians in the area of musculoskeletal biology, biomechanics and
mechanobiology; stimulate interactions among investigators in all levels in
their careers; builds for-life scientific networks; emphasize active
participation of junior faculty and students; and are unique in that discussion
time equals or exceeds time allotted for presentations. The focus of the
workshop is broad and highly multidisciplinary. Sessions address significant
current problems, limitations, potential solutions, and approaches applicable to
both basic science and clinical. The attendance of this Workshop represents a
significant number of students, young investigators, women, and underrepresented
minorities. Partnership with the ORS provides maximum visibility through
broadcast emails and links on the ORS website, where abstracts will be posted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific theme of the 2022 workshop is
“Musculoskeletal immunology and mechanotransduction: biology and disease from
stem to senescent cells.” The program consists of the “Remodeling in Bone” (RIB)
plenary lecture entitled “The biology of bone and muscle wasting”; two career
development sessions; and six scientific sessions: (1) Major Methodologies:
Optical imaging of musculoskeletal tissues; (2) Problems in Orthopaedics:
Autologous-autogenous treatments for musculoskeletal disease; (3) Interactions
between the immune system and musculoskeletal tissues; (4) Mechanobiology of
musculoskeletal tissues; (5) Osteocytes: From biology to pathophysiology; and
(6) Problems in Aging: Development of senolytic therapies for musculoskeletal
disorders. The specific objectives of the MSK workshops are (1) Work toward a
multidisciplinary basic and clinical synthesis of molecular, cellular, tissue,
and biomechanical processes that lead to understand the pathogenesis of
musculoskeletal diseases, prevention, and treatment. (2) Apply basic science
concepts to clinical problems and develop dialogue between basic and clinical
investigators. (3) Identify problems and formulate solutions to musculoskeletal
diseases. (4) Provide a forum for students and junior investigators training to
interact among themselves and with more senior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.