* 2217560
* Temperature Scaling of Animal Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Christopher Hammell, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2026
* USD 999,999.00

The development of animals from a single cell to adulthood is a complex
operation requiring extreme coordination of billions of molecular events.
Remarkably, development of most animal species occurs normally despite radical
changes that may occur in the environment that would individually impact these
molecular reactions. This property suggests that evolution has selected for and
can encode gene regulatory networks that generate similar developmental outcomes
despite changing conditions. This proposal aims to understand how animals can
maintain the correct timing of gene expression when developing at different
temperatures. Specifically, the investigators have developed tools to directly
measure how and when animals turn on and off key developmental genes. They will
use this system to dissect how changes in global gene expression are maintained
across different cells and tissues during development at variable temperatures.
This will allow the investigators to determine the unknown architectures of gene
expression that are in place to make sure development in varying environments
generates similar outcomes. As part of this project they will also provide
research experiences for an undergraduate student, and they will perform
outreach to minority-serving high schools in New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature impacts all biochemical reactions. For
multicellular developmental systems, temperature fluctuations pose particular
challenges because the orderly morphological progression depends on both
spatially and temporally coordinated cellular decisions. It has been shown that
overall developmental rates of poikilothermic animals obey Arrhenius scaling,
though scaling parameters are genus and even species dependent. Despite the
myriad diverse chemical reactions involved, this temperature scaling is uniform,
leaving the relative timing of key developmental milestones unchanged. It
remains unknown how this is achieved and, more generally, how individual
molecular decisions that control developmental processes are buffered against
temperature and synchronized within and across tissues to maintain developmental
precision. The goal of this project is to uncover the organizational strategy
and molecular mechanisms that confer this robustness. The investigators have
developed a unique microfluidics methodology that allows high-resolution imaging
of gene expression in multiple C. elegans larvae simultaneously throughout post-
embryonic development. This technology will enable the investigators to
determine how transcriptional patterns of key regulatory molecules are organized
at different temperatures and enable them to model how Gene Regulatory Networks
(GRNs) that generate these patterns work. The studies put the investigators in a
position to now pioneer quantitative in-vivo studies of the temporal patterning
GRN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.