* 2217647
* Understanding swimming hydrodynamics of elastic propulsors with tapered thickness
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 301,190.00

Fish leverage flexible fins to achieve fast and efficient swimming that far
exceeds the performance of current man-made devices. This computational research
project aims to investigate the role that fin elasticity plays in underwater
locomotion and to understand the effects of thickness tapering on the fin
swimming performance. Fish fins and rays typically feature tapered thickness
where the fin thickness gradually decreases from the fin base to the trailing
edge. It is speculated that this geometrical feature can be beneficial for
enhancing fin swimming performance, however how the thickness tapering
contributes to enhanced performance of fins remains largely unknown. This
project will use computer simulations to probe the underwater locomotion of
plunging elastic fins with tapered thickness to reveal and analyze the
hydrodynamic mechanisms maximizing their swimming propulsion and efficiency. The
results of this project will facilitate the development of novel swimming robots
with efficient biomimetic fins. Such autonomous robots may be useful in diverse
underwater applications, including surveillance, rescue operations, water
pollution control, and fish monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
computational research aims to develop fundamental understanding of the
hydrodynamics of undulatory swimming in viscous fluids using elastic plate
propulsors with tapered thickness. The project hypothesizes that thickness
tapering causes the acoustic black hole effect that suppresses the reflection of
flexural waves at the trailing edge of the propulsor, which in turn facilitates
the formation of more efficient for underwater locomotion traveling waves. It
further hypothesizes that thickness tapering can be used to control the
propulsor bending pattern and the type of flexural waves the propulsor produces.
The project will use a three-dimensional computational model for fluid-structure
interactions to investigate the project hypotheses and to characterize the
hydrodynamics of tapered propulsors at different flow conditions. It will seek
to understand the effects of traveling and standing waves on biomimetic
locomotion and to identify hydrodynamic mechanisms facilitating the efficient
and fast swimming. The project will establish how these hydrodynamic mechanisms
depend on the propulsor geometry and properties. An evolutionary genetic
algorithm will be harnessed to identify the tapering shapes leading to the
optimum propulsion. The results of this project will advance the fundamental
knowledge of the complex interactions between unsteady viscous flows and
oscillating elastic plates with nonuniform thickness, thereby enabling the
development of novel biomimetic propulsors for efficient underwater
locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.