* 2217543
* The Mechanics of Self-Folding Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Christian Santangelo, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 88,660.00

Nontechnical Summary &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education on mechanical structures that are made
from programmable and responsive materials, and fold themselves into 3D shapes
from an initially flat shape. Self-folding material structures are poised to
revolutionize manufacturing, particularly by allowing the fabrication of very
complex three-dimensional structures from sizes less than a millimeter to human
scale. Because they are fabricated flat, self-folding structures can be made
cheaply, rapidly, and in bulk. However, one of the primary obstacles to
realizing this technology is the proliferation of misfolded structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will develop new theoretical and
computation tools to design material structures that will fold robustly, thus
removing this manufacturing obstacle. The research will also establish
connections between the mechanics of self-folding materials structures and the
mechanics of material shells more generally by incorporated tools from the field
of discrete geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce graduate
students to cutting edge techniques in the analysis of materials, and foster
collaborations between theory and experiment. The methods developed in this
project will be incorporated into a computational package that will be
documented and distributed to the broader materials community. An educational
module on geometry and origami for middle school will be developed to introduce
students to mathematical thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research, and
education on self-folding origami structures. Self-folding origami structures
are poised to revolutionize manufacturing by providing an easy means of creating
complex three-dimensional geometries from an initially flat substrate on any
length scale. Recently, there has been a great deal of effort devoted to
creating material systems that can be fabricated to fold or unfold upon
application of an external stimulus. While many complex folding structures fold
robustly into their target shape, many do not, even when the fold patterns are
simple. One of the primary obstacles to realizing such structures is the
bifurcated nature of the configuration space, which exhibits a multitude of
branches that are exponential in the complexity of the structure. This is a key
and unavoidable feature of the way such structures deform and leads to apparent
glass-like behavior in folding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a
theory for the mechanics of self-folding structures and devise principles by
which those structures can be made to fold robustly. The scientific aims of this
project, specifically, are to develop a theory for the configuration space of
self-folding structures that incorporates the bending elasticity of folds,
allows for the introduction of Gaussian curvature at vertices, and properly
accounts for the geometrical rigidity of the structures at second-order and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have an impact on the design of
structured materials by introducing new analytical techniques for the prediction
of three-dimensional structures. It will lead to the further development and
documentation of a software package in Mathematica that can be used to perform
complex calculations on rigid mechanisms. It also funds a number of education
activities, including the training of a graduate student in cutting edge
theoretical techniques. An educational module on geometry and origami for middle
school will be developed to introduce students to mathematical
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.