* 2218671
* Integrating Art, History and Diverse Knowledge Systems in Systematics: A Framework to Advance Inclusive Practice in Taxonomy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Evon Hekkala, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,230.00

This project is designed to integrate the history of science with modern
cultural and technology-based knowledge through participatory research to
advance inclusive practice in systematics and taxonomy. The project focuses on
crocodiles, a group of animals which figure prominently in cultures and
communities around the globe, to develop a model of interdisciplinary team-based
surveys of cultural heritage materials from archaeological, artistic and
archival contexts reflecting cultural beliefs related to natural history and
taxonomy. The project will result in a model of knowledge integration that is to
be disseminated by publishing a reference database online and by providing
opportunities for research participation, outreach, and education in an
exciting, shared endeavor among students and participants representing diverse
communities and cultures. Other outcomes of the project include public science
communication events, interdisciplinary journal articles, and international
collaborative research and professional development opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers. A workshop focused on
this research is to be developed for the annual Student Conference on
Conservation Science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Systematic taxonomy strives to
recognize all levels of biological diversity, yet much of the data used in the
documentation of diversity has relied on knowledge provided by the communities
from which these collections were sourced without appropriate attribution. This
project will strive to resurface, re-attribute and integrate place based and
traditional knowledge to enhance our understanding of biological diversity.
Through team based co-produced archival research on the contributions of source
and descendant communities we will re-visit the interpretation of natural and
cultural diversity with additional societal stakeholders and expand pathways of
knowledge production and presentation. The integration of technological advances
in digitization, mapping and bio-molecular analysis methods with Indigenous and
place-based knowledge systems may provide us with the next big jump in
understanding the history of and relationships among living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.