* 2218033
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Understanding Law-Enforcement Cyber Investigations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Brian Schaefer, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 45,185.00

Numerous challenges confront law enforcement investigations and prosecutions of
cybercrime offenses, including under-reporting by victims, jurisdictional
conflicts and limitations, insufficient resources, training, and expertise, as
well as organizational constraints. This research is a study of cybercrime
investigators, their departments, and the challenges they face in fighting
cybercrime. The research consists of social scientific research on how law
enforcement investigators and their units conduct cybercrime investigations. The
findings will contribute to the academic literature in criminology, sociology,
and other disciplines and inform recommendations for improvements in the
resources, policies, and procedures of law enforcement agencies engaged in
cybercrime investigations. This research also will contribute to the education
of students of social science and cybersecurity, who will be involved in the
data collection and analyses of data. The research will be critical to
understanding the vital role law enforcement plays in apprehending cybercrime
offenders and disrupting criminal networks, useful functions in the provision of
a secure and trustworthy cyberspace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the
challenges confronting cybercrime investigators, the researchers are using
ethnographic techniques to study cybercrime units and specialized personnel who
work in them. The study examines (1) innovative cybercrime units and those that
are leaders in their field and (2) cybercrime units in transition or those only
recently having developed cybercrime investigative capabilities. These are the
units and personnel most likely to have experience managing the perils and
pitfalls involved in such investigations. Within these units, the researchers
will employ in-depth qualitative interviews that will probe challenges such
investigators face, their relationships to other public and private
cybercrime/information security organizations, sense of occupational identity,
relationship between cybercrime investigators to other police personnel and
organizations, and perceptions of cybercrime and offenders. The researchers also
work with other criminal justice units and agencies to learn more about case
processing policies and procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.