* 2218781
* Spray-mediated air-sea gas exchange of carbon dioxide in high winds
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Penny Vlahos, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2025
* USD 385,388.00

Understanding the processes that control the exchange of gases between the ocean
and atmosphere is crucial to understanding the role of the ocean in the global
carbon cycle and predicting the response of the ocean to global change. Gas
exchange is more complicated for carbon dioxide than for many other gases
because carbon dioxide reacts with water to form carbonic acid, bicarbonate
ions, and carbonate ions. This project seeks to incorporate the full carbonate
system into modeling a particular process affecting ocean-atmosphere gas
exchange: the exchange of gases with droplets of sea spray produced by breaking
waves in high winds. This work builds on previous NSF-funded projects that
developed a model for sea spray gas exchange for non-reactive gases. The project
will generate a new model of sea spray-mediated gas transfer that will
contribute greatly to understanding of air-sea gas exchange in high winds and is
needed to improve climate models and predictions. The results from the project
will be made available as open source code. The project will support graduate
and undergraduate student research, incorporate mentoring of underrepresented
and first-generation students, and involve public outreach. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project build upon the foundational Andreas
Gas Exchange Spray model (AGES) developed for non-reactive gases, by adding the
components of a reacting gas system and coupling these to a scalable physical
model. By constraining the CO2 system as a spray droplet evolves, the
investigators will also constrain the alkalinity and pH profile and therefore
the chemical environment that controls other reactions and transformations
within the droplet. The investigators expect that, relative to previously
modelled non-reactive gases, sea spray will play a much more significant role
for CO2 gas exchange. CO2, unlike the previously modeled gases, will be produced
during sea spray evaporation as the carbonate and bicarbonate equilibria shift
in an evaporating and acidifying spray droplet. This process is significant for
a better understanding of gas exchange at high wind speeds to improve current
parameterizations. This project also constrains the chemistry of sea spray drops
before reaching the aerosol stage and therefore creates a significant link
between surface-ocean and atmospheric chemistry. The team will use the model to
generate an estimate of the role sea spray serves in CO2 air-sea exchange in the
Southern Ocean. This will present the results in a convenient and relevant
global context which may prove useful for global modeling and climate
assessments. Finally, the model generates novel gas-exchange parameterizations
expressed in terms of a net transfer coefficient that can be divided into
bubble, interfacial, and sea spray transfer coefficients. These
parameterizations will be proposed at different levels of complexity with and
without explicitly accounting for the wave variables in case a wave model is not
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.