* 2218646
* Collaborative Research: Active and Passive Seismic Imaging of the Three-Dimensional Structure and Magma System beneath the Summit of Kilauea Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2026
* USD 161,641.00

In 2018, the Kilauea volcano in Hawai’i experienced its largest Lower East Rift
Zone eruption and caldera collapse in over 200 years. While much was learned
from the massive magma drainage and surface collapse, there remains little
knowledge about the magma plumbing system beneath the collapsed summit and the
migration of magma to the East Rift Zone. A detailed model of Kilauea’s magmatic
system is critical for addressing questions related to magma evolution and
transport in volcanic systems. This project partners with the United States
Geologic Survey and applies active and passive seismic surveys along with novel
geophysical techniques to provide a high-resolution three-dimensional image of
the subsurface summit structure after the 2018 collapse. The project will result
in an unprecedented image of the magma plumbing system in an active volcano
which is of critical importance for predicting magma storage and transport prior
to future eruptions and reducing potential economic and societal losses. The
seismic dataset and high-resolution modeling provide a template for fundamental
breakthroughs at other active volcanic systems. This project provides support
and training for several graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates an active-passive-source
investigation of the Kilauea summit in Hawai’i with a temporary three-component
nodal array to provide the high-resolution seismic images needed to gain new
insights into the magma plumbing system. The data from the seismic survey are
used for a battery of processing techniques including arrival-time tomography,
earthquake relocation, full waveform inversion, surface wave imaging, ambient-
noise tomography, and joint inversions with gravity and magnetotelluric data.
The work provides an unprecedented seismic wavefield dataset and structural
resolution for the summit area of Kilauea volcano. Independent, upper-crustal
velocity of primary and surface wave constraints are invaluable in improving
accuracies of earthquake hypocenters and the resolution of deeper structure
using earthquake arrival time and ambient-noise data. The attendant insights
into structure and composition help evaluate the potential of future seismic and
volcanic hazards in Hawai’i. The geophysical record obtained in this project are
also linked to the geochemistry of subsequently erupted olivine and glasses to
establish a link between geochemical signals and reservoir geometry and
distribution within the volcanic edifice. This project is an integral part of a
larger collaborative effort between the investigators and United States Geologic
Survey researchers that brings together a broad spectrum of geophysical imaging
techniques, along with geodynamics and petrology, in a coordinated
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.