* 2218607
* Conference: 1st Global Amphibian and Reptile Disease Conference
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Leon Grayfer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The first Global Amphibian and Reptile Disease Conference (GARD, 2022) will
break down discipline-based silos and bring together a diverse array of
investigators focused on studying diseases of amphibians and reptiles. This
conference will serve as a forum for uniting communities of investigators to
discuss, compare, and contrast various aspects of amphibian and reptile
diseases. To this end, this meeting will include, but will not be limited to
virologists, mycologists, parasitologists, veterinarians, immunologists,
ecologists, and pathologists. Dealing with the impacts of infectious diseases
plaguing amphibians and reptiles requires a more comprehensive understanding of
the replication, transmission, and epidemiology of these pathogens, the
molecular bases underlying pathogenicity, and the roles of host immune systems
during such infections. Concurrently, greater insight into these diseases and
their resulting outcomes require in-depth knowledge of pathogen ecology,
specifically addressing issues of host range, host-pathogen interactions, and
the myriad environmental factors, such as climate, altitude, ultraviolet
exposure, agrochemicals, and anthropomorphic changes, that impact host
susceptibility and resistance. As such, the 2022 GARD meeting will provide an
opportunity for scientists studying the many different facets of herpetological
diseases to combine their respective areas of expertise and thus raise the level
of global awareness and understanding of infectious disease impacting amphibians
and reptiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal unifying the
participants of the first Global Amphibian and Reptile Disease Conference is to
diminish the loss of amphibian and reptile diversity by advancing our
understanding of the principal agents contributing to diseases of these animals
and developing mitigation strategies to control them. To accomplish that goal,
this conference will improve scientific communication among investigators whose
diverse interests often find them attending different meetings. The 2022 GARD
meeting will also engage junior researchers through comprehensive workshops and
presentations that prominently feature research from students, postdoctoral
fellows, and research associates. Through outreach programs offered by the
universities whose faculty are in attendance, we will facilitate participation
by students from under-represented minorities, thereby integrating them into our
scientific communities. Moreover, the hands-on training that students,
postdoctoral fellows, and principal investigators will acquire through workshops
and field trips offered at GARD 2022, will enhance their respective research
endeavors, advance their studies of amphibian and reptile diseases, and
strengthen STEM research in general. GARD attendance and participation will be
gender-balanced and will include racial and ethnic
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.