* 2218975
* MCA: Transparent and Accountable Decision Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amelie Marian, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2025
* USD 132,708.00

Automated and algorithmic decision systems are used extensively to enact public
policy. Despite their use within the public domain as automated decision-making
and resource distribution tools, these systems are often opaque and not publicly
audited. Details that could provide a measure of reason and accountability are
often hidden within proprietary contracts with third-party vendors. Without
transparent and explainable processes, it is not possible to verify whether the
outcomes satisfy ethical and fairness constraints. Without accountability, there
can be no trust in the decisions produced by these systems. This project focuses
on accountability, transparency, and explainability in the context of automated
decision systems for public policy. This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA)Award
supports Amelie Marian to work with a partner/mentor who brings different
expertise. The PI leverages her background in designing ranking systems and
decision-making algorithms to collaborate with the partner’s team of legal
scholars, policy researchers, and social scientists to develop guidelines and
techniques for transparency and accountability in decision
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the accountability of
algorithmic decisions through the perspectives of computation, law, and ethics.
Transparency and accountability are critical prerequisites for building trust in
the results of automated decisions and guaranteeing fair and equitable outcomes.
The research involves secondary analysis of data used for public policy
decisions in domains such as school admissions, vaccine and organ donation lists
prioritization, job applications, public housing allocations, and ranked choice
voting. The PI is using the MCA award also to deepen and create new
collaborations with policy-makers, as well as establish new multidisciplinary
collaborations with the project's mentor partner, Helen Nissenbaum, director of
the Digital Life Initiative group at Cornell Tech. By involving a wide array of
stakeholders and scholars, this research obtains a better understanding of what
constitutes a fair, transparent, and accountable decisions, thereby increasing
trust in the decision processes and leveraging algorithmic decision mechanisms
for social good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.