* 2218943
* Establishing a diverse community of expert Rubin Observatory users throughout the California State University System
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Louise Edwards, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2026
* USD 700,726.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). A partnership is developed between a network of
observational astronomers within the California State University (CSU) system
and members of NOIRLab and the Vera Rubin Observatory to use the Legacy Survey
of Space and Time (LSST) data. Faculty and undergraduate students at the CSU
will form teams that will: work closely with Rubin Observatory staff to achieve
data access; develop new scientific collaborations with NOIRLab scientists;
engage in technical training and unique research-institute focused experiences;
and become expert users of the Rubin Science Platform (RSP). In turn, a
scientific study of the partnership will set best-practices that will serve the
NOIRLab in its work toward research inclusion. Program highlights and partner
profiles will be produced and communicated throughout the 23-campus CSU STEM
community, laying the groundwork for building a CSU network of astronomers that
extends beyond the project period. Three of the four CSU partner institutions
are Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). Conscientious and deliberate
recruitment and mentoring will increase opportunities for the retention and
success of students from groups underrepresented in
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; CSU astronomy faculty and undergraduate
students will work together to learn the Rubin Science Platform, collaborate on
preview-data science, and prepare for the immediate use of the Rubin Data
Release 1. The partners will develop expertise and fluency in the RSP by
investigating astrophysics topics particularly synergistic with the LSST
experimental setup and the expertise at each CSU hub. At an early summer ‘data
summit’ Rubin specialists will deliver tailored support and the CSU teams will
build community. Each team will develop their own project and produce their own
scientific results, but will work as a community to develop and share data
analysis pipelines, as an accountability group, and in revising data analysis
notebooks. The scientific areas addressed at the four CSU hubs are:
Galaxy/Filament alignments in large scale structures, X-ray binary monitoring
and discovery, gamma ray burst afterglow characterization and detection, and
discovery of long-period variable stars in nearby dwarf galaxies. The impact on
the student experience will be tracked by an external program
evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.