* 2218919
* Collaborative Research: The great Alaskan escape room: Has Northern Cordilleran escape tectonics fluctuated with time and why?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Trevor Waldien, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 406,293.00

The proposed research will address how plate tectonics causes fragments of
continents to “chip off” and move along the continental margin to a new
location, often thousands of kilometers away from where they formed. This
process has been termed tectonic escape and has played an essential role in
shaping the mountainous terrain in western North America over the last ~100
million years. Professors Waldien and Regan will study this tectonic phenomenon
by unraveling the geologic evolution and uplift history of the Ahklun Mountains
in western Alaska because this region is the northernmost extent of continental
fragments that have moved northward along western North America. The study will
test the hypothesis that magmatism and uplift in the Ahklun Mountains is related
to temporal fluctuations in the amount of tectonic escape over the last ~70
million years. Due to the remote location and inherent relationship between
rural communities and the western Alaska landscape, the project will be used to
train first-generation college student geologists from first-people communities
in Alaska and South Dakota (locations of host institutions). All personnel
working on the project will participate in public outreach presentations at
Wood-Tikchick State Park emphasizing the relationship between the bedrock
geology and the unique landscape of western Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;Escape tectonics
is commonly evoked in collisional systems to aid in orogenic space limitations
by translating crustal material away from collisional indenter(s). In
accretionary orogens however, strike-slip deformation develops in response to
oblique relative plate motion and results in the translation of forearc slivers.
If persistent over prolonged time, the accumulated strike-slip displacement may
manifest as forearc escape. Accretionary orogens present a challenge to
classical models of escape tectonics because the obliquity of relative plate
motion and the broad wavelength geometry of strike-slip faults can change over
the duration of orogenesis, thus the proportion of plate motion taken up as
escape may vary greatly through time. The 3-year project intends to test the
long-proposed model of Cordilleran escape tectonics by documenting the
Cretaceous-Cenozoic offset and deformation history along the southwestern
terminal onshore segment of the Denali fault system in the Ahklun Mountains of
western Alaska. Key questions addressed by the study will include: 1) Do
reactivated suture zone faults in the Ahklun Mountains and associated
extensional magmatism together represent a partitioned obliquely convergent
margin that was active during an escape regime? 2) Do structures inherited from
the assembly of the Cordillera focus strike-slip and/or shortening during the
downscaling of escape? 3) Is the transition out of a primary escape tectonics
regime recorded by the uplift/exhumation of the Ahklun mountains? and 4) Does
the timing of reduced escape tectonics correspond with suggested Paleocene-
Eocene oroclinal bending of southern Alaska? PIs Waldien and Regan will pursue
answers to these questions by employing regional geologic mapping, structural
analysis, petrography, thermochronology, geochronology, and geochemistry in a
series of focus areas within the Ahklun Mountains to 1) determine the timing of
and cause of magmatism and rock exhumation in the Ahklun Mountains, 2) identify
offset markers that may be used to restore Denali fault strike-slip displacement
at different time intervals, and 3) couple the fault restoration and timing of
exhumation/magmatism to regional tectonic processes operating at the scale of
the orogen. Results from this study will test whether tectonic escape was
steadfast or fluctuated along the Cretaceous-Cenozoic Denali fault system and
identify the tectonic scenario(s) associated with transitions among primarily
indentation, rotation, and escape regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.