* 2218916
* MCA: Ontogenetic constraints to climate change resilience â€“ Investigating consequences of heteroblasty under increasing aridity in New Zealand forests
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Kasey Barton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 287,095.00

Forest trees are experiencing increased physiological stress due to rising
temperatures, less predictable rainfall, and more extreme events such as extreme
heatwaves, storms, and floods. Because plants change considerably in form and
function as they grow from seedlings to juveniles to adults, the effects of
climate change on plant survival and growth are expected to change with plant
age. This could have large consequences for the persistence of species on the
landscape. For example, an unusually hot or arid climate period after a
disturbance that kills adult trees (like a hurricane or a forest fire), could
cause high mortality of regenerating tree seedlings thereby limiting forest
recovery. Additionally, unusual climate stressors such as prolonged drought,
could lead to dieback of adult trees with consequences for watershed
functioning, carbon storage and wildlife habitat. At the individual plant
species scale, we do not understand how plants will tolerate climate change as
they grow from juveniles to adults, particularly for long-lived plants that
experience changing climates within their lifetimes. This project investigates
climate change effects on several forest tree species by comparing the
performance of distinct juvenile forms versus adult stage trees of several
species in New Zealand forests in response to simulated droughts of two
different kinds. These forests have been reduced in area by land use change and
introduced animals, and their unique biodiversity is now being threatened by
climate change. Island plants may be particularly vulnerable to climate change
due to their limited distributions and potentially limited overall flexibility
in growth traits compared to mainland forest tree species. This work will
evaluate existing variability within each species across a natural climate
gradient and evaluate how different populations respond to drought in a
controlled greenhouse setting. The study will improve our understanding of
drought tolerance in different life stages of these forest trees, help to
identify the climate conditions that might be refugia where these species can
continue to exist as both seedlings and adults as climate warms and dries, and
also areas on the landscape where populations are likely to be highly
susceptible to mortality because of juvenile sensitivity to climate change or
adult tree death. This information will contribute to the conservation of native
island species while engaging native Pacific Island students, and Indigenous
forest managers in the research process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
change considerably in form and function as they grow, with the result that
seedlings and juvenile trees usually differ from adult trees in leaf shape,
rates of photosynthesis and water use, and in the production of spines and
toxins as defense against herbivores. Such ontogenetic changes are thought to
help plants survive and grow through environments that also shift as plants
mature. For example, seedlings grow near the ground where it is colder, drier,
shadier, and less windy than the environment adult plants experience, and they
may experience different types and intensities of herbivory. For many plant
species, the shifts in environmental conditions as plants pass through
developmental phases are predictable, leading to the evolution of fixed
developmental changes in plant form and function, a life history known as
heteroblasty. Climate change is introducing new variability within short time
scales, including more consecutive days without rain, more extreme rainfall
events, and directional changes in mean annual rainfall. How these climatic
changes will affect plants throughout their lifetimes, especially those with
fixed ontogenetic shifts in form and function, is unclear. This project
investigates how species with fixed (homoblastic) versus flexible
(heteroblastic) ontogenetic shifts in form and function perform under climate
change using a combination of approaches, including field studies to measure
morphological and physiological traits in seedlings and adults across different
climates, and greenhouse experiments to test the degree to which plant traits
are plastic under simulated climate change conditions. Many species with fixed
developmental patterns occur on islands where species are particularly
vulnerable to environmental change because they have limited ranges that have
been reduced by historic land use change. Hence, this project will be carried
out in New Zealand where heteroblasty is common. This work will improve our
understanding of climate change effects on plants as they grow up, and
contribute to the conservation of native island species under the threat of
global change. It will engage native Pacific Island students in research, and
will work with Indigenous forest knowledge holders to exchange information on
important island tree species and their potential responses to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Population
and Community Ecology program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.