* 2218044
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Bank type, bank market ecologies, and support of small businesses
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Marc Schneiberg, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 163,359.00

American banking has long denied credit to borrowers in poor and marginalized
communities. Yet that system contains a striking variety of lending
organizations, ranging from global corporate behemoths to community banks,
credit unions and community development institutions, that embrace very
different business models missions and values, and that relate to borrowers and
communities, including poor and traditionally marginalized minority ones, in
very different ways. This project analyzes that organizational variety and its
impact in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to determine how differences in
lending organizations and the ecologies or mixes of lenders that populate
banking markets shape –and might enhance—access to credit for small business in
poor and non-white communities. Ideally suited for this study, the PPP was a
federal government program that worked though the nations’ existing lenders to
issue nearly 12 million loans to businesses to keep workers on payroll during
the pandemic, and produced detailed data on where and to whom lenders
lent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the impact of lender organizational form
and bank market ecologies on credit flows, this project combines interviews of
lenders and borrowers with multi-level quantitative analyses of a new data set
on all PPP loans that links: a) data on lending by seven lender types and socio-
economic conditions in 32,000 communities, with b) data on the organizational
compositions of 625 regional banking markets that served those communities.
These analyses contribute broadly to understanding how organization shapes
inequality, while extending organizational ecology and institutional research on
organizational form and complexity to new outcomes. They address a key gap in
our knowledge of class and ethno-racial divides in banking and credit,
integrating work in organizational studies, economic sociology and political
economy on bank organization, banking systems and their economic impacts with
research in sociology, law and allied fields, which extensively analyzes banking
and credit as sites of discrimination and segregation, but commonly sets
organizational variety in banking aside (or focus on large banks) to document
broader systemic tendencies. And by identifying possibilities for greater
inclusivity within American banking—and in government programs that work though
that system – this project highlights new avenues for reform, including building
the capacities of lenders that engage traditionally marginalized communities and
altering mixes of institutions in regional markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.