* 2218329
* Collaborative Research: Harnessing plant hormone receptors for the rapid design of genetic circuits controlled by user-specified ligands
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Sean Cutler, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 921,054.00

Organisms across the tree of life can sense features of their environments and
respond to them. For example, plants grow in the direction of light, and
bacteria swim toward nutrient sources. An organism’s ability to sense and
respond is a core biological function undergirded by molecular machinery that
recognizes specific signals and then triggers responses, such as changes in the
organism’s growth, development, or movement. In this project, a team of
engineers and biologists work together to develop new biological functions by
engineering a sense-response module taken from plants. This sensor is unique
because it can be used as a simple switch for turning other proteins on and off
at will and can be reprogrammed to recognize diverse chemicals. This project
develops sensors for pharmaceuticals and dietary molecules and then uses these
new sensors to design synthetic ‘sentinel cells’ that can easily indicate the
presence of many different molecules. For example, the project designs cells
that turn different colors depending on to which pharmaceutical they are
exposed. To do this, the team is reprograming a plant sensor to recognize new
molecules and then physically link the new sensors to a bacterial enzyme that
regulates gene expression. This union enables bacteria to turn different colors
in response to input signals. The project supports the training of students in
STEM careers and the research findings are integrated into a discovery-based lab
associated with an introductory laboratory course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project enables the rapid construction of single and multi-channel genetic
circuits controlled by user-specified molecules. This capacity is enabled by
building a platform for the rapid construction of programmable chemically
inducible RNA polymerases (ChIRPs). To do this, computational design,
mutagenesis, and genetic selections are used to reprogram the ligand-binding
specificity of a novel plant-derived chemical-induced dimerization module that
is used to regulate the activity of split T7 RNA polymerase. In parallel, a new
set of orthogonal T7 variants that recognize novel promoters are developed and
converted into ChIRPs to deliver multi-input/multi-output chemical-regulated
circuitry. These efforts open a vast range of new ligand-controlled
biotechnologies and allow investigators to design complex genetic circuits
controlled by the best specific ligands for target
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.