* 2218298
* CAS-CLIMATE: DIRECT METHANE CAPTURE IN AIR BY AEROBIC METHANOTROPHS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Shonnard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 507,499.00

Methane has a warming impact 34 times greater than CO2 on a 100-year timescale,
and 86 times greater on a 20-year timescale, and its relatively short half-life
in the atmosphere (~10 years) provides the opportunity for near-term climate
mitigation. This project targets creation of a technology that would set the
stage to slow global warming by removing methane from air at significant scale.
Removing methane from the atmosphere is challenging due to the low concentration
(1.89 ppm). This project focuses on creation of technology to remove methane
from the air over sites where emissions result in locally higher concentrations
in the air, such as many landfills, sewage treatment plants, coal mines, oil and
gas wells, feedlots, and hydroelectric dams, using methane-consuming bacteria
(methanotrophs). Many methanotrophs can be stably maintained at 500 ppm methane,
making this concentration a possible target for reactor deployment. Tens of
thousands of such sites in the United States are projected to contain 500 ppm or
more methane in the overlying air, providing the opportunity to achieve
atmospheric methane capture at scale. Although biofilter technology exists to
remove methane from gaseous waste streams, it is optimized for more concentrated
methane and is not practicable at 500 ppm methane. This project aims to result
in a laboratory prototype for consuming methane from sites with 500 ppm or
greater in the air, with a goal of a 10-fold increase over current capacity
(methane consumed/m3 treatment volume/year).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will start with methanotrophs identified in the Lidstrom lab that have 2- to
4-fold higher rates of methane consumption at 500 ppm than any in the
literature, and develop improved strains and optimized growth conditions
including consortia. The team will then model, test, and optimize for methane
consumption a modified biofilter configuration using optimized microbial
communities. Concurrently with experimental work, the team will develop an
integrated modeling framework, coupling process simulation with impact
assessment, to assess the bioreactor systems under several potential operating
scenarios. The team will then conduct linked techno-economic and environmental
life cycle assessment studies to illustrate the potential for economic
feasibility and environmental benefit for widespread application of the
bioreactor systems and guide further research and development work. The
experimental and modeling teams will work closely and collaboratively, in an
iterative design process to build the final framework and obtain a robust
assessment of feasibility. The long term goal is to see these bioreactors as
standard equipment at landfills, sewage treatment plants, feedlots,
hydroelectric dams, coal mines, and elsewhere. This methane capture would have a
powerful impact on the climate future, especially when coupled to parallel
efforts to reduce methane emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.