* 2218181
* Organizational Challenges of Post-Fire Recovery: Decision Making, Collective  Action, and Community Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 428,146.00

Disasters are increasing, destroying homes and infrastructure within communities
in the United States. After these events, governmental organizations must make
decisions on how to rebuild, including the adoption and enforcement of building
codes and processes. These decisions will have a long-term influence on
community outcomes such as resiliency (reducing risks of future disasters) and
sustainability (reducing climate change impacts). Simultaneously, these
organizations face short-term pressures to rebuild expediently and cost-
effectively to accommodate displaced residents. In parallel, homeowners must
decide if and how they will rebuild, including whether and how they will convene
with other affected homeowners to rebuild. This project is studying information-
seeking, decision-making, and actions for rebuilding by jurisdictions and
homeowners. By assessing long-term community outcomes and analyzing how these
decisions and processes influence these outcomes, findings will help inform the
development and adoption of building codes and processes to achieve desired
community outcomes and provide guidance on how homeowners can meet collective
goals after a disaster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting and analyzing
interviews, meetings, and correspondence, the project team is characterizing how
jurisdictional organizations seek information, identify and address tradeoffs,
and make post-fire rebuilding decisions; and characterizing how emergent groups
of homeowners organize, seek information, determine collective goals, and
rebuild. Employing fuzzy-set Qualitative Comparative Analysis to study
collective groups of homeowners, the project team will then analyze how
combinations of process, structure, and decisions enabled or inhibited progress
on collective goals and outcomes. Finally, the project team will develop novel
engineering assessments in terms of housingâ€™s resiliency (e.g., future fire
risk), sustainability (e.g., energy use and embodied carbon), and expediency
(e.g., rebuilding time) to perform a cross-case comparison that links
organizational decisions and processes to these
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.