* 2218427
* Identifying novel memory traces that improve action precision
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Maurice Smith, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 633,223.00

How do we remember a phone number long enough to dial it or remember two numbers
long enough to add them together in our head? This type of memory, called short-
term working memory, is a cognitive store that allows a few items to be recalled
and acted upon within a short span of time. Early studies of working memory
suggested that we can typically remember about 5 to 9 unrelated items. More
recent work suggests a true capacity of just 3-4 distinct items. A briefer but
far more vivid form of short-term memory, called sensory memory, has been
identified in the visual, auditory, and tactile systems. Visual sensory memory,
for example, is remarkable in that it can provide incredibly detailed
information about 64 or more items in recent visual scenes, a far greater
capacity than shown for working memory. The present work will study a previously
unidentified proprioceptive sensory memory (proprioception refers to information
about the position and movement of the body). Like visual sensory memory,
proprioceptive sensory memory provides a high-precision but short-lasting store
for sensory information and for information about recent motor actions. The
hypothesis is that both type of memories, when available, provide high-precision
input into the sensorimotor neural circuitry involved in action planning,
allowing for extremely high levels of motor precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this proposal are to develop an understanding of the relationship
between the availability of novel high-precision proprioceptive and motor
command memories and the spatiotemporal properties of improvements in motor
precision. The team will begin by identifying the existence of a high-precision
sensory memory for proprioception by determining the link between the
availability of this novel memory and improved action precision. They will then
characterize the extent and time course of the rapid reduction in time scale
variability that this memory can provide. Finally, the research will parcel out
two novel high-precision hyper-transient memories, proprioceptive sensory memory
and motor command memory, based on both spatial and temporal properties, using
geometric characterization and direct experimental manipulation. The planned
work will develop a framework for understanding how recent sensory and motor
memories can work both separately and in combination to improve motor precision
during voluntary movement. This project provides a fertile research training
opportunity to apply computational and engineering principles and tools to the
study of learning and memory in neural circuits for trainees ranging from the
undergraduate to the postdoctoral level, and introduces community middle school
and high school students to how learning and memory shape the ability to
precisely control actions in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.