* 2218106
* The Role of Consumption In Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 182,891.00

The goal of this project is to investigate wine consumption, social distinction,
and identity in colonial and post-colonial contexts. Alcohol production and
consumption have been an integral part of the human experience since ancient
times, and the consumption of wine has long been linked to broader patterns of
political and social activity. Archaeology is well suited to contribute to a
growing body of literature on the special role of alcoholic beverages by
considering the complex relationships between humans and alcohols across time.
Alcoholic beverages tend to be subsumed under the general category of foodways
or, in the case of valuable beverages like wine, grouped in the political
economy with other luxury goods. But how does the consumption of this beverage
transcend other kinds of food and luxury goods, particularly in the context of
intercultural interaction and colonialism? Both today and in the past, wine
consumption plays a special role in marking boundaries of group inclusion or
exclusion—who drinks, when, and where are often representative of broader group
identities and reflect how alcohols are incorporated into social worlds, a topic
of broad relevance in the past and present day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining
traditional ceramic analysis with chemical residue analysis the research team
will add a novel case study in commensal politics that will add to the larger
literature that emphasizes the special character of alcoholic beverages,
particularly in the context of colonial frontiers. The investigators will study
ancient wine from archaeological collections from two colonial sites. The long
continuity of occupation at these sites is ideal for an examination of drinking
across the ebb and flow of varying control over the region. This study of
alcoholic beverages and drinking practices engages with larger archaeological
and anthropological questions regarding the intersection of practices of
drinking and the consumption of valuable foodstuffs, in this case wine, in the
context of a colonial frontier. The research team’s exploration of additional
biomarkers has the potential to enhance existing methods and identify the
regionality of wine archaeologically. These topics, in combination with cutting-
edge laser and computational techniques, lend themselves extraordinary well to
outreach activities across countries, connecting researchers and students as
well as capturing the interest of the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.