* 2218776
* HNDS-I: Migrant Mortality Mapping Portal Project (M3P2)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nicholas Herrmann, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,001,109.00

Since 1980 an unknown number of migrants, ranging from thousands to tens of
thousands, have died trying to enter the United States along the US-Mexico
border. Despite the size of this tragedy, there is no central database on
migrant deaths. As a consequence, national authorities, policymakers, and public
health officials not only do not know how many people are dying, but also do not
know how federal, state, and local policies impact migrant mortality. This award
funds the creation of the Migrant Mortality Mapping Portal Project (M3P2), a
website to document, count and map migrant deaths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two parts. The first part is the collection and organization of a
large amount of data on migrant deaths along the US-Mexico border from various
sources, ranging from law enforcement reports to newspaper articles. The second
part is the development of a public-facing website through which these data can
be downloaded and explored. The M3P2 website includes tools for exploring the
data that can be used by anyone who wants to study the phenomenon of migrant
deaths at the US-Mexico border. The website not only makes it easier to count
migrant deaths but also makes possible research on topics related to forensics,
social and behavioral sciences, public health, geography, and geographic
information science. It will also help design better policies, improve public
health, make search and recovery easier, and help reunite families with their
loved ones’ remains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.