* 2218156
* Decrypting the functional significance of cryptic surfaces by combining simulations and experiments
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Gregory Bowman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

Proteins are molecular machines that are responsible for many of the active
processes we associate with life, from muscle contraction to sensing light and
sound. Like cars and other familiar machines, proteins have moving parts that
are essential to their function. However, the field is typically only able to
capture a snapshot of what a protein typically looks like using experimental
methods. The goal of this project is to combine computer simulations and
experiments to gain a better understanding of proteins’ moving parts,
particularly motions that expose parts of the protein thought to be buried based
on existing experimental structures. The team will explore the hypothesis that
these ‘cryptic’ surfaces can play important roles in function (e.g. by binding
to other proteins) and provide a new means to control a protein’s function (e.g.
by designing small molecules that bind cryptic surfaces and inhibit or enhance
function). As specific examples, the project will focus on proteins from Ebola
and coronaviruses. They will also engage the public in this research through the
Folding@home distributed computing project, which enables anyone with a computer
and an internet connection to become a citizen scientist by contributing their
personal computing power to run simulations of proteins. This project will also
involve members of blind community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
research team will explore whether excited states that expose cryptic surfaces
play an important role in protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions,
either by providing a means to allosterically control function or by directly
engaging with natural binding partners Specific aims include: 1) assessing the
functional significance of a cryptic pocket that the team recently discovered in
the interferon inhibitory domain (IID) of Ebola’s viral protein 35 (VP35) in
filoviruses, and 2) assessing the functional significance of dramatic opening of
the team predicted in the SARS-CoV-2 spike in coronaviruses. This work will be
enabled by the powerful combination of approaches the research team has
developed for characterizing the ensemble of structures that a protein adopts
that includes physics-based simulations, machine learning, the Folding@home
distributed computing platform, and biophysical experiments. For example, the
team has developed adaptive sampling algorithms for uncovering cryptic pockets,
deep learning methods for inferring how mutations modulate the structural
preferences of distant functional sites, and a variety of experimental assays
for testing computational predictions. These include thiol labeling assays to
test predicted cryptic surfaces and high-throughput screens for testing the
impact of mutations and compounds on protein function. This project is funded by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.