* 2218622
* Assessing Scales of Power and Inequality in Early States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Amy Thompson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 297,566.00

The goal of this study to assess how wealth differentials and institutionalized
inequality develops and persists in tropical states. This study examines
inequality among nested scales of community – neighborhoods, districts, and
cities – within different environmental settings. Archaeological assessments of
institutionalized inequality in early states are invaluable as they provide
insights into the long-term effects of wealth differentials among large
populations and smaller sectors within them, illuminating the mechanisms that
drive inequality within and between populations in cities and allowing for the
consideration of policy changes that may mitigate inequities in modern
societies. The researcher will focus on how inequality manifests at different
scales, and how differential access to resources among the occupants of
neighborhoods, districts, and cities affect the well-being of its residents. The
results of this study are directly applicable to other cities where differences
in wealth are present. This study provides an in-depth analysis of inequality in
tropical states, creating a comprehensive dataset for comparisons to other
spatiotemporal contexts in the past and present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator and her team of researchers will evaluate how environmental
setting, differential access to resources, and trade networks impacted
inequality at nested scales of community. The researcher will explore
institutionalized inequality in three discrete topographic regions (coastal
plains, foothills, and mountains) in two distinct environmental settings (upland
areas and river valleys). Cutting-edge geospatial technologies including light
detection and ranging (lidar) and GPS will support the documentation of five
sites. Locations, size, and architectural complexity of houses and the presence
of controllable resources such as water, chocolate trees, and valued minerals
will be documented during survey. Roads, neighborhoods, and districts will be
spatially modeled. Finally, inequality will be evaluated based on house size
differentials and statistical analyses of the distance from each house to
controllable resources and public services such as marketplaces and roads. The
researcher will train graduate and undergraduate students in archaeological
field techniques and geospatial analyses and conduct research alongside local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.