* 2218759
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Small: Risk-Aware Planning and Control for Safety-Critical Human-CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Negar Mehr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The future of cyber-physical systems are smart technologies that can work
collaboratively, cooperatively, and safely with humans. Smart technologies and
humans will share autonomy, i.e., the right, obligation and ability to share
control in order to meet their mutual objectives in the environment of
operations. For example, surgical robots must interact with surgeons to increase
their capabilities in performing high-precision surgeries, drones need to
deliver packages to humans and places, and autonomous cars need to share roads
with human-driven cars. In all such interactions, these systems must act safely
despite the risks and uncertainties that are intrinsic with humans,
technologies, and the environments in which they interact. The key insight of
this project is that control strategies can be developed that increase safety in
situations where a human needs to closely interact with a cyber-physical system
(CPS) that is capable of autonomy or semi-autonomous
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop risk-aware
interactive control and planning for achieving safe cyber-physical-human (CPS-h)
systems. This project will advance the state-of-the-art of CPS-h planning and
control in three main ways: (i) developing computationally tractable risk-aware
trajectory planning algorithms that are suited to general autonomous CPS-h, (ii)
developing a computationally efficient and empirically supported framework to
account for risk-awareness in humanâ€™s decision-making, and (iii) deriving
interaction-aware planning algorithms for achieving safe and efficient
interactions between multiple risk-aware agents. The proposed algorithms will be
extensively evaluated with human subjects in interaction with autonomous CPS-h
such as autonomous cars and quadcopters. This work will have direct impact on
many CPS-h domains including but not limited to multi-agent interactions,
autonomous driving, collaboration and coordination between humans and autonomous
agents in safety-critical scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.