* 2218475
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 370,246.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for oceanographic
instrumentation that is needed to carry out NSF-supported scientific research.
Working within the collaborative framework of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed instrumentation will be
maintained by the SIO ship operations department for use by NSF-supported
scientists from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing facilities.
Instrumentation is requested to support the portable seismic capabilities of the
Academic Research Fleet (ARF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, SIO
provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following Oceanographic Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acoustic Doppler
Current Profiler Systems $143,288 &lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure $601,175
&lt;br/&gt;Motion Reference System Renewal for R/V Sally Ride $204,050
&lt;br/&gt;Multibeam Echosounder System Spares for R/V Sally Ride and R/V Roger
Revelle $174,540 &lt;br/&gt;pCO2 System Upgrades for R/V Roger Revelle $52,241
&lt;br/&gt;MOCNESS Nets $22,908 &lt;br/&gt;
$1,198,202&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.