* 2218566
* Examining Childrens Environmental Health Science and Science-Based Regulatory Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ellen Kohl, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 240,039.00

This award supports a study of the development and practice of Children’s
Environmental Health Science (CEHS) and of regulatory policy based in CEHS.
Prior to 1995, children were largely ignored in environmental regulatory
decisions despite growing evidence that their developing bodies were more
vulnerable to environmental health threats. Over the past twenty-five years,
CEHS has expanded through federal support for a network of CEHS centers, which
furthered scientific research on children’s vulnerability to environmental
health threats. The idea of orienting regulatory protections toward the most
vulnerable has gained currency, and it has been codified to some extent in law
and policy. However, there has been little analysis of how and to what extent
CEHS has influenced regulatory policy and how CEHS’s interdisciplinarity and
focus on community based participatory research has influenced the development
of the field and environmental policy. The results of this study will be
published in high-impact peer reviewed journals, and they will be disseminated
to scientific, advocacy and governmental groups via presentations and white
papers at professional organizations and conferences; they will also be used for
curriculum development. In addition, the project will train and mentor up to six
undergraduate students, three of whom attend a minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct interviews
with scientists, regulators, and advocates. The team will also engage in
archival research and participant observation to establish a history of CEHS,
and to explore how scientists, lay people, and advocates contributed to its
development and evolution. The team also plans to examine the impacts of CEHS on
federal environmental regulations, and it will examine the role CEHS centers
played in the evolution of CEH and the translation of CEHS into policy. The
results of this project will contribute to ongoing conversations in Science and
Technologies Studies regarding the interactions between science, regulations,
and advocacy. They will contribute to the peer reviewed literature on the role
of vulnerability, equity, and justice in the development of scientific fields
and how these concepts are translated into policy. This project will also engage
with scientists, regulators and advocates to share lessons learned and to make
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.