* 2218595
* DEVIATE: Using positive deviance to reduce economic and health inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Kai Ruggeri, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2026
* USD 336,026.00

Economic and behavioral policies aimed at reducing inequality are typically
based on what works for middle- and high-income individuals. That approach
misses practical challenges facing low-income individuals, such as systemic
barriers, limited resources, and lack of opportunity. This research reverses
that trend by studying positive deviants: individuals who overcame inequalities
and other disadvantages. It begins with observing behaviors such as financial
savings despite limited incomes or getting flu shots even with limited access to
care or when social norms discourage it. Those observations lead to more
practical interventions, which are tested in many settings and across multiple
behaviors to understand how different environments may worsen inequalities, even
when disadvantaged individuals make what appear to be good choices. This will be
the first comprehensive behavioral research to use the positive deviance
approach with an explicit aim to reduce economic
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral research on structural
disadvantages focuses on the psychological consequences of scarcity as opposed
to coping strategies and interventions. Concurrently, most behavioral
interventions are designed for the modal person, rendering many large-scale
behavior policies entirely ineffective in disadvantaged communities. By focusing
on individuals that overcome inequality, known as positive deviants, this
research demonstrates to what extent the positive deviance framework can
innovate approaches to behavioral policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first
phase, extensive healthcare and financial data are used to define and observe
positive deviants. Those observations are leveraged into interventions in the
second phase. Finally, early career researchers are mobilized to test the
replicability of interventions in multiple countries. The third phase will also
identify potential differences created by social and systemic factors,
highlighting behaviors that are unique to positive deviants compared to where
agency in choice is restrained. Studies are focused on six behaviors directly
relevant to health and economic inequality: flu vaccinations, preventive care
attendance, prescription compliance, debt repayment, windfall management, and
financial savings. The researchers test boosts, nudges, standard behavioral
interventions (fees/incentives), and mandates, for potential effectiveness at
incorporating and facilitating positive deviance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.