* 2218260
* Collaborative Research: Poise under pressure: developing strains with minimal genomes for integrated bioprocessing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jason Boock, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 328,332.00

The current challenges of dependence on non-renewable fossil sources to generate
the chemicals and materials that humans depend upon, along with the energy- and
carbon-intensive processes that transform them, motivates the development of new
approaches to convert renewable feedstocks to useful products. Advances in
biotechnology have resulted in substantial growth within the methodologies and
commercial activities that comprise the Bioeconomy, including those with a focus
on the conversion of sustainable feedstocks. However, it remains the case that
the costs of many bio-based products are not sufficiently competitive to
displace fossil-derived counterparts. It is also true that the scope of products
accessible through biological production is frequently constrained by the
sensitivity of commonly-used microbes to the compounds that are desired to be
produced. Finally, because contamination is a significant concern, bioprocesses
are usually operated in batch or fed-batch mode, while chemical processes
benefit from the productivity advantages inherent to continuous production. This
project focuses on the development of a particular organism that displays an
unusual set of physical characteristics to help addresses these challenges. The
microbe is capable of growth in a two-phase system that includes supercritical
CO2 (scCO2), which is a preferential solvent for many toxic products as well as
inhibits growth of most organisms. This secondary phase should both protect the
microbe from high concentrations of the product through continuous withdrawal,
and minimize the risks of contamination. This research project will result in
greater understanding of the behavior of this organism, an increase in genetic
engineering tools, and a streamlined strain, all of which will lead to new
opportunities for integrated bioprocess operations, which couple production with
extraction. The work will enable the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers as well as research exchanges between the collaborating
institutions. New content will also be introduced into an experimental
laboratory curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
elucidate the genotype-phenotype relationship of tolerance to scCO2 of the
chosen microorganism using a reduced genome approach. The objectives include the
determination of gene essentiality using transposon libraries, development of
robust tools for genome-scale engineering of the organism, and construction of a
minimal genome strain for use in bioproduction. Transposon libraries will be
constructed for both gene knockouts (i.e., complete elimination of associated
enzyme activities) and overexpression, and the resulting libraries will be
assessed to establish essentiality of gene sets under different environmental
conditions. Transcriptomic (RNA sequencing) and translatomics (ribosome
profiling) studies will be performed on library members to understand systematic
biological responses to changes in culture conditions at the molecular level.
The associated data will also be used to mine and design new bioparts to expand
a toolbox for genetic engineering. Lastly, a reduced genome strain displaying
the desired tolerance phenotype will be constructed and engineered to produce
target compounds, with these strains evaluated relative to the wild-type
predecessor. This project will provide deeper understanding of tolerance to
toxic solvents and provide a workflow for assessing these complex phenotypes. It
is the next step in a long-term effort to introduce new, non-model organisms
that are inherently advantaged for bioprocessing, with the ultimate goal of
advancing a robust, sustainable Bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.