* 2218110
* Large-Scale DER Aggregation: Active Prosumers, Optimal Aggregation, and Sustainable Growth
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lang Tong, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 359,609.00

Breakthroughs in wind, solar, and battery technologies, coupled with advances in
information technology in sensing, control, and artificial intelligence, are
making it possible for the large-scale aggregation of small-sized but ubiquitous
renewable energy resources anytime, anywhere. This project aims to develop
scientific principles and engineering solutions that enable transformative
innovations in the large-scale aggregation of distributed energy resources. The
project addresses major challenges in achieving zero-carbon energy generation,
transmission, and distribution at the interface between the bulk transmission
and the traditional distribution systems where distributed generation and demand
resources originate. The intellectual merits of the project include the
development of (i) novel stochastic and dynamic optimization techniques that
integrate behind-the-meter solar, storage, and flexible demands such as electric
vehicle charging and thermostatic control, (ii) practical and data-driven
aggregation solutions, and (iii) system-theoretic models for the analysis of
short and long-run technology adoption process and policy designs. The broader
impacts of this research include addressing cogent needs of developing practical
engineering and business models that facilitate efficient, competitive, and
large-scale integrations of small-sized and distributed energy resources. The
interdisciplinary nature of this research enables engineering students to gain
tools of economic analysis and insights into the economic and societal impacts
of engineering designs. The project provides opportunities for curriculum
developments in a critical area of engineering education and broadens the
participation of women and underrepresented minority students in power and
energy system research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical thrusts of this
research aim to advance fundamental theory and technology in control,
optimization, and machine learning in three broad directions: (i) optimal
decision processes for prosumers with behind-the-meter generations, storage, and
flexible demands, (ii) optimal energy aggregation strategies for the profit-
seeking aggregator to participate in the wholesale market, and (iii)
characterization of short and long-run market equilibrium, social welfare
distribution, equity, and sustainable growth brought by large-scale distributed
energy resource aggregations. Practical aggregation and the coordination models
of distribution system operators and the wholesale market independent system
operators are developed and analyzed for their economic efficiency, equity of
access, computation complexity, and scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.