* 2218023
* Unraveling the anatomical and molecular adaptations of primate touch
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Carrie Veilleux, Midwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2027
* USD 625,000.00

Touch is a fundamental way that humans and other animals navigate and interact
with their world. Precision touch, which allows us to use our hands to detect
texture, shape, vibration, and movement, is vitally important for human and
primate sensory biology and health. While precision touch is critical for tasks
like detecting fruit ripeness, locomotion, and making and using tools, it is
still poorly understood relative to other senses. This project uses a
multidisciplinary approach to investigate variation in, and the role of,
precision touch across primates and other mammals. The results of this work aim
to identify ecological factors associated with variation in precision touch and
contribute to our understanding of the role of touch in primate and human
sensory biology, ecology, and evolution. This project can increase public
understanding of sensory systems and science through an interactive exhibit at
the Arizona Museum of Natural History. Furthermore, the project supports and
expands international research collaborations and STEM research training to
undergraduate and graduate students. Critically, the research team leverages a
unique sampling opportunity to generate a biobank of tissues and RNA from wild
mammal species, many of which are endangered and poorly studied, and make the
data available to the global research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project addresses four aims: (1) identify genotype-phenotype
relationships for precision touch; (2) quantify the effects of diet, manual
dexterity, and tool use on precision touch; (3) quantify the effects of
arboreality vs. terrestriality on precision touch, and (4) evaluate claims that
the Primate Order is uniquely derived for precision touch. The project aims to
address long-standing evolutionary questions regarding selective factors driving
the origin of early primate features as well as questions about the evolution of
highly sensitive precision touch in the human lineage. The research team uses
transcriptome sequencing, histology, and morphometrics to compare the expression
of touch-related genes with estimates of touch receptor cell (i.e.,
mechanoreceptor) densities and morphology in different tissues within
individuals and between species. The project focuses on primate species that
span taxonomic clades (strepsirrhines, platyrrhines, cercopithecoids, hominoids)
and ecologies (diet, activity pattern, substrate use, tool use), and compares
these to non-primate mammalian models targeted to investigate the convergent
evolution of primate traits. The research team collects tissue samples from
individuals across 18 mammal species in collaboration with veterinarians. The
team also collects behavioral data on how the study species use precision touch
to interact with food items and move about their environment. Additionally, the
research team leverages publicly-available genomic databases in order to
investigate the history of natural selection acting on touch genes across
mammals. This project is jointly supported by the Biological Anthropology (SBE)
and Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics (BIO)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.