* 2218191
* BRC-BIO: Phenotypic convergence and trait loss in high-elevation Andean frogs
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rudolf von-May, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 471,862.00

Tropical mountains are natural laboratories to study how the environment
generates and shapes organismal diversity. In the high Andes, cold temperatures
and unique habitats play an important role in the distribution, activity, and
behavior of organisms. Interestingly, these conditions support a diverse group
of amphibians known as terrestrial-breeding frogs. Recent work on these frogs
has revealed that distantly-related species living at high elevations exhibit
more similar body shape to one another (e.g., they have shorter limbs and
shorter snout) than species at lower elevations. Additionally, high-elevation
frogs often lack ears compared to those found at lower elevations. This project
will identify factors that explain these predictable body forms. It will also
explore how lacking ears may affect the social communication of high-elevation
Andean frogs. Through collaborations across universities and natural history
museums, the project team will obtain X-ray images and measure the skeleton and
other internal structures in preserved specimens. The team will use genetic data
to determine the speciesâ€™ evolutionary relationships and identify patterns of
repeated evolution among similar features. This project will provide practical
and engaging research experiences for undergraduate students. Additionally, high
school students will participate in a workshop providing information about
education and research opportunities at the university. Through these
experiences, the project will advance the goal of increasing participation of
underrepresented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergent evolution is the emergence of
similar phenotypic traits in distantly-related species. It is a common feature
of many evolutionary radiations. Classic examples of adaptive radiations on
islands (e.g., Anolis lizards) reveal that predictable phenotypes can evolve
across biogeographic space. These patterns provide insights into the role of the
environment in shaping morphological, physiological, and behavioral traits.
However, understanding how different morphological traits evolve in replicate
evolutionary radiations remains challenging because traits can vary
independently (e.g., skull shape and limb length in frogs can exhibit different
rates of morphological change). Additionally, the loss of some traits can lead
to changes in other linked or unlinked traits. This project aims to use new data
on morphological diversity, phylogenetic relationships, and elevational
distribution of terrestrial breeding frogs (Strabomantidae) to understand
patterns of phenotypic convergence and trait loss at high elevations. Research
will focus on eight genera (Bryophryne, Lynchius, Noblella, Microkayla,
Oreobates, Phrynopus, Pristimantis, and Psychrophrynella), containing species
living in high-elevation Andean habitats. Morphological data collected using
X-ray micro-computed tomography (microCT scanning) will be combined with
ecological and phylogenetic data. The data will be used to test if similar high-
elevation environments lead to similar body shapes. Additionally, this research
will examine whether independent losses of key structures in acoustic
communication have been lost or modified at high
elevation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.