* 2218218
* Crafting an Open Source Digital Publication Tool for the History of Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,370.00

This award supports the development of research infrastructure for the history
of science and technology. The project team will develop a publication tool,
EditionCrafter, that integrates primary sources (digitized technical
manuscripts) with original research, including transcriptions and translations
of the texts, commentary, and textual analysis. The project is oriented towards
early modern texts on technology and craftsmanship. Integrating the resulting
texts of practice into the history of science will allow a fuller, more
inclusive view of the origins of scientific thought and practice, revealing
contributors who have been hidden up to now, and allowing for the construction
of new narratives of making modern science. Researchers, students, and
institutions (including libraries, historical societies, and archives) as well
as community groups will be empowered to grant wide access to valuable textual
sources otherwise hidden from public and scholarly
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EditionCrafter is designed to be an open-
source, customizable publishing tool that will allow users to deploy their own
texts, data, and commentary as low-maintenance digital critical editions. It
will enable the creation of static sites that rely on basic well-established
technologies and workflows to address issues of longevity, maintenance,
sustainability, and cost. Initially, eight case studies are to be produced by
collaborators to inform and troubleshoot the development and deployment of the
new tool, and many more once the tool is fully operative. Feedback and testing
of the ease with which the tool can be adopted by users under different
institutional constraints will result in the release of a targeted set of varied
deployment options that will provide users with multiple ways to run the
software and publish the resulting editions. Finally, a community workshop is to
be organized that brings together a diverse network of stakeholders and experts
to offer feedback and use-case contexts to best inform and evaluate the new
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.