* 2218678
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Efficient Massively Parallel Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Mohammad Hajiaghayi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 298,219.00

Modern computing systems have moved beyond single-core&lt;br/&gt;single-
processor devices to more modern multicore processors operating&lt;br/&gt;in
networked systems and available in warehouse-scale clouds&lt;br/&gt;popularized
by companies such as Amazon or Google. Future advances in&lt;br/&gt;computing
power will likely come not mainly from faster devices, but&lt;br/&gt;by
processing in inherently parallel and distributed environments, and&lt;br/&gt;by
understanding how to exploit the parallelism inherent in
many&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic problems. Simultaneously, the world has entered the
era of&lt;br/&gt;``big data'' with large data sets on which previously
unthinkable&lt;br/&gt;sized problems with great economic and social impact need
to be&lt;br/&gt;solved. This new parallel, interconnected, big-data world
specially&lt;br/&gt;requires fundamental research on their algorithms, which are
both&lt;br/&gt;parallel and distributed.The algorithms in this project address
this&lt;br/&gt;important research challenge by building and developing new
general&lt;br/&gt;frameworks for massively parallel
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the main thrust of this project, the
investigators will design&lt;br/&gt;fundamental and efficient algorithms for
core massively parallel&lt;br/&gt;computations especially in the practical
Massively Parallel&lt;br/&gt;Computation (MPC) framework. In particular, they
will consider methods&lt;br/&gt;for reducing the number of rounds in the MPC
model as well as&lt;br/&gt;tradeoffs between rounds, memory, number of machines,
and&lt;br/&gt;communication time. They seek to find new MPC algorithms for
basic&lt;br/&gt;graph problems such as connectivity, matching, vertex cover,
maximal&lt;br/&gt;independent set, as well as other basic string matching
problems such&lt;br/&gt;as suffix trees, edit distance, and longest
common&lt;br/&gt;subsequence. Another focus is dynamic algorithms for
massively&lt;br/&gt;parallel computation, which modify the output efficiently in
a&lt;br/&gt;parallel/distributed setting based on frequent modifications of
the&lt;br/&gt;input and with direct applications in evolving social networks,
the&lt;br/&gt;World Wide Web, road networks, scheduling systems among others.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators will augmenting current
parallel&lt;br/&gt;environments/architectures with better data structures
and&lt;br/&gt;abstractions to allow simplified and fast implementations of
the&lt;br/&gt;current fundamental algorithms that can be used in
practice&lt;br/&gt;via open-source codes. The discoveries in this project will
be&lt;br/&gt;integrated into existing and new courses and books about
parallel&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, distributed algorithms, and foundations of big
data. The&lt;br/&gt;wealth of attractive open problems in these areas will
provide both&lt;br/&gt;challenging research topics and intuitive accessible
problems to&lt;br/&gt;inspire students to enter research in computer science
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. In particular the project will involve Ph.D. students
and&lt;br/&gt;post-docs, undergraduate students, and even high-school
students&lt;br/&gt;(especially students among minorities and women), many of
whom will&lt;br/&gt;continue their research at other academic institutions and
research&lt;br/&gt;centers, further broadening the impact of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.