* 2218623
* Developing a Structural, Morphological, and Microphysical Understanding of Left-moving Supercells
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matthew Van Den Broeke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 473,485.00

Left-moving (LM) supercell thunderstorms produce a large number of severe
weather reports every year, including many high-impact hail events. Radar
represents a way to study these storms. New polarimetric radar technology has
now been in operation long enough to allow development of a large sample of LM
supercells. Using this dataset, the project will focus on when these storms
occur through examination of their environments, what they look like under
different environmental conditions, and how these storms’ radar signatures might
be used to anticipate associated severe weather events. This will be the first
large-scale study of LM supercells, and is anticipated to advance scientific
understanding of these storms in a way that may lead to improved severe weather
warnings for the benefit of society. An educational component will provide
training to students from middle school through graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A LM supercell dataset anticipated to contain 600+ individual storms
for which polarimetric radar observations are available will be constructed
using data from the Storm Prediction Center and manual analysis of recent radar
datasets. Environments of these storms will be characterized using model output
data and clustered using self-organizing maps. Polarimetric radar
characteristics of the updraft, hail, and inflow regions will be quantified
using the Supercell Polarimetric Observation Research Kit. Environmental
clustering will be used to characterize the environments in which LM supercells
occur and how their radar presentation and impacts vary across environments. LM
supercells have similarities to more common right-moving storms, and the
structure, microphysics, and temporal evolution of storms in the LM dataset will
be compared to these characteristics in sets of right-moving storms which have
been studied prior. Severe weather outcomes in LM storms will be put in the
context of radar signature evolution and environmental characteristics, allowing
development of models describing events which lead to severe weather production
in LM supercells. The project will also include development of a mobile severe
weather workshop with hands-on experimental components for middle school
students. This workshop will be developed by graduate students as part of their
professional development, and will be presented by students and faculty to rural
and Native American students in the central Great Plains
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.