* 2218712
* EAGER: DNA demethylation in maize pollen gene regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* John Fowler, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Pollen is made of two cell types, sperm cells and pollen vegetative cells, each
with different sets of active genes. Pollen vegetative cells carry the sperm
cells inside them on their journey first through the air and then through the
female reproductive structure to fuse with eggs and make seeds. During this
process, the pollen vegetative cells use a large number of genes to grow and
develop and to protect their cargo of sperm cells. Robust pollen that can
survive adverse environmental conditions is essential for high yield in crops
like corn (maize). Especially in regard to heat tolerance, pollen is an
important consideration in crop improvement. Recent discoveries have revealed
that enzymes called DNA glycosylases, which change the structure of DNA, are
important for activating genes in pollen vegetative cells. This project aims to
investigate the function of these enzymes in corn pollen. The results will yield
new knowledge about pollen genetics and new tools for putting that knowledge to
use in plant reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA methylation generally
represses repetitive DNA. In certain situations, however, DNA methylation can
regulate developmental gene expression. In plants, DNA glycosylases remove
methylation and can mediate epigenetic inheritance. The goal of this project is
to identify both genes and intergenic regions of the genome that are targeted
for demethylation and to determine the functional significance of demethylation
in pollen. This will involve a novel approach to determine the effects of
demethylation on gene expression at single-cell resolution in mixed populations
of normal and glycosylase-defective pollen. The capstone of the project will be
testing the potential of engineering glycosylases to demethylate specific
genetic elements. This will be an initial step toward a larger goal of creating
experimental resources for studying the consequences of methylation as well as
for epigenetically controlling gene expression in pollen, with potential for
heritability into the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.