* 2218983
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Relevant, Rich, and Realistic Representations of Housing, Well-Being, and Energy-Coupled Transitions
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Chris Messer, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2027
* USD 82,762.00

This multidisciplinary project pursues an upgrade to the science, practice, and
use of projections that describe sociotechnical change. The projectâ€™s ultimate
goal is creating explicit representations of well-being that occur during
transitions, connected to the factors that enable change. Thus, the work will
facilitate sharing of diverse priorities and experiences in academic, policy,
and governance realms. The investigating team is methodologically and topically
diverse, yet unified by interest in population heterogeneity and in human health
and well-being as endpoints. Technical expertise includes engineering, social
science and environmental science disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
tackles a number of scientific questions under premise that there is the
possibility that the imminent wave of action for decarbonization could improve
aspects of well-being that are tangible to communities but beyond the scope of
current frameworks. The project is build around the following objectives and
methods: (1) Elucidate perceptions of well-being, pathways of information, and
paradigms of change held by diverse demographic groups through in-depth
interviews, coding, and network analysis; (2) Represent the roles of framing,
networks, and institutions in models of sociotechnical change through
interviews, surveys, and system mapping; (3) Simulate and compare trajectories
of well-being with a hybrid statistical-dynamic model that integrates paradigms
of change, the physical and social environment, and human priorities; (4)
Represent sociotechnical transitions with a cascading-scale framework (nation,
region, community, household) that includes distributions of resource access and
well-being; and (5) Stimulate transdisciplinary inquiry and shared understanding
of frontiers among multiple intellectual communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.