* 2218550
* Correlated Quantum Phenomena at Superconductor/Magnetic Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jagadeesh Moodera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 475,000.00

Nontechnical abstract: Quantum materials and related technology have been the
driving force for giant breakthroughs in physics in the recent decades. For
future progress in the field it is essential to understand quantum materials at
the atomic level. This research project will focus on combining two quantum
systems, namely ferromagnets (FMs) and superconductors (SCs), to enable
intriguing scientific inquiries such as the appearance of Majorana pair modes
and exotic spin triplet SCs. These topics will be experimentally investigated at
cryogenic temperatures using advanced probes, leading to developing practical
topological qubits and forming the basis for building a robust, scalable quantum
computer. This work will impact quantum materials development, medicine,
technology, finance, communication, and national security. The outcome of this
multidisciplinary research project also has the potential for leading
developments in highly energy-conserving superconducting spintronics, and for
advancing quantum information science and engineering. In the process, postdocs
and students at all levels would be trained at the forefront of quantum
science/technology and material physics. The project will open up ample
opportunities for initiating new theoretical and experimental collaborations
worldwide, including advanced atomic level interface characterization at
national laboratories. This will provide opportunities to the students including
high school summer interns for scientific interaction with national and
international scientists, and for enriching students' educational and outreach
activities, both online and in-person.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
The project aims at investigating quantum phenomena at atomically resolved
hybrid interfaces. Interface driven effects are pivotal in quantum materials
study, a focus of this project. This study intends to understand and manipulate
correlated effects in hybrid system by combining the quantum systems -
ferromagnets (FMs) and superconductors (SCs) at the atomic level. This approach
enables the study of signature interfacial exchange interaction, leading to
establishing the Majorana bound state pair and their entanglement/teleportation,
as well as the spin triplet Cooper pairing in SCs. Following the theoretical
prediction, gold (111) surface state with its large spin orbit splitting in
conjunction with a large gap SC, is an ideal platform for seeking the
simultaneous Majorana pair appearance and understanding the parameters that
define the intrinsic behavior/stability. For the triplet pair study the
ferromagnetic Ni, EuS or GdN would be proximity-coupled to Ga, Bi or SCs such as
Al or NbN, creating model systems for controlled study. To reach the goal, MBE-
grown thin film heterostructures, scanning tunneling spectroscopy and high field
as well as cryogenic magneto-transport studies would be carried out. The project
will lead to a scalable, coherent topological qubit development, and an ideal
dissipationless spin polarized source for superconducting spintronics, and the
results will impact the field of quantum information science and engineering.
Project involves postdocs and students to be trained in multidisciplinary areas
at the forefront of quantum science, material physics and nanodevice technology.
Opportunities are created for initiating theoretical and experimental
collaborations worldwide in interface characterization at national laboratories.
Outreach, education and broadening participation efforts in STEM address the
needs of undergraduates and high school students, while promoting scientific
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.