* 2218958
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Coupled homogeneous and heterogeneous processes for an environmentally sustainable lignin-first biorefinery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* J.William Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 269,419.00

A future, environmentally sustainable chemical industry will likely utilize
woody biomass as a renewable carbon source. In many biomass conversion
processes, chemical reactions in the fluid phase interact with reactions on the
surfaces of catalytic materials during forcing conditions of high pressure and
elevated temperature. In a recently proposed wood biorefinery, the lignin
component of wood is preferentially dissolved and depolymerized to monomers in
the fluid phase. Subsequently, the generated monomers need to be stabilized on a
catalytic material to avoid formation of undesirable compounds that cannot be
further processed. To improve the environmental sustainability and profitability
of such a wood biorefinery, this project will accelerate both the lignin
depolymerization and the product stabilization by tuning the solvent fluid
properties and designing catalysts that are optimized for the reaction
environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Given the complexity of the lignin reductive
catalytic fractionation reaction system, it is hardly possible to directly
design the catalyst and fluid properties for woody biomass. Because lignin
structure varies for different biomass sources, this project will study the
coupled homogeneous and heterogeneous processes under realistic reaction
conditions for lignin model compounds instead of actual solid biomass. By
working with model reactants that contain the critical bond linkages and whose
conversion products are representative of the conversion products of woody
biomass, the system complexity is dramatically reduced without fundamentally
changing the depolymerization and reductive product stabilization chemistry,
enabling the concurrent design of fluid properties and catalyst. Overall, this
project constitutes a case study of how to use modern data science tools for
tightly integrating fundamental computational and experimental research with
life cycle assessment, techno-economic analysis, and regular validation of
design principles for the conversion of poplar to expedite the development of an
environmentally and economically sustainable biorefinery. The education plan
includes postgraduate, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students. They will be
trained in broad research areas while emphasizing the ability to work
collaboratively in addressing difficult environmental problems. To engage all
team members in unfamiliar fields, students will give tutorial presentations
that are aimed at a diverse audience and that can later be adapted into short
interactive web-based lectures and web modules on topics such as life cycle
assessment and machine learning. Project participants will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups, women, and those with non-traditional
backgrounds in science and engineering by engaging in outreach and training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.