* 2218698
* Equipment: Acquisition of an EDS detector and Carbon Coater for Quantitative FEG-SEM Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Penelope Wieser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2024
* USD 185,094.00

This award will permit the acquisition of an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer
(EDS) and a new carbon coater, with a high-precision thickness monitor for the
University of California at Berkeley. These purchases will augment a new Field
Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG-SEM) facility to address a wide range
of geological problems. The acquired facilities will also represent the focus of
a new graduate-level course on electron beam microanalytical methods in the
Earth and Material Sciences. The project team will also work with an
undergraduate student to develop open-source Python3 tools for visualization and
interpretation of spatial chemical data to help the community move away from
proprietary software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ chemical analysis forms an
integral part of the project teams research in volcanology, igneous petrology,
and mantle geochemistry. The capabilities of the new EDS detector provide the
ability to collect rapid, multi-scale geochemical information that will be vital
for petrological analysis of past volcanic eruptions and has potential to
provide near real-time petrological monitoring of future volcanic activity
(e.g., assessing crystal zoning to obtain transport times, crystal chemistry to
determine magma storage depths). Fully quantitative chemical mapping via EDS is
also critical to research on melt transport in magmatic mush zones and the onset
of sulfide saturation during magmatic differentiation. Furthermore, the new
equipment will also be utilised by other researchers at UC Berkeley, promoting
interdisciplinary collaborations. For example, chemical data from EDS mapping
will be combined with rocks magnetic data to determine sediment redox chemistry
in ancient environments, and to assess the timescales between breakage,
sintering and mixing of explosive mafic magmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.