* 2218485
* Conference: Botany 2022, PUI Section: Careers and Mentorship at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Nathan Jud, William Jewell College
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 06/30/2023
* USD 48,081.00

Faculty mentors of undergraduate researchers at public and private liberal arts
colleges, community colleges, and branch campuses (collectively, PUIs) train
over half the undergraduate STEM majors in the United States. Broadening
participation in plant sciences, biodiversity sciences, and related disciplines
requires recruiting and retaining faculty mentors with mentoring strategies that
are effective for students from diverse backgrounds. Multiple training
experiences for current and prospective PUI faculty will be held in conjunction
with the BOTANY 2022 meeting, with the aims of broadening participation in the
discipline and supporting STEM education at the undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A program of three, varied events at BOTANY 2022
will be supported. First, a half-day workshop in which participants receive
training in inclusive mentoring strategies that support successful undergraduate
research experiences, will be offered. Workshop participants will explore how
their social identities influence the mentor-mentee relationship and will learn
how to help students become active contributors in the mentoring relationship
and develop a mentoring mosaic to support their success. Second, a career panel
on applying to and interviewing for positions at PUIs, intended for graduate
students, postdocs, and their faculty mentors, will be convened. Finally, a
networking event for all faculty and individuals interested in botany at PUIs
will be held to aid in developing local and disciplinary networks for post-
meeting collaborations in support of undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.