* 2218241
* The Tenth (10th) International GEOS-Chem Meeting (IGC10); Saint Louis, Missouri; June 7-10, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 35,000.00

This project will provide travel support to students, early career scientists
and experimental scientists to attend the 10th International GEOS-Chem Meeting
(IGC10) in St. Louis MO on June 7-10, 2022. This meeting brings together
scientists, students, and others in the GEOS-Chem modeling community to exchange
information that will inform and stimulate fundamental research in the modeling
of atmospheric composition with links to climate dynamics, biogeochemistry, and
air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOS-Chem is an open-source global 3-D model
of atmospheric composition used actively by over 160 research groups around the
world, including over 50 research groups in US universities. Guidance for model
management is provided by a GEOS-Chem Steering Committee including 15 US
university professors. International GEOS-Chem meetings have been held every two
years and are major events for the global atmospheric chemistry modeling
community, with about 250 attendees and a very broad range of topics.
Applications of GEOS-Chem span a very wide range of atmospheric composition
problems including oxidants, aerosols, carbon gases, stratospheric chemistry,
mercury, persistent organic pollutants, and others. GEOS-Chem links with climate
and weather models for studies of chemistry-climate-ecosystem interactions,
chemical data assimilation, and air quality forecasting. Oral presentations by
early-career scientists and graduate students are prioritized at GEOS-Chem
meetings, providing for many a first opportunity to present their work in front
of a large international audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.