* 2218863
* The role of sponges in altering seawater DOM on Caribbean reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Winifred Johnson, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2025
* USD 946,705.00

Sponges now dominate Caribbean reefs after decades of declines of reef-building
corals. Unlike most benthic reef organisms, sponges are ecosystem engineers that
pump and filter huge volumes of seawater, turning-over the water-column and
transforming seawater chemistry. The ability of sponges to alter dissolved
organic matter (DOM) is recently the subject of increased scientific interest,
along with new evidence of ample production of DOM by seaweeds, prompting novel
hypotheses about the role of sponges in carbon and nutrient biogeochemical
cycling and ecosystem function. The most common species of emergent (large, non-
cryptic) sponges on Caribbean reefs range from those having a high abundance of
microbial symbionts in their tissues (HMA) to those with low microbial abundance
(LMA). Most studies of emergent sponges have shown that HMA species are net
consumers of DOM, while LMA species are net producers. While the quantity of DOM
in seawater is easily measured, little is known about the composition of the DOM
that is processed by sponges. This project is using complimentary analytical
approaches, including new chemical derivatization techniques, to characterize
ambient and seaweed-derived DOM components in seawater and the effects of
processing by HMA and LMA sponges on these components under laboratory
conditions and in the coral reef environment. These studies are providing the
most complete characterization of DOM and nutrient cycling by sponges on
tropical reefs to date. Broader impacts of this project include research support
for two new female faculty in a Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, STEM
outreach from female role-models through UNCWâ€™s MarineQuest program to a local
charter grade school for girls that specializes in serving under-represented
groups, and world-wide public outreach through educational YouTube videos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on recent discoveries of the effects of sponge
processing on the DOM pool in seawater, this interdisciplinary and collaborative
research project is transforming our knowledge of biogeochemical cycling on
coral reefs and inspiring novel explanations for differences in reef resilience
across the tropics, including the continued decline of Caribbean reef corals.
This project is targeting 4 HMA and 2 LMA sponge species with cylindrical shapes
and uses a suite of complimentary analytical methods to characterize the
naturally occurring DOM compounds in seawater before and after sponge processing
using both field and laboratory experiments. Measurements of DOM in seawater
include bulk quantification, carbohydrate and amino acid quantification, and
solid phase extraction before and after derivatization using targeted and
untargeted approaches that employ LC-MS/MS, GC/MS and UPLC-QToF. Untargeted
UPLC-QToF MS metabolomics techniques reveal which compounds are significantly
altered as seawater moves through the sponge body on the reef. Laboratory
incubation experiments characterize the production of DOM by 3 common seaweed
taxa and subsequent processing by each of the 6 target sponge species.
Considering that DOM is one of the largest reservoirs of organic carbon on the
planet, this research project is transforming our understanding of the
composition and cycling of seawater DOM by sponges for a tropical reef
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.