* 2218730
* MCA: Characterizing the role of alternative oxidases in marine bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anne Dunn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 361,134.00

Bacteria are abundant on our planet, colonizing diverse environments and playing
essential roles in important ecosystem processes such as nutrient cycling. They
have an amazing diversity of pathways for generating the energy they need to
live and function, and these pathways underlie their survival and ability to
contribute to ecosystem processes. Despite this importance, there is a lack of
knowledge of how the function of specific energy generation pathways connects to
bacterial fitness and these organisms’ role in the function of our environment.
This project focuses on better understanding how alternative oxidase (AOX), a
component of energy-generating pathways of marine bacteria that play vital roles
in nutrient cycling, functions in their growth and survival. This award will
allow the investigator to develop skills they will use to discover how
alternative oxidase is expressed and functions in diverse bacteria and begin to
connect this to nutrient cycling pathways. In addition, the investigator will
couple these research activities with student training, outreach to K-12
students in Hawaii and the mainland, and the development of new diversity,
equity, and inclusion efforts at their home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on AOX function in eukaryotes has
been a very active area in recent years. Studies in plants, protists, fungi, and
animals have revealed a common thread in AOX activity in helping cells deal
effectively with environmental stresses and maintain energy balance. However,
outside of the investigator’s work in Vibrio fischeri, the physiological role(s)
of AOX in marine bacteria is essentially unexplored. Unanswered questions
include how AOX functions in diverse bacteria and whether there are
commonalities in physiological pathways in AOX-encoding bacteria or correlations
between environmental conditions and the presence of aox-encoding bacteria. This
project will address these knowledge gaps using three approaches: 1)
microrespirometry along with genetic, biochemical, and molecular approaches to
determine the physiological role of V. fischeri AOX under environmentally
relevant conditions; 2) genetic, molecular, and biochemical approaches to
understand the regulation and physiological contribution(s) of AOX in other
diverse model marine bacteria; and 3) bioinformatic approaches to identify the
genomic features and environmental conditions that correlate with aox abundance
and expression. The results of this research will provide valuable new
information about AOX regulation and function in bacteria and lay the foundation
for further exploration of the influence of bacterial AOX on microbial
physiology, marine ecosystem function, and biogeochemical cycling. These results
will also provide insight into commonalities in the regulation and function of
AOX in different kingdoms of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.