* 2218054
* RII Track-2 FEC: Membrane Purification Platform for Continuous Biomanufacturing of Viral Vectors and Virus-like Particles in Arkansas and Beyond
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Dibakar Bhattacharyya, University of Arkansas
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,974,826.00

Biologics are large molecule therapeutics and have been used to treat a variety
of diseases, including cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, autoimmune
disorders, genetic and ophthalmologic diseases to name a few. Biologics include
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and other therapeutic proteins, vaccines such as
mRNA vaccines, cell and gene therapies products such as stem cells, and viral
vectors. The impact of biologics on human health has been tremendous with the
success of mRNA vaccines for COVID-19 as an example. The market for biologics is
increasing exponentially, reaching over $300 billion as of today. The large
demand for biologics places great challenge on the manufacturing process. The
total cost for downstream process accounts for up to 80% of the total
manufacturing cost. The vision of this RII Track-2 FEC project is to create a
membrane-based downstream purification platform for the future large scale
biomanufacturing of viral vectors and virus-like particles (VLPs) for gene
therapy and vaccine applications. This platform will be used to replace the
current processes such as centrifugation and resin-based chromatography that are
difficult to scale up. The overall goal of this project is to develop innovative
and practical unit operations that could be part of a platform for the
downstream purification of these virus particle-based therapeutics. The project
brings together multidisciplinary researchers with complementary expertise from
three EPSCoR jurisdictions from the University of Arkansas (Arkansas), Clemson
University (South Carolina) and University of Kentucky (Kentucky). Each of the
three institutions offers unique facilities and resources that can rapidly
catalyze the technology development. The economic impact of the proposed
activities on the entire state of Arkansas as well as on Kentucky and South
Carolina will be significant. Regional incubator centers for biotechnology
industry of tomorrow will be established in the three EPSCoR states. Successful
development of a high-productivity membrane purification platform is expected to
improve human health by improving access to revolutionary treatments for genetic
and chronic diseases for mid- and low-income families. Workforce development for
the future biotechnology industry, a commitment to diversity through
collaborations with Minority-serving Institutions, and a focus on early career
faculty mentorship are key components of the project. The project will provide
internship opportunities for graduate students and research experiences for
undergraduates to develop the STEM workforce in this field. In addition, all
three universities will outreach to the respective Minority-serving Institutions
in the state to foster collaborative research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Development of cost-effective large scale biomanufacturing for the
purification of viral vectors and virus-like particles (VLPs) is a major
challenge. Membrane based unit operations are attractive; however, membrane
capacity, fouling and lack of commercial membranes as well as the robustness of
membrane performance under a range of operating conditions have limited
applications by industrial practitioners. This project will address key issues
and overcome critical barriers for developing a membrane-based bioprocessing
platform for viral vectors and VLPs. The project aims to overcome the technical
and economic barriers at multiple fronts and involve close collaborations among
researchers at three different institutions in three EPSCoR jurisdictions. More
specific research objectives include (1) feedstock production of two common
viral vectors for gene therapy applications and VLPs for vaccine applications;
(2) advanced microfiltration operations for bioreactor harvesting; (3) high
capacity affinity membrane design, fabrication and characterization; (4)
downstream membrane chromatography for separating full and empty viral capsids;
(5) module design, process optimization and process intensification; (6)
employing state-of-the-art bioanalytical methods for detection and
quantification; and (7) a technology readiness and acceptance study. Through the
project's collaborative research efforts across three universities, researchers
will build upon existing infrastructure at each institution, expanding it far
beyond current capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.