* 2218884
* Technology, Paleoenvironment and Exchange
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 318,587.00

This project explores the environmental and behavioral contexts of the
appearance of pottery technologies in early hunting and gathering societies.
Early archaeological theories developed during the “Neolithic Revolution”
posited a causal relationship between increasing reliance on domesticated
plants, sedentary village life, and the production of pottery vessels for food
storage and cooking. However, archaeological and ethnographic research
discovered that people did not have to be reliant on domesticated plants to
create pottery and indeed, hunters and gatherers with varying degrees of
mobility made and used ceramic vessels. Recent research indicates that some of
the earliest known pottery in the world was adopted by hunter-gatherers. Despite
these exciting discoveries, very little is well known of the dating of the finds
and the social and ecological contexts of their appearance. This project
examines the exact timing of the adoption of pottery, the impact of
environmental change, and associated technology and behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to examine changes in settlement
patterns, mobility, and associated assemblages of artifacts at one such early
site. Comparisons of distinct paleoenvironmental changes suggests that sea level
rise has the most significant correspondence to the onset of pottery appearance.
Nonetheless, a high-resolution geochronology is required to adequately evaluate
and understand changes that occurred. This study will determine if the emergence
of pottery corresponds with sea level rise, and decisions to become more
sedentary, a transition to a diet rich in plant food, and long-distance exchange
to buffer newly emerging risks associated with sea level rise and climate
change. To accomplish this, project leaders have assembled an interdisciplinary
team of geochronologists and paleooceanographers who will create models of sea
levels, specialists in ceramic analysis who, using thin section methods,
chemical sourcing, microprobe analysis and other techniques, will define the
likely sources of the pottery, experts of stone tools will study change in
lithic technology and uses, and specialists in the analysis of environmental DNA
and plant remains recovered from excavation to define the ecology of the region
and foodways in the two periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.