* 2218507
* Developing Genome Transplantation for Non-mycoplasma Bacteria to Enhance the Creation of Synthetic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Glass, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,025,256.00

In 2010, researchers constructed a synthetic bacterial cell whose genome was
synthesized from laboratory chemicals. It was anticipated that this first
synthetic cell would be followed by many others constructed by scientists all
over the world. Indeed, researchers anticipated that bacteria of all types would
be designed and constructed to solve human problems in medicine, energy,
industry, environmental remediation and basic research. That has yet to happen
because it is difficult to transplant a rationally designed synthetic genome
into a suitable recipient bacterial cell. In the project proposed here, the
original inventors of the genome transplantation procedure will adapt the
technique so that it can be applied to other bacteria. This will allow academic
and industrial bacteriologists and synthetic biologists to build new bacteria
with remarkable capabilities. In addition to removing a huge technical hurdle
stalling the construction of synthetic cells, this project will facilitate the
training of the next generation of scientists in the field of synthetic biology
and will be used as a platform for discussions with the scientific community,
industry and public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome Transplantation, the insertion
of a complete bacterial genome into a suitable recipient cell so that the
donated genome commandeers the recipient cell to produce a new cell with the
genotype and phenotype of the donated genome, was the fundamental technical
development that enabled the construction of the first bacterium with a
synthetic genome. At the announcement of the creation of the worldâ€™s first
synthetic cell, JCVI-syn1.0, the work was heralded as a major accomplishment for
humans. To date, genome transplantation has only been achieved using a small
subset of the atypical bacteria called mycoplasmas. The goals of this project
are to investigate the mechanism of genome transplantation, develop genome
transplantation for at least two species of non-mycoplasma bacteria, and use
microfluidics technology to automate and improve the efficiency of genome
transplantation. A potential outcome is to establish a set of rules that
synthetic cell builders can use to transplant isolated whole synthetic bacterial
genomes and produce new synthetic cells with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.