* 2218504
* Collaborative Research: Human Infrastructure for a National Geochronology Consortium: Micro-funding an inclusive community grassroot effort to better understand the earth system
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Vicki McConnell, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2027
* USD 128,930.00

This project supports the Advancing Geochronology Science, Spaces, and Systems
(AGeS-cubed or AGeS3) initiative to: (1) increase access to geochronology data
and geochronology expertise to further our understanding of unified Earth
systems, (2) implement a platform attracting underrepresented minorities to the
geosciences, and (3) test grassroots ideas at a frontier of inclusive and
collaborative science. Geochronology data provide the temporal information
required for synergistic science spanning the deep Earth to surface processes.
Yet National Academy reports have repeatedly highlighted challenges for
geochronology data access, technical innovation, and training. This project
addresses these needs through a trio of strategic micro-award programs. The
mature AGeS-Grad program supports high-impact collaborative science projects
between graduate students, labs, and home institution mentors. The prototype
AGeS-DiG (Diversity in Geochronology) program funds pilot initiatives to
increase access to geochronology for those underrepresented in the Earth
sciences. The new AGeS-TRaCE (Training and Community Engagement) program
supports community-led efforts to address emerging challenges in geochronology.
The micro-awards of this program powers the human infrastructure engine,
enabling important scientific advances that may not happen within the silo of
more classic grants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advancing Geochronology Science,
Spaces, and Systems (AGeS-cubed or AGeS3) project builds on the success and
cooperative spirit of the AGeS-Grad subprogram through the launch of micro-grant
opportunities to crowd-source solutions for self-identified geochronology needs.
The program harnesses expertise and creativity across the Earth sciences by
enabling collaborative science and evaluating grassroots community-led solutions
to current challenges in geochronology and geosciences more broadly. The project
activities propagate a web of new relationships that position the greater
geoscience community to make transformative scientific advances on the dynamics
and complexity of Earth processes and systems. This project funds over 150
strategic micro-awards across three subprograms to engage hundreds across the
Earth sciences in collaborative science, training, review, and governance
activities. Still broader engagement and integration will be achieved through
annual, virtual, fully open AGeS community meetings, a website that will host
project blogs and deliverables, and a formalized governance model that includes
steering and review committees with rotating members designed to balance
experience with new engagement. Assessment and evaluation activities will
provide formative feedback to shape the initiative over its arc. Belonging,
accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and inclusivity are infused
throughout all activities, and outcomes of diverse participation will be sought
via inclusive and accessible practices that also promote a sense of connection
and belonging in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.