* 2218248
* Genesis of Harrat Basalts in Western Saudi Arabia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Tanya Furman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 332,625.00

This project seeks to understand the formation of large-volume basalt lava
fields that erupt onto continental crust, where they provide important nutrients
for terrestrial and aquatic life as well as geothermal and mineral resources for
human use. The research is pursued in Western Saudi Arabia because the thermal
and material structure of the crust itself is a barrier to basalt volcanism, and
yet the study areas have been volcanically active for up to 30 million years.
The work uses the geochemistry of basalt lavas as a lens through which to
explore the long-term evolution of the lowermost crust, i.e., the “underlayer”
of the continent that cannot be observed directly. The research project will
determine how plate tectonic processes acting in the region have affected
crustal thickness and integrity, potentially thinning and weakening the
continent substantially and thereby encouraging volcanic activity. The work is
conducted in partnership with Saudi colleagues who are interested in
diversifying their economic portfolio beyond petroleum and natural gas
resources. Funds from this project support a doctoral candidate and several
undergraduate students from backgrounds that are underrepresented in the
geosciences; help develop a middle-school learning unit in cooperation with a
local teacher and a museum display focused on the artistic, cultural, religious
and ecological significance of the Saudi lava fields. This work will create new
knowledge about the long-term evolution of our planet that helps us prepare for
a sustainable and diverse future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental basalts are
the most common subaerial volcanic features on Earth but melting beneath thick
continental crust is difficult to achieve. Geochemical and geochronologic data,
integrated with geophysical evidence, will be used to determine the mechanism(s)
of mantle melting and the mineralogic, isotopic and thermo-barometric parameters
of mantle source domains that contribute to alkaline mafic volcanism in two
long-lived western Arabian Harrats (Uwayrid and Ash Shaam). The geochemical and
isotopic investigation will document evolution of source domains and mantle
melting mechanisms in a region of complex tectonics and will test whether
rejuvenated mafic alkaline volcanism in two Arabian harrats results from
lithospheric drip magmatism. Geochemical evidence for this process has focused
on documenting individual small-volume volatile-rich melt batches, contributions
from a pyroxenitic source, small-scale temporal trends of increasing melting
depth and temperature, and a positive correlation between depth and degree of
mantle melting. The research will pursue this evidence through robust major and
trace element analysis of lavas and individual crystals in lavas and xenoliths
from Harrats Uwayrid and Ash Shaam. High precision 40Ar/39Ar dating will
establish temporal trends in magma chemistry, and Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf-He isotopic study
of lavas and xenoliths will establish source characteristics. The research
explores contributions from the Afar plume, ambient upper mantle and
metasomatized lithosphere, and documents spatial and temporal variations to
these contributions across the Arabian plate. The findings have implications for
transport of plume material, for the development of gravitationally unstable
zones in metasomatized lithospheric mantle, and for evolution of the Dead Sea
Fault and northern Red Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.