* 2218015
* Epigenetic processes and biological senescence in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jane Buikstra, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 197,809.00

The rate of biological aging varies across individuals, being influenced by both
genetic and environmental factors. This variation presents challenges in
anthropological research and forensic practice for determining how old an
individual was when they died based on skeletal measures of aging and frailty.
This project leverages epigenetic and imaging data from living and postmortem
clinical cohorts to examine the relationship between gene methylation and
skeletal frailty and advance methods for understanding patterns of human
senescence in the past and present. The results of this research are shared with
the general public at the Boston Museum of Science, the Maxwell Museum in
Albuquerque, NM, and at the Warren Anatomical Museum at Harvard University. The
project supports student science education and training opportunities from
elementary school to the postgraduate level (medical and graduate students).
Outreach to groups underrepresented or underserved in STEM is planned at the
Boston Museum of Science through its events for girls interested in STEM and
through the Maxwell Museumâ€™s educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
advanced imaging methods and epigenetic analysis, this project takes a novel,
interdisciplinary approach to further characterize relationships among age, sex,
and bone quality/quantity, especially in bone acquired in postmortem contexts.
The investigators: (1) provide a methodological proof-of-concept demonstrating
that epigenetic modification of genes in DNA derived from both femoral bone and
blood samples in osteoporotic living patients is similarly observed in femoral
bone and dental samples from skeletal remains, (2) identify any differences in
epigenetic modification of the above genes in men and in women; (3) explore
using tooth samples instead of femoral neck samples for assessment of
methylation data that can provide information about skeletal health and age; (4)
examine the utility of DNA methylation for the assessment of chronological age,
using bone and dental samples, and (5) determine whether assessments of skeletal
frailty and chronological age can be made based on imaging findings, thereby
reducing the need for destructive sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.