* 2218664
* EAR-Climate: Mountain Glacier Contribution to Sea Level CE 1900-2100
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jacqueline Austermann, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,166,628.00

The area and mass of glaciers in mountainous regions have been shrinking
dramatically in recent decades, and this accelerating glacier retreat impacts
alpine systems and downstream communities dramatically around the globe. These
shrinking mountain glaciers may also contribute to sea-level rise, yet the
predictions of this influence are much less quantified than those for the polar
ice sheets. Reasons for this include: (i) the large number of mountain glaciers
and their individual complexities; (ii) modern satellite observations of glacier
volume change are mostly limited to the last 20 years, which is not long enough
to calibrate glacier dynamic models; (iii) the limitations in computing power to
model glacier change for thousands of alpine glaciers and their impacts on the
solid-earth response. The goals of the current project are to provide accurate
predictions of mountain glacier melt rates across the globe together with the
contribution to sea-level rise on the global and local scale, and to evaluate
the impacts of glacier change on societies. The latter will include an
assessment of risk for communities impacted by changing glaciers together with
adaptation strategies such as migration. A documentary film will be prepared
that narrates the journey of the glacial meltwater from its birth at the icy
peaks of the high Andes all the way to the Pacific Ocean, in turn documenting
the impacts on communities from the glacier to the ocean. The film will
illustrate the process of building models for improved predictions of downstream
effects of changing climate and will be available to a wide audience on web-
streaming platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accelerating mass loss of glaciers
around the globe is impacting societies and contributing significantly to
ongoing and accelerating sea-level rise. Initial estimates predict that mountain
glaciers, which are highly sensitive to warming climate, might contribute up to
half a meter to sea-level rise, but the uncertainties of these predictions
remain considerably higher than those for the polar ice-sheets. This project
will integrate glacier observations over the last century, and include them in a
global glacier-change time-series. This time series will be developed by
artificial intelligence methods, glaciologic modeling through CE 2100, solid
earth modeling of isostatic adjustment related to mountain glacier change, and
societal impact science that identifies areas of highest societal and economic
costs, together with first-order solution strategies. The research will quantify
to what degree mountain glacier changes since the end of the Little Ice Age
(about CE 1850) are reflected in sea-level rise, and how these environmental
changes affect densely populated regions down-stream of glaciated areas and
near-shore communities. To achieve this goal, the project will use cutting-edge
methodology, from new observations to artificial-intelligence-based modeling to
societal impact science tools, that would be widely applicable to other problems
at the interface of Earth Science and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.