* 2218457
* Collaborative Research: The Lake Superior Basin: Natural Geomorphic Experiment, Deepwater-Terminating Ice Stream, and Isostatically Adjusting Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Andrew Wickert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2027
* USD 880,144.00

Glaciers, lakes, rivers, and the solid Earth interact to reshape the surface
environment. This applies to the Lake Superior Basin, a basin that formed as a
rift in Earth's crust 1.1 billion years ago and since has hosted mountains,
lakes, glaciers, rivers, and human inhabitants. Past and present lake-level
change is responding to ancient ice-sheet retreat, whose unweighting of Earth's
surface causes our planet's crust to bend and underlying mantle to flow. This
project takes a multidisplinary approach to better understand the shaping of
this continental landscape. The research team is reconstructing how the
geological past of the Lake Superior basin impacts ongoing uplift and tilting of
the land surface as well as surface processes including river erosion. Lake-
level fall incites rivers to slice downwards through sediment and rock, while
lake-level rise drowns the river mouths, causing deposition of gravel and sand.
Mapping the three-dimensional patterns of the rivers encompassing the Lake
Superior Basin, as they cut through materials ranging from soft mud to hard
rock, is critical for understanding erosional processes. Additionally, dating
landforms associated with past water-terminating glaciers and simulating their
dynamics using computer models will improve scientists' ability to predict the
fate of Earthâ€™s existing ice sheets. Indigenous Ojibwe partners will consult in
the research and share knowledge of both land and lake. Through a partnership
with the Superior Hiking Trail Association, the project team will enhance
outdoor recreation by providing public scientific knowledge of the region and
its natural history. Finally, the research team is self-examining its approaches
and practices to learn how to better include and support upcoming generations of
Earth scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the nexus of the Lake Superior
basin, this research is answering fundamental questions about river incision,
(de)glacial landscape and lake-scape evolution, water-terminating glacier
instabilities, and glacial isostatic adjustment. Lake Superior provides a
uniquely suited testbed to advance each of these knowledge areas and to
understand their feedbacks. Synchronous base-level fall on Lake Superior
triggered river incision and knickpoint propagation across myriad lithologies,
providing replicate natural experiments in erosional mechanics. The project team
is applying traditional glacial geological approaches together with state-of-
the-art topographic analyses to map lake-level evolution and the extent of
glacial and fluvial process domains. Paleolake shorelines and spillways were
modified by, and record, glacial isostatic adjustment, which can be further
constrained via detailed seismic imaging of three-dimensional solid-Earth
structure and extensive modern global navigation satellite system data. These
data are being used to probe deeply into the mechanisms and feedbacks
surrounding the marine ice sheet instability, critical for understanding the
response and sensitivity of marine-terminating outlet glaciers and ice sheets.
The research team is partnering with local nonprofit and government
organizations to share the narrative of the Lake Superior region, integrate
Indigenous knowledge, and build an inclusive field-research program whose goal
is to invite a diversifying next generation into the
geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.