* 2218189
* Marine Sediment Sampling Facility (MARSSAM) Oceanographic Instrumentation:  Acquisition of a Seagoing Sediment CT-Scanning System
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Mitchell Lyle, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2023
* USD 611,799.00

This proposal seeks funds for acquisition of a seagoing computed tomography
(CT)-scanning system for the Oregon State University Marine Sediment Sampling
Facility (MARSSAM), which supports NSF coring programs across the United State
Academic Research Fleet (ARF). The system they propose to acquire, a GeoTek
Vertical X-ray CT-scanner (VXCT) has a small footprint allowing it to be
installed in a containerized lab for deployment aboard many of the ARF
platforms. The scanner can collect three-dimensional images at resolutions of
between 350 and 30 microns for cores of up to 150 cm in length in a vertical
orientation, allowing for preservation of the sediment water interface. Full-
length core sections can be scanned in as little as 40 minutes at 64-micron
resolution, allowing for data collection at a pace that falls within the flow of
core processing aboard the ship&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seagoing Sediment Core
Computed Tomography Scanner $611,799 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.