* 2218036
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 519,991.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for Shipboard
Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) that is needed to carry out NSF-supported
scientific research. Working within the collaborative framework of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed
equipment will be maintained by the SIO ship operations department for use by
NSF-supported scientists from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing
facilities. Equipment is requested for RV Sally Ride, a 238-foot, Navy-owned
vessel built in 2014 and for R/V Revelle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
proposal, SIO provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition
of the following SSSE:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portable cranes of
Revelle and Sally Ride $446,800 &lt;br/&gt;GPS Receiver for Revelle $4,360
&lt;br/&gt;Diaphragm pumps for Revelle and Sally Ride $19,492
&lt;br/&gt;Electric hoist for Revelle hanger bay $7,947 &lt;br/&gt;Blocks for
.322" wire on Revelle and Sally Ride $29,662 &lt;br/&gt;Air Compressors for
Revelle and Sally Ride $16,090 &lt;br/&gt; $524,351&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.