* 2218933
* US-European Workshop: Grid at the Edge-towards the zero-carbon power grid with improved visibility, safety and reliability at Split, Croatia on May 23-24, 2022.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2023
* USD 19,700.00

This proposal requests funding to provide travel subsidies for university
professors to attend the NSF Joint US-European Workshop to define the research
directions for the Grid Edge. The workshop to be held in Split, Croatia on May
23-24, 2022 will be focusing on unresolved problems, technology requirements and
research directions for the time horizon of 5-10 years. This workshop intends to
bring together the travel grant recipients, as well as industry and government
stakeholders from the US and Europe to address the Grid Edge concepts,
fundamentals and vision holistically. The participants will discuss and
coordinate a research strategy and related action plan to meet industry needs
for new solutions in response to the new developments affecting the grid. The
grid edge is considered a crucial development for the future of the electricity
grids and requires contributions from academics, engineers, policy makers,
economists, social scientists, government officials, and technology leaders in
delivering the next generation grid solutions for the benefits of the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental concepts needed for advancing the
grid Edge require an interdisciplinary approach involving basic research,
applied engineering, technology innovation, behavioral studies, market
economics, and policy insights. The grid edge is defined in this context through
multiple dimensions: a) the asset ownership, which entails the utility owned and
non-utility owned assets, b) the edge stakeholder role, which encompasses the
utility-centric and third party-centric view, and the view that focuses on the
need to closely collaborate across the edge boundaries, and c) the structured
operational layers covering physical grid components, control and protection,
the technology, cyber-physical security and privacy, markets, regulatory
framework, and business models. This workshop will continue the NSF past and
current efforts undertaken through a recent series of timely workshops to offer
additional research insight and a perspective focusing on the cyber and physical
aspects of energy generation and consumption at the grid
edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.