* 2218602
* Climate Change Impacts on the Past and Future Coastal Freshwater Resources of Oceanic Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Carl Lipo, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 302,215.00

History has shown that humans have long faced considerable challenges of climate
change. Documenting how past people responded to environmental change, through
adaptations and innovations, offers vital information for better solutions to
present and future challenges. This study focuses on a small island which makes
an excellent case study in human history demonstrating the unique ways past
communities adapted to unpredictable and changing environmental and climatic
conditions. On this small, isolated, and resource-poor island, people lived
sustainability for over 500 years despite extreme freshwater scarcity and
frequent paleo-droughts. Understanding how past islanders managed changing
freshwater availability, however, remains poorly understood. This project takes
a convergent approach to ancient adaptations to freshwater scarcity through the
integration of archaeology, hydrogeology, geospatial science, and traditional
ecological knowledge. Using a transdisciplinary approach, this project will
yield a hydrogeological model and will produce a spatial and chronological
reconstruction of ancient water management adaptations. In addition to resolving
fundamental questions of how past human communities adapted to water scarcity,
the project will yield actionable data for contemporary islanders to deploy in
mitigating impending risks from climate change today, and a targeted plan to
broaden participation in archaeology and geoscience through a range of outreach
and training opportunities for multiple students. Overall, this work will offer
new insights into the ingenious and sustainable strategies used by past human
communities to adapt to changing environmental conditions. These insights will
contribute to solving similar problems today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
goal of this project is to resolve how ancient water management systems emerged
over time as adaptive responses to climate change. Recent evidence indicates
that the islanders innovated unique adaptations to freshwater scarcity through
the collection and management of submarine groundwater discharge (SGD),
locations at which fresh groundwater emerges at the tideline. Using a convergent
historical ecological framework that integrates expertise in hydrogeology,
remote sensing, archaeology, and traditional ecological knowledge, this project
will test the hypotheses that SGD provides the most abundant and reliable source
of fresh water on the island; ancient water management features were innovated
and established to manage/extract SGD during times of increased aridity and
multi-year drought events, and dams were built to opportunistically exploit high
rainfall events. This project will test these hypotheses through
hydrogeological, archaeological, and geospatial data collection. The results
will be incorporated into an island-wide hydrogeological model as well as
document archaeological features associated with ancient water management. This
research will result in broader intellectual and societal impacts by providing a
clear understanding of past solutions to environmental and climatic risks,
generating documentation of archaeological features imminently threatened by
climate change, result in actionable data for stakeholder communities who seek
to mitigate these challenges, and offer targeted training and education to
diverse students. As issues of climate-induced freshwater scarcity are looming
threats across the Pacific Islands, the results of this community-based,
convergent research will have broader impacts for a better understanding of both
the past and future sustainability of human
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.