* 2218197
* AGS-PRF: Physics-Constrained Machine Learning-Based Models for Climate Simulations with Data Assimilation and Uncertainty Quantification
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Mohamed Aziz Bhouri, Bhouri, Mohamed Aziz
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

Despite recent computational advancements, climate models still cannot
explicitly resolve key physical processes like turbulence, convection, and
clouds. These unresolved processes must be accounted for by parameterization
schemes. The inability of these schemes to mimic reality has hindered the
ability of model simulations to capture various observed phenomena, leading
model biases and uncertainties. Recently, machine learning-based techniques have
greatly improved these schemes. Nevertheless, the standard machine learning-
based methods are built solely on idealized computational models without
considering the wealth of observational data available. Thus, inherent
inaccuracies of the parameterization schemes continue to undermine the
performance of climate models. This project aims to improve machine-learning-
based parameterization schemes and, thereby, enhance the performance of existing
climate models. The proposer will incorporate observations and physical laws
into machine learning techniques to make parameterization schemes more accurate
and provide uncertainty estimates to capture the chaotic nature of the climate
system. The proposed work will train a young postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposal will utilize data from satellite
observations and high-resolution simulations to improve machine learning
schemes. Physics-constraints will be imposed either through the incorporation of
a physical loss term or by considering specific machine learning tools such as
Neural Networks with fixed output layer that strongly imposes the known physical
constraint. Uncertainty quantification in machine learning schemes will be
implemented using ensemble learning or Bayesian approaches such as Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo sampling schemes. The knowledge gained in this project could have an
impact across climate science, including the advancement of global climate
modelsâ€™ development and of machine learning application to Big Data in climate
science, as well as the development of novel computational probabilistic methods
for complex multi-scale and multi-physics real-world
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.