* 2218859
* Collaborative Research: Incorporating SPECFEM3D numerical seismograms in the Global CMT Project
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 226,615.00

This research will lay the groundwork for improvements in the scientific
description of earthquakes, benefitting researchers in earthquake statistics,
seismic tomography, seismic hazard, and seismic discrimination, as well as
tectonic interpretation and analysis. This is the first step towards making the
results of complex and expensive numerical calculations available for multiple
applications and a wide range of users. This work focuses on demonstrating the
feasibility of the methodology, but the database and method will be valuable for
any research requiring accurate predictions of the global seismic wavefield from
an arbitrary earthquake at any location without expensive computation. Two
graduate students will be trained in research at the nexus of earthquake
science, theoretical seismology, and computational Earth
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year, focused effort will (1) develop a
new method for calculating, storing, and accessing high-fidelity long-period
synthetic seismograms for state-of-the-art 3D tomographic models of the Earth,
and (2) incorporate these seismograms in the earthquake analysis of the Global
Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT) Project. Currently, the CMT synthetic seismograms
are calculated using modern 3D Earth models, but accuracy is limited by the
validity of the path-average approximation for mode summation and surface-wave
ray theory, inexact predictions of the amplitude and polarization of ground
motion, and other unmodeled effects, bias retrieved earthquake parameters. The
incorporation of higher-fidelity synthetic seismograms in the CMT analysis will
improve the characterization of seismic sources and remove concerns about a key
source of uncertainty and bias. The team will adapt the spectral-element wave-
equation solver SPECFEM3D_GLOBE to generate a database of kernel seismograms on
a global grid of hypocenters, for a large set of station locations, using
source-receiver reciprocity to speed up the calculation. Kernel seismograms on
the grid will be organized and stored in a format that facilitates rapid access
to a particular source region and the stations of the Global Seismographic
Network. Kernel seismograms for an arbitrary centroid location will be
efficiently calculated by spatial interpolation, in a manner that matches the
accuracy of the full forward calculation. The CMT code will be modified to
ingest the interpolated SPECFEM3D_GLOBE seismograms and testing will allow the
assessment of success of the approach and method. The Princeton numerical
seismology group and Lamont earthquake-analysis group will jointly evaluate the
approach and fidelity of the waveform interpolation, develop practical formats
for accessing the (massive) database of global waveforms, and assess the success
of these developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by
the Geophysics and Instrumentation and Facilities programs in the Division of
Earth Sciences. It is also co-funded by a collaboration between the Directorate
for Geosciences and Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and
open science activities in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.