* 2218954
* MCA: Incorporating Carbon Use Efficiency into Strategies for Ecosystem Restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Kathryn Docherty, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2024
* USD 355,096.00

The central United States once contained the largest tallgrass prairie ecosystem
on Earth. Through agricultural and urban development, most of this ecosystem -
and the benefits it provided to soil health, carbon storage and biodiversity -
were lost. Today, ecosystem restoration is an important way that land managers
and scientists can work together to return ecosystems such as tallgrass prairies
to the North American landscape, along with the benefits they provide. Typical
restoration strategies focus on seeding native plants. That approach overlooks
the millions of soil microorganisms that were also disrupted through tilling and
fertilization. Research shows that many processes fall short of their potential
in restored systems because the amounts and types of microorganisms in the soil
remain permanently altered. Critically, this affects how much carbon can be
retained in the restored soil. Reframing restoration goals so that they focus on
managing ecosystems that act as optimal carbon sinks is an important step toward
balancing greenhouse gas emissions and reversing the effects of environmental
change. The first step to accomplishing this goal requires greater understanding
of how basic management choices affect soil microbial carbon use. This project
leverages an existing NSF-funded study that includes two metrics (land area and
number of plant species) and will examine the efficiency with which soil
microorganisms use carbon in these different treatments. This mid-career
advancement award (MCA) will provide support for a scientist at a critical
career juncture to advance their research by learning new techniques for
measuring an important trait of microorganisms. Results of this work will be
communicated broadly with six regional land management organizations in
southwest Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research is to
understand how plant richness and restoration area influence carbon use
efficiency (CUE), soil bacterial and fungal community composition, function and
heterogeneity in restored prairies. These goals will be addressed using the
Conservation Lands Experiment (CLE), an ongoing research project at Kellogg
Biological Station Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. The CLE maintains
12 sites ranging from 0.3 – 3.2 hectares, which were planted with low- and high-
richness plant seed mixes in 2015. It is an ideal experiment in which to test
applied questions about how restoration strategies influence microbial diversity
and heterogeneity using a spatially-explicit sampling design. Next-generation
DNA sequencing and analyses, putative functional pathway prediction and other
common soil metrics are standard procedures for the PI, but the value of these
variables will be enhanced when coupled with rate-based measurements of carbon
fluxes. This project expands the PI’s research expertise by providing time and
resources to learn 18O-isotope-based CUE assays with an expert colleague at the
University of New Hampshire. Opportunities for networking and collaboration are
expected to lead to interdisciplinary projects that have real-world applications
and involve non-profit land management organizations. Ultimately, outcomes will
include new restoration strategies that maximize belowground restoration for
carbon storage, while remaining tractable and cost-
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.