* 2218621
* EAR-Climate: Collaborative Research: Methane Dynamics Across Microbe-to-Landscape Scales in Coastal Wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Annette Engel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2027
* USD 288,716.00

Methane (CH4) is a gas that, although it has a much lower concentration in the
atmosphere compared to carbon dioxide (CO2), possesses a much more potent
greenhouse effect, possibly accounting for 20-25% of global warming since the
Industrial Revolution. Methane has a short residence in the air, so that
regulating the emission of this gas can have rapid and profound results for
mitigating climate change. The amount of methane in the atmosphere has increased
despite reductions in anthropogenic sources; accordingly, the processes of
methane production in natural environments must be accurately assessed. Coastal
wetlands account for ~40% of global methane emissions and these regions are in
constant flux owing to sea-level rise, sediment accumulation, ecological shifts,
and landscape dynamics. This project will investigate the present-day controls
on methane emissions in coastal wetlands, assess their variability due to sea-
level rise, and use field observations and experiments to develop models that
integrate the numerous factors that control methane emissions from these
environments. The study site will be in coastal Louisiana, which has ~40% of all
coastal, tidally influenced fresh and saltwater wetlands in the U.S., and these
wetlands experience some of the highest relative sea-level rise rates in the
world. Nearly 1 billion people around the globe live in proximity to similar
coastal wetlands, so that the results of this research will have broad
applicability to solving large-scale problems. The project’s educational and
outreach activities will leverage ongoing programs at the participating
universities and further include the development of new resources that will be
available to students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
spatiotemporal framework will combine field, experimental, and model-based
approaches to determine methane emissions from a range of settings (e.g.,
elevation, salinity, distance from waterways, hydroperiod, temperature,
vegetation, soil organic carbon) and time scales (decadal–centennial–
millennial) in the Terrebonne-Timbalier Estuary of coastal Louisiana. Some of
these vegetated wetland soils emit more methane annually than the soil carbon
that they sequester. The research objectives will: i) assess spatiotemporal
variability of methane inventories and emissions, ii) quantify soil and organic
carbon age and sedimentation history, iii) determine the microbial and
functional diversity from soils at different spatiotemporal scales and across
geochemical gradients, iv) experimentally assess methane flux due to flooding
(e.g., duration, frequency, depth) regime changes, v) integrate landscape change
into hydrodynamic and biogeochemical models that account for changes in wetland
configuration and sea-level, and iv) evaluate the best numerical parameters to
simulate methane dynamics across microbe-to-landscape
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Frontier
Research In Earth Sciences (FRES) program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Ecosystem Sciences program in the
Division of Environmental Biology (DEB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.