* 2218421
* SBE-UKRI: Form and function of primate natal coats
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 10/31/2026
* USD 489,363.00

The color of infants in many primates stand out clearly against adult and
background color. Why and how should the most vulnerable members of a group be
so conspicuous to threats? This project investigates this question and offers
insight into the role of infants in the social systems of primates. The research
will create and curate a new publicly accessible standardized image database of
primate species alongside life history, social and ecological data and results
will contribute to our understanding of why some animals change color over their
lifetimes. The project will train two postdoctoral researchers plus dozens of
researchers globally, including many in primate native range countries, in
objective photography for studying animal coloration. The project’s
comprehensive education and outreach program provides education and training
opportunities to students from kindergarten to graduate school with a focus on
enhancing the representation, retention, and training of underrepresented
minority scholars through existing institutional and professional association-
affiliated programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many ideas for the function of infant
conspicuousness in some species have been proposed but not rigorously
investigated. These include warning potentially infanticidal out-group males or
predators that the infant will be defended by the group, confusing the paternity
of infants to prevent infanticide, helping caregivers keep track of the infant,
and facilitating the care of infants by mothers and non-mothers. This project
tests these hypotheses by objectively measuring the color of many individuals
from many primate species throughout infancy, carrying out a comprehensive
comparative analysis of infant coloration across species, along with behavioral
experiments to measure how mothers, fathers and non-fathers respond to
differently colored infants. Color is measured using calibrated and standardized
digital photography at zoos, sanctuaries and research centers globally, with
local researchers photographing infants throughout the period of development.
These are then be processed using visual-system dependent methods to get a
‘receiver-eye-view’ of primate infant appearance for 250 individuals from 80
different primate species, and by experimentally manipulating the coloration of
images to assess response by different adult members of the group. Comparative
analyses across primate species test the predictions made by each of the
functional hypotheses about how infant color should relate to species’ behavior,
ecology, and social system. This project is funded jointly by Biological
Anthropology (SBE) and Behavioral Systems Cluster
(BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.