* 2218829
* Collaborative Research: Towards Better Understanding of the Climate System Using a Global Storm-Resolving Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Peter Blossey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2025
* USD 352,990.00

Weather phenomena come in all spatial scales, from the turbulent up-and-down
motions within clouds to frontal systems that span a time zone to the jet
streams that circle the globe. Naturally different models are used to capture
phenomena at different scales, including Large Eddy Simulation (LES) models with
grid spacings of perhaps 10m used to simulate individual clouds or small cloud
clusters. LES models are typically applied on a limited domain, perhaps 10km to
100km wide, and the influence of larger scales of motion on the clouds is
represented by imposing domain-wide conditions, for instance a single vertical
profile of temperature and moisture for the whole domain. The drawback of such
simulations is that they fail to capture two-way interactions between small and
large scales, for instance the effect of small clouds on the large-scale
temperature and moisture profiles. Models that can capture a larger range of
scales would thus be quite valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One model which has
proved quite useful for this purpose is the System for Atmospheric Modeling
(SAM), developed by the Principal Investigator (PI) in the early 2000s. SAM has
been used as an LES model, for instance in simulations of flow around a building
at 1m resolution, but has also been used with grid spacings around 5km to
simulate wave motions in a channel domain spanning the tropics. SAM has been a
workhorse model for studies of cloud behaviors including the aggregation of
convective clouds and the response of clouds to greenhouse gas-induced warming,
in particular the extent to which the cloud response intensifies or counteracts
the warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the PI developed a global version of
SAM called gSAM, which extends the Cartesian coordinates to spherical
coordinates and makes other modifications to represent flow on a global domain.
The model inherits all of the features of SAM and also adds an immersed step
topography, an advance over previous versions which were more idealized and
assumed a flat surface. Another way in which gSAM adds realism is the ability to
run simulations starting from observational initial conditions, allowing short-
term "forecasts", also called hindcasts, of real-world weather system evolution.
A recent study used this feature, along with "nudging" to reanalysis data, to
simulate conditions observed during the SOCRATES field campaign (see
AGS-16628674). The study concluded that the formation of cloud ice particles
from the shattering of earlier ice particles plays a role in determining the
width of clouds, thus regulating the amount of sunlight that reaches the surface
of the Southern Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this award is to further
develop gSAM and make it available to the worldwide research community as a
resource for weather and climate research. The work includes tasks devoted to
improving model behavior near the poles, improving the accuracy and efficiency
of radiative transfer calculations using machine learning techniques, improving
input/ouput performance, and validating simulations against satellite data.
Additional resources are developed to facilitate use and adoption of the model,
including a full suite of documentation and tutorials, initial and boundary
condition datasets for multiple configurations and resolutions, and model output
for several six-month simulations. The model is maintained on GitHub and users
can contribute to code development using GitHub repositories. The PI also
maintains a model website that tracks publications using the model and provides
additional information and resources. Since gSAM is an extension of SAM it is
easily configured to run as a limited-domain LES model, thereby continuing to
serve the SAM user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts
due to the power of gSAM as a tool for conducting basic science research on a
wide range of topics. One area of particular interest is the interaction between
clouds and climate change, as the sensitivies of clouds to a warming climate
could affect the amount of warming that occurs. gSAM can also contribute to our
understanding of how the intensity of extreme precipitation events is likely to
change in a warming world. In both cases gSAM serves to lower the barriers
between the research communities studying climate processes on the global scale
and cloud properties on the local scale. The project also supports a graduate
student, thereby building the next generation scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by a collaboration
between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure to support Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning and open
science activities in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.