* 2218556
* The Nature of Brain Networks in Cognitive Neuroimaging
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Felipe De Brigard, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 401,854.00

This project seeks to clarify conceptual challenges in the burgeoning field of
network neuroimaging. Network neuroscience uses mathematical tools from graph
theory to understand the brain, its relationship to the mind, and the neural
basis of neurological and psychiatric illnesses. However, the highly abstract
nature of network analysis has produced deep methodological and conceptual
disagreements regarding what exactly network methods reveal about the brain and
its functions. This project aims to clearly articulate these disagreements and
to use tools from philosophy of science to develop the conceptual foundations
necessary to resolve them. The project’s findings will be disseminated through
both scholarly and public channels and will be of interest to practicing network
neuroimagers, philosophers of science, clinical neuroscientists, and members of
the general public interested in brain function and
malfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central points of disagreement among
practicing network neuroscientists concern the extent to which the structures
revealed in network neuroimaging are biologically meaningful, as opposed to
merely instrumental mathematical abstractions, and relatedly, whether and to
what extent functions can be attributed to these networks. The research team
will analyze and build on survey results among practicing network
neuroscientists that unveil these conceptual disagreements. The project then
seeks to use tools from philosophy of science to develop a conceptual framework
with two central aims: To show how different modeling commitments affect the
extent to which brain networks can be interpreted as biologically real or
meaningful, and to articulate the appropriate conditions under which functions
can be attributed to brain networks. The results of this project will provide
insight into both the strengths and limitations of network methods when employed
for different research purposes in neuroscience. These insights will help
researchers overcome hurdles that currently threaten progress in the field, will
open new avenues of research in philosophy of science, and will facilitate
clearer interpretations of results in this cutting-edge area of
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.