* 2218913
* Closed-Loop Control and Operant Conditioning of Loading Response during Locomotion After Stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Victor Duenas, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 366,369.00

Individuals after stroke often struggle to use their stroke-affected leg to
propel themselves during walking. Due to this partial disuse of the affected leg
and in compensation to that, people walk slowly and with more effort. Despite
advances in exoskeleton technologies and robotic gait rehabilitation in
improving gait energetics and speed, it remains challenging to yield sustaining
improvements in leg function. In people after stroke, the activation of lower
leg muscles and generated forces are diminished, and the ankle joint motion that
is critically important for walking is impaired. The goal of this project is to
develop a novel gait training method to augment the function of the stroke-
affected leg by targeting the ankle joint and its muscles to increase walking
power. This project will use a wearable robotic device to impose small movement
perturbations about the ankle to strategically activate stroke-affected ankle
muscles during walking. A unique conditioning training protocol will be designed
to increase the person’s ankle muscle activity and force to propel the body
forward during walking. This project will advance fundamental knowledge to
enhance the muscle power and propulsion, which is a key barrier to improving
gait after stroke. Educational and outreach impact: middle and high school
students and teachers with disabilities will have opportunities to be exposed to
the wearables and gait-assistance technologies through hands-on lessons in a
workshop setting. Broader outreach impact includes a public forum for sharing
findings from this project and raising disability awareness with people at the
local stroke support group. Undergraduate researchers from underrepresented
groups and minorities will be encouraged to participate in these training and
dissemination activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to achieve a
paradigm shift in neuro-behavioral gait training by integrating a novel operant
conditioning protocol and a robotic ankle device to enhance paretic leg function
post-stroke. The innovation in this project is the development of a hybrid
approach to target the soleus muscle activity within the stance phase of walking
and condition its loading response as a strategy to improve hemiparetic walking.
The research plan includes two objectives with testing in people post-stroke and
able-bodied individuals. Objective 1 will characterize the input-output property
of the ankle plantarflexors’ loading response in stance phase. An adaptive
closed-loop control algorithm will be designed and evaluated to apply ankle
joint rotations using the wearable robot. The joint perturbations will be
shifted from the natural ankle kinematics to target the soleus loading response,
i.e., activate load sensing Ib afferents, in mid-late stance phase. The closed-
loop algorithm will be systematically investigated to customize the perturbation
magnitude, speed, and timing for each participant. Changes in soleus
electromyography (EMG), joint kinematics, and propulsion will be quantified
between perturbed and unperturbed step cycles during one treadmill walking
session in 15 participants post-stroke. Findings from this objective will
provide insights into the methods to modulate the soleus loading response by
manipulating ankle kinematics through applied, controlled joint perturbations
using the wearable device (i.e., emulate imposed dorsiflexions during normal
gait). Objective 2 will develop a dynamic protocol to enhance (operantly up-
condition) the soleus loading response during treadmill walking. With operant
conditioning of the EMG evoked response, participants will be rewarded for
enhancing the soleus loading response through visual feedback. The conditioning
protocol will be implemented in 8 able-bodied individuals to quantify soleus
EMG, joint kinematics, and propulsion throughout 6 baseline and 24 conditioning
sessions. Findings from this objective will help to advance the knowledge to
target and enhance the excitability of Ib pathways to increasing soleus activity
and propulsive force generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.