* 2218382
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Programmed Stimuli-responsive Mesoscale Polymers Inspired by Worm Blobs as Emergent Super-Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support
fundamental research aimed at developing novel materials composed of stimuli-
responsive filaments. The long-term desired behavior of these materials is
inspired by the behavior of 1-cm-long California blackworms (Lumbriculus
variegatus, Annelida: Clitellata: Lumbriculidae), a fascinating organism that
collectively self-assembles to form functional worm blobs. The three-
dimensional, soft, and tangled blob behaves as a living material that responds
to environmental stresses through dynamic transformations of the blobâ€™s
morphology. The specific goals of this EAGER project are two-fold: to conduct
biophysical experiments and mathematical analysis on living worms, and to
synthesize soft, flexible, filament-like structures in polymer solutions. The
behavior of both biological and synthetic systems will be studied at the level
of individual filaments, pairs of twisted filaments, and collections of
interacting structures. Understanding the properties and movements of these
types of filaments has direct implications for creating novel materials,
flexible robots, and objects that are pre-programmed to perform useful functions
in response to external stimuli such as light, heat, or chemical reagents. The
research team will include students from diverse disciplines and under-
represented groups, thus adding powerful educational impact to the project and
enriching its societal and human impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
project will synthesize worm-inspired pre-programmed filamentous structures in
polymer solutions capable of exhibiting tangling and untangling dynamics in a
triggered fashion. While physically entangled filament-like structures are of
great interest at both the molecular and macroscopic size scales, the
interactions of structures of intermediate size, termed mesoscale, are not well
understood. This project seeks to identify the chemistry, architectures, and
most useful stimuli that enable collective systems of mesoscale polymers (MSPs)
to readily tangle and untangle on command. Rudimentary segmental actuation of
filamentous MSPs has been demonstrated by the research team. However, achieving
intricate knotting and unknotting of collective filamentous structures remains a
challenge. Here, chiral, twisting, and braiding mesoscale polymer structures
will be synthesized using photochemical and fluid-induced methods. These efforts
will be guided by fundamental research on the mechanics of knotting and
unknotting in the living system. Together, these efforts could bring on a leap
in materials synthesis while uncovering new foundational capabilities in the
synthetic design of complex interacting filamentous
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.