* 2218996
* OPP-PRF: Conjugate Experiment to Explore Magnetospheric Phenomena Via Spatial Sonification and Mixed Reality
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Kristina Collins, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* David Porter
* 12/31/2024
* USD 307,548.00

Magnetic field variations on the Earth’s surface can be used to remote sense and
characterize electrical currents and plasma waves in the near-Earth space
environment that can affect technology, for example by inducing currents in
power grids. Asymmetries between the space environment in the polar regions of
the northern and southern hemispheres can profoundly affect these magnetic field
variations. Magnetometers, which measure the strength and direction of magnetic
fields, have been installed in the Arctic and Antarctic at opposite ends of the
Earth’s magnetic field lines. By looking at data from both sets of
magnetometers, researchers can determine whether disturbances in the Earth’s
magnetosphere (a region of near-Earth space dominated by the Earth’s magnetic
field) caused by the Sun impact the Northern hemisphere, the Southern hemisphere
or both, and thus understand the sources of north-south hemisphere asymmetries.
Some events that appear in the magnetometer data may be difficult for computers
to identify, but easy for people to identify if the data is translated into
sound. Researchers will develop a tool for listening to data in a virtual
reality environment, so that data from various instruments can be played back,
making it easier to explore datasets intuitively. This system will be prototyped
using a mixed reality headset for use in both science and education and may be
used to analyze data taken at the same time by sensors on the ground and on
satellites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine one particular type
of disturbance – magnetosheath jets – and its relation to plasma waves by
addressing the question “Do magnetosheath jets routinely drive Pc5/Pc6
geomagnetic pulsations?” via the analysis of magnetometer data from
geomagnetically conjugate (based on the International Geomagnetic Reference
Field, IGRF) Arctic and Antarctic magnetometers. This question will be
approached first through traditional plotting and visual analysis, then by
presenting datastreams as sound sources situated in a virtual audio environment
developed in the Unity game engine and integrated with mixed reality
presentation via the Microsoft Hololens platform. This approach will leverage
human capabilities for spatial discrimination of sounds to identify geomagnetic
pulsations (surface magnetic field variations related to plasma waves in outer
space) related to magnetosheath jet events with potentially large north-south
hemispheric asymmetries, spatially localized wave activity, and irregular
waveforms. The resulting presentation modality will make use of existing
repositories of magnetometer data and may potentially be extended to the
presentation of synchronous datasets from multiple sensing
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.