* 2218835
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Autonomous retrieval of impurity-laden Arctic sea ice and hyperspectral surface properties through innovative robotics
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Julienne Stroeve, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 63,068.00

Snow and glacier ice are often laden with light absorbing particles. By
comparison to land ice, sea ice surface biogeochemistry has been largely
ignored. One reason is due to the relative inaccessibility of impurity-laden sea
ice. The presence of these particles, such as black carbon and dust, lowers the
surface albedo, resulting in increased solar absorption that quickly thins the
impurity-laden ice. Deposition of black carbon onto Arctic sea ice is likely
growing due to the increasing frequency and severity of fires in the Arctic.
Additionally, thawing permafrost may be increasing dust deposition onto nearby
sea ice. The increased absorption of solar radiation by the light absorbing
particles also increases meltwater generation and melt-pond formation. As a
result, physical access to sampling impurities on sea ice is limited due to
unsafe physical ice conditions. This award supports development of an integrated
unmanned aerial system (UAS) capable of taking off from a ship-based platform,
imaging the surface of the sea ice to locate ideal sampling locations, and
autonomously retrieving snow samples that would otherwise be unreachable.
Students are engaged throughout this project via the Colorado Space Grant
Consortium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scale of impurity-laden sea ice is
currently unknown and is not accounted for in global climate models. Sediment-
laden ice and other impurities have a profound impact on sea ice biota and can
delay or inhibit the timing of the spring phytoplankton and ice algae bloom,
thereby impacting the entire marine ecosystem. Given that these localized albedo
responses and feedbacks lead to regional impacts on the Arctic surface energy
balance, climate, and ocean primary productivity, it will have repercussions for
the global climate as well. The impurity-ice albedo feedbacks also thin the sea
ice, limiting physical sampling due to unsafe ice conditions. Therefore, field
sampling of snow and ice surface biogeochemistry will be transformed by
developing a robotic sampling device affixed to an UAS, together with a
hyperspectral remote sensing imager. The rapid collection of useful spectral
information will help document the impact impurity-laden ice has on sea ice
albedo and the robotic arm will increase the spatial and temporal frequency of
ground-based observations from normally inaccessible floes. This new integrated
UAS will be tested in the Pacific Northwest and on sea ice in the Arctic Ocean
and will have broad applications for use in other regions of the cryosphere,
such as heavily crevassed glaciers and ice sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.