* 2218392
* "Track 1" for Planning or Conference Grant, CO2 Sequestration and Storage using Vetiver Grass on Coastal Wetlands
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Ramzi Kafoury, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 02/28/2023
* USD 90,054.00

The goal of this project is to address sustainable built environments through
the development of diverse research teams that will design projects based on
this grand societal challenge. The planning grant team will us Vetiver Grass, to
sequester carbon dioxide (CO2) in Mississippi wetlands to mitigate climate
change, as a focus to guide conversations in the space of engineering
sustainable built environments. The team of PIs includes a highly-qualified
social scientist that will play a large role in the outreach and communication
activities with different researchers and students during the planning grant
activities. This innovative and intentional research will serve as the catalyst
to create knowledge and experiential learning to broaden the participation and
capacity building of underrepresented groups (URGs) in Engineering through the
creation of an effective network of partnerships across the Engineering and
other disciplines among Historically Black Universities and Colleges (HBCUs),
Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) and Predominantly White Institutions (PWI),
and collaborations with High and Middle Schools in the state of
Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jackson State University Team in
collaboration with partnering institutions of learning in the state of
Mississippi aims to broadening the participation of URGs, including women in
engineering by implementing a program that incorporates 1) innovative research
leveraging the unique properties of vetiver grass to sequester CO2 and mitigate
climate change, 2) conference participation, seminars and outreach, 3) create
dialogue to understand the barriers to participation in engineering among URGs
and women, 4) elevate interest in engineering through innovative and engaging
research projects and its impact on cultural and societal change, and 4)
cultivate an environment of collaboration and partnerships to elevate the level
of participation to create sustainable pathways in engineering. The team at
Jackson State University are well positioned to create a network of partnerships
and collaborations with other HBCUs, MSIs, PWIs, and High Schools in
Mississippi. They will create and disseminate knowledge by orchestrating and
implementing a Conference and Seminars to broaden the participation of URGs in
Engineering and building capacity of well-adapted and highly trained innovative
engineers to impact societal change and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.