* 2218190
* BRC-BIO - Expanding the ‘community’ in Community Genetics: Infracommunity genomics of duck symbionts to determine the eco-evolutionary factors underpinning holobiont evolution.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Erika Ebbs, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2025
* USD 519,686.00

How host-parasite interactions are maintained over ecological time and
evolutionary time (i.e. many generations) is a significant biological question,
with real-world applications in medicine, public health, and conservation. It is
often overlooked, though, that a single host can contain a diverse community
(i.e. infracommunity) of parasites.. The proposed research focuses on duck hosts
and seeks to understand their parasite infracommunity structure and
predictability. Ducks transmit several diseases of human importance, including
Avian Influenza Virus (AIV) and Human Cercarial Dermatitis (HCD). As a group,
ducks can be divided based on ecological traits (habitat selection, feeding
behaviors) into two groupings, dabbling and diving ducks. Prior studies have
suggested that dabbling ducks may support a higher rate of transmission of AIV
and HCD. This work will characterize infracommunities of four dabbling and four
diving duck species within the Eastern USA, to determine if infracommunities are
specific to host species and/or ecological group. We will look deeply into the
genetics of recovered parasite populations to determine if host species and/or
ecological group help explain critical public health parameters, such has higher
rates of transmission. Human-induced environmental change has resulted in
significant changes to duck populations, such that some species are thriving in
altered habitats, and others are in decline. There is thus an urgency to
understand the ecology and evolution of duck parasite infracommunities to better
model diseases such as AIV and HCD in a changing world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within an individual host, a community of symbionts
(infracommunity) assembles in response to both ecological and evolutionary
processes. Does the shared host environment act in a concerted way to shape the
structure, assembly, and microevolution of infracommunities? The proposed
research takes a community genetics approach to provide robust insights into the
evolutionary processes within and across species of a shared host environment.
This work will investigate the helminth (parasitic worms) and viral communities
of eight duck species, which can be divided into two distinct ecological groups
(dabbling vs. diving species) based on host-traits. The proposed research will
use long-read Oxford Nanopore Sequencing to 1) characterize infracommunity
structure across hosts and ecological groups and 2) compare population genetic
structure and diversity of recovered core taxa (i.e. &gt;70% prevalence).
Merging community ecology and population genetics will help uncover the
ecological determinants of infracommunity assembly, microevolution and
ultimately provide insights into the evolution of the hologenome. Prior work
with both helminths (Trematoda: Trichobilharzia) and Avian Influenza Virus (AIV)
have shown higher prevalence, genetic diversity, and larger effective sizes are
associated with dabblers, suggesting host-traits shape infracommunity assembly
and within-host microevolutionary patterns. Understanding the predictability and
taxonomic scalability of infracommunity assembly, and identifying what
ecological factors support transmission, could improve our ability to model
zoonotic waterborne diseases associated with
waterfowl.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.