* 2218849
* NSF-BSF: Fluctuation phenomena out of equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2026
* USD 294,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports basic research and
education aimed at characterizing emergence of collective behaviors in large
assemblies of interacting entities. While actions of individual components of a
system may be difficult to chart (due to chaotic classical motion or inherent
quantum uncertainty), the collective behavior of a large number can be easier to
predict, for example the dispersion of sound waves despite random movements of
gas molecules. This is made possible by the tools of statistical physics that
enable systematic averaging over stochastic motions of molecules, to describe
effective field theories for evolution of relevant densities. The extensive
utility of this approach, averaging from uncertain motions of particles to near
deterministic collective behavior, in describing physical systems in
equilibrium, suggests its applicability to broader class of entities. Some
examples of collective behaviors of complex entities, especially in systems out
of equilibrium, are explored in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) The
emerging field of active matter is concerned with collective motions of
entities, such as bacteria, artificial self-powered nanobots, of even flocks of
birds or school of fish, that individually consume and dissipate energy. Despite
stochasticity at the individual level, interactions lead to fascinating
coordinated motions of the collective. We have found that such long-range
coordination can be disrupted by obstacles within the medium, or even disorder
at its edges. The research team will explore the roles of disorder and
boundaries on phases of active matter. Phenomena to be studied include the long-
reach of disruptions caused by impurities, and the wanderings of passive
bystanders caught in the flow of active matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) At a
basic level, a key difference between elements of active matter and atoms in
“equilibrium matter,” is that consumption of energy sets up a natural arrow of
time. In contrast, one cannot distinguish between movies of equilibrium gas
particles running forward or backward. Interestingly, insights gained from
behavior of “active matter” can be explored in other domains of physics, such as
in the context of photons and radiation, for example, heat transfer. The team is
investigating the feasibility of heat engines based on radiation, with
similarity to non-equilibrium forces exerted in active matter through the
ratchet effect arising from asymmetric boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii)
Living systems, the epitome of non-equilibrium, consume energy not only to move,
but to grow and reproduce, presenting other phenomena to explore. For example,
as a bacterial film, or a tumor expands into new space, its composition is
dominated by successful ancestors at the expansion front. This sets up a
connection between the shape of the front, and the competing bacterial variants.
The research team will classify possible shapes of films that may appear during
growth and expansion of competing variants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
activity is closely incorporated in seminars and courses of the PI which through
his published textbooks and web-pages reach a broad scientific community. This
research crosses disciplinary boundaries and has potential impact in diverse
areas from applied mathematics to
immunology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluctuations, whether of quantum, thermal, or non-
equilibrium origin, are cause or signature of various physical phenomena.
Generalizing concepts and mathematical tools characterizing equilibrium
fluctuations to the realm of non-equilibrium phenomena has been a long-running
endeavor. This research aims at quantifying out of equilibrium fluctuations in
diverse contexts. Specific goals include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) The emerging
field of active matter is concerned with collective behaviors of entities that
consume energy to move. The current of energy through the system yields novel
collective phases and fluctuations, not always describable with field theories
of equilibrium matter. The research projects will explore the roles of disorder
and boundaries (static or mobile) on active matter. Phenomena to be explored
include long-ranged correlations and force, and anomalous dynamics of
inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Quantum electrodynamic phenomena in setups
without time reversal symmetry share common features with active matter. In
particular, we shall explore the feasibility of a radiative heat engine that
utilizes a ratchet effect to generate force, and forces that violate Newton’s
third law in setups that break electromagnetic
reciprocity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Growing populations provide yet another
venue for exploration of emergent phenomena. One set of research projects
pertain to classifying morphologies of films arising during growth and expansion
of competing species. Another set deals with dynamics of populations with time-
varying reproduction rate due to mutations or external
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects in this research will be studied
through a combination of numerical and analytical methods. The typical starting
point would be a simplified model of elements following simplified but refine-
able rules. On the analytic front, the goal would be to coarse-grain the model
to the level of a continuum description, and to then apply methods of field
theory to characterize phases and fluctuations. The numerical task would be to
implement the simplified rules and characterize the emergent behaviors, in
contrast or support to the theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing
probability distributions underlying fluctuations in nonequilibrium settings has
been a long-standing quest in statistical physics, with notable recent progress
on several fronts. Yet, puzzles of force in active matter, and fixation in
growing bacterial fronts are but two examples amongst several projects pointing
to complexity of the underlying phenomena, which this research aims to
unravel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and development of human resources are
an essential broader impact: The research activity is closely incorporated in
seminars and courses of the PI which through textbooks and web-pages reach a
broad scientific community. Past students and postdocs of the group are
productive members of academic and research communities. This research crosses
disciplinary boundaries and has potential impact in diverse areas from applied
mathematics to immunology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.