* 2218604
* Low Temperature Embedded Memory Devices for Near-Memory and In-Memory Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Shimeng Yu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 650,000.00

High performance computing in data centers enables numerous commercial and
critical military applications, including genomic sequencing, computational
chemistry, financial risk modeling, weather prediction, complex system design,
multi-domain physical simulations, crypto-analysis, and deep learning, etc.
Historically, improvements in high-performance computing have been driven by new
integrated-circuit technology scaling following Moore’s law. That paradigm is no
longer bringing significant advances in the last decade due to the difficulty in
continuing conventional transistor scaling, particularly with respect to power
reduction. While logic circuitry is typically designed to operate at room
temperature, it is well known that transistor characteristics can improve
significantly at lower temperatures. If cryogenic computing is successful at 77
Kelvin (the liquid-nitrogen temperature), the energy savings for data centers
could potentially overwhelm the cooling power cost, resulting in the reduction
of carbon footprint for society. Most prior research have been focused on low-
temperature logic transistors (including cache memory) and compute-intensive
microprocessor design. On the contrary, low-temperature memory devices and data-
intensive accelerator design that employs near-memory and in-memory compute
paradigms are much less explored. This award will also train the next generation
of students as the workforce for revamping the US domestic semiconductors and
microelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will undertake a
comprehensive characterization of embedded-memory devices fabricated in-house
and test vehicles with collaborative foundry partners. The embedded-memory
devices of interests here include resistive random-access memory (RRAM) and
ferroelectric field-effect transistors (FeFET) that offer multilevel states for
the read-intensive weight memories, and 2-transistor gain-cell-based embedded
dynamic random access memory (eDRAM) for write-intensive buffer memories. The
goal of this project is technology pathfinding to enable &gt;10× energy saving
and &gt;3× performance improvement (in terms of throughput or latency) for data-
intensive workloads (e.g., machine/deep learning) at 77 K when compared to room
temperature. The outcome of this award includes not only a collection of first-
hand experimental data of embedded memories at cryogenic temperatures but also a
benchmark framework for design-technology co-optimization of near-memory and in-
memory compute accelerators at cryogenic temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.