* 2218932
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Predicting the spread of Rapid Ohia Death and detecting resistant varieties of Metrosideros polymorpha
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Gregory Asner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 31,401.00

This project develops mitigation strategies to lessen the ecological, economic,
and social consequences of forest pathogens. Tools that allow forest managers to
accurately monitor disease spread across large spatial scales and identify hosts
resistant to forest pathogens are critical to controlling disease outbreaks.
This project uses remote sensing to develop a monitoring system for Rapid Ohia
Death, a problematic pathogen affecting native forest areas, and a means of
identifying resistant hosts to assist in the design of conservation strategies.
Discovered in 2010, Rapid Ohia Death has led to widespread declines of the
keystone species, Metrosideros polymorpha, though the extent of its effect is
unknown due to the lack of precise monitoring systems. M. polymorpha accounts
for over eighty percent of the biomass across forests, provides habitat to many
endemic plants and animals, is vital for groundwater recharge, and is culturally
and economically significant to local communities. As a result, many
conservation agencies seek to understand and mitigate the threat of Rapid Ohia
Death. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to efforts to conserve
native forests by spatially mapping M. polymorpha, its four genetic varieties,
and Rapid Ohia Death spread across using state-of-the-art remote sensing
technologies. Existing forest species maps are over 20 years old and rely on
remote sensing instruments with coarse spatial and spectral resolution. Not only
does this award update these M. polymorpha spatial maps, but it also improves
upon their accuracy and precision by using high resolution remote sensing data
from an airborne imaging spectrometer. This award goes further than species
mapping by developing novel landscape-scale spatial data of the four described
M. polymorpha subspecies. By fusing maps and data from multispectral satellites,
this project tracks Rapid Ohia Death spread through time. These datasets provide
the foundation for understanding disease spread and host resistance. Combined,
these data products and resulting information will expedite the process of
restoring forests with Rapid Ohia Death-resistant M. polymorpha individuals.
This research focuses on the needs of federal, State, and private organizations,
and resulting data products will be integrated into their mitigation strategies.
This project contributes to forest conservation by developing novel methods and
datasets to understand the spatial ecology of disease spread regarding host
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.