* 2218813
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: RUI: Data Science from Economic Foundations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Emmanouil Pountourakis, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 292,495.00

This project seeks to develop a theory of computational learning adapted to the
particular challenges of economic environments. Such environments often have
strategic participants who are aware that their data will be used by a platform
designer to make future decisions. When participants anticipate these decisions,
they may change their behavior; a consumer may wait for a coupon to purchase,
and a contractor may start their price high to facilitate later negotiations.
Strategic manipulation in turn necessitates new learning algorithms which
interpret the data correctly and use it carefully. The applications of interest
range from e-commerce and managerial decision-making, where firms optimize
operations from data, to the design of the social safety net, where the
selection of recipients impacts the livelihoods of the most economically
vulnerable. The end goal is theoretical conclusions that can guide both
designers of and regulators for such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard
theory of online learning is insufficient in settings with strategic concerns. A
designer now needs to control a subtle feedback loop: the way data will be used
dictates what data will be provided in the first place. It is additionally
important to understand which learning algorithms are stable when the learner
can change their algorithm in response to the data. To tackle these issues, this
project seeks to use and expand on techniques from data privacy in computer
science and the theory of dynamic games in economics. The research will apply
these tools in two primary ways. The first is comparative: understanding many
distinct applications will highlight the structural features that help or hinder
algorithmic learning. These include standard economic models from contract
theory and delegation, pricing, and targeting of social benefits. The second
approach is to apply the insights from the comparative analysis to design new
systems. The goal is to produce new algorithms for well-studied strategic
environments, or understand how these environments can be modified by a
government or firm to enable learning (or mitigate its
harms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.