* 2218195
* Washington State Earth Sciences Summit: Pathways for Undergraduates
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Katrien Kraft, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 84,655.00

The Washington State Undergraduate Earth Sciences Summit will bring together
geoscience faculty and staff from community and technical colleges (CTCs) and
bachelors-granting universities across the state. The goal of the Summit is to
develop a plan where Earth science majors have access to clear pathways that
result in successful transfer within the state. Two-year colleges have the
potential to be a source of increasing diversity of Earth science majors across
the state. However, if the transfer process is unclear or inconsistent or does
not effectively prepare students, there could be a bottleneck resulting in a
decreasing number and diversity of bachelor's degree recipients. PIs anticipate
that the partnerships and structures that will emerge from the Summit will
improve both the number and diversity of successful students in geoscience
programs. This Summit has the potential to develop a model that could be useful
for other geoscience programs, including environmental science, meteorology,
oceanography, agricultural and soil sciences, all programs which are generally
discovered after students enter college. The Summit seeks to identify the unique
barriers that may block transfer pathways in the Washington state system, and
the solutions that reduce or remove these barriers that could be extrapolated
and adapted nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Washington State Undergraduate
Earth Sciences Summit will organize and convene a gathering of undergraduate
faculty and advisors who will seek to improve transfer pathways in Washington
state. The Summit seeks to build a community of Earth science faculty in the
State, and develop relationships between all undergraduate institutions that
will facilitate the sharing of ideas and improvement of programs. Summit goals
include (1) engagement of key stakeholders to foster discussions about Earth
science opportunities through a lens of guided pathways and equity; (2)
identification of threshold concept(s), competencies, and self-regulatory
strategies that lead to successful transfer; (3) definition of successful
transfer and identification of obstacles that impede students' progress in the
Earth sciences; (4) exploration and initiation of future collaborations across
colleges and institutions, and (5) identification of next steps for improvement
of transfer processes at both the institutional level, between institutions, and
in Washington state overall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.