* 2218553
* Data, Science, and Environmental Justice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Christopher Sellers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 465,888.00

Multiple environmental hazards converging in low income and minority communities
remain among this nation’s most significant and recalcitrant environmental
problems. First highlighted by the Environmental Justice movement in the 1980s
and 90s then elaborated as an emerging concept in Science and Technology Studies
(STS) and other scientific fields and through community-based civic science, the
problem of cumulative exposure has posed special challenges to the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the premier environmental regulator in the United
States. This project will study how EPA’s science-based and data-based pollution
control has contended with and adapted to the growing knowledge of cumulative
exposures in Environmental Justice communities. It aims to boost the nation’s
collective capacity to achieve greater environmental justice both
intellectually, by looking for science-related EPA practices that may require
reexamination and reform, and by broadening public awareness. Offering
substantial training in graduate and post-graduate education as well as for
younger members of two collaborating Environmental Justice groups, its many
products of analysis and outreach include three articles, a white paper, a book
written for public as well as academic audiences, public databases, workshops,
and webinars for EPA staff as well as other policymakers, and new data tools and
other capacity-building for Environmental Justice groups and communities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This three-year investigation of the EPA’s forty-year
track record of handling the cumulative environmental risks faced by low income
and minority communities will study agency contentions with cumulative exposure
in three realms: scientific approaches, including civic science; the definition
and collection of data; and bureaucratic uses of this science and data in
decision making associated with Environmental Justice communities. Drawing on
interviews, publications, and archives as well as documents obtained through the
Freedom of Information Act, it will make scholarly contributions to newer STS
fields such as critical data studies, undone science/data, and civic science,
and more broadly, to understanding of the data-dependence of the federal
bureaucracy and the limits to the impact of social movements on
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.