* 2218305
* Collaborative Research: Towards a new framework for interpreting mantle deformation: Integrating theory, experiments, and observations spanning seismic to convective timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Lars Hansen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2027
* USD 368,201.00

The Earth’s mantle, which sits directly below the crust, is predominantly made
of solid rock; yet the solid mantle can flow when pushed or pulled. The rate of
this flow depends on the properties of the rock, such as its temperature, and on
the nature of the contacts between the tiny mineral crystals that comprise the
rock. The mantle can be pushed to flow by numerous different phenomena, such as:
passing seismic waves after an earthquake; melting of continental ice sheets and
glaciers; the annual cycle of groundwater recharge and extraction; and the
draining of large lakes. This study uses observations of these phenomena to
measure the rock properties and the interactions between mineral crystals in the
mantle beneath three locations: the western United States, Alaska, and Iceland.
Meanwhile, laboratory experiments are probing how samples of rock deform under
controlled conditions. Finally, new computer models are synthesizing the lab and
field observations to understand the underlying physical laws that explain the
full suite of data. The results of this study have a bearing on topics that
range from predicting how sea level will rise due to melting ice sheets to
understanding tidal deformation on Jupiter’s moons. Outreach and training are
key elements of the project. Four graduate students and six undergraduate
students are being educated over the duration of the project. Workshops will
bring together researchers from diverse scientific disciplines to learn and
debate about the scientific outcomes and the computer tools developed as part of
this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is emerging recognition that the
variables describing Earth’s mechanical response to stress, elastic moduli,
attenuation, and viscosity, are all frequency dependent. While the end-member
elastic and steady-state behaviors are relatively well understood, there remain
many fundamental questions regarding the intermediate transient regime. This
study is an integrative research and outreach program that combines
observational, laboratory, and modeling efforts to measure Earth’s full-spectrum
rheological response and illuminate the underlying microphysical processes.
Observational work is characterizing frequency dependent upper-mantle
dissipation in three locations (western U.S., Iceland, and Alaska) using seismic
and geodetic observations of different frequencies but complementary spatial
sampling. Experimental work is investigating how dislocations affect transient
creep under different temperature and stress conditions and with variable
quantities of melt and secondary solid phases. Modeling work is developing new
constitutive laws for transient creep and incorporating more sophisticated
rheologies in the viscoelastic deformation code. This study is addressing
questions about: (1) the broadband mechanical response of the solid Earth; (2)
the microphysical processes that control viscoelasticity; and (3) the
implications for inferences of steady-state viscosity from geodetic observations
and of thermodynamic state from seismic tomography. Broader impacts include
training of graduate and undergraduate students, a synthesis workshop that
convenes 120 researchers to outline recent advances in understanding transient
rheology and to shape the topics and collaborations that will dictate the next
decade of inquiry, and development of interactive Jupyter notebooks that
introduce open-source data-science tools in the context of seismic attenuation
and transient rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.