* 2218220
* Visual Control of Steering, Obstacle Avoidance, and Path Following
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Brett Fajen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2025
* USD 418,127.00

The ability to guide oneâ€™s movement through the world on the basis of vision
plays an essential role in many daily activities, from routine behaviors such as
walking through crowded spaces to skilled tasks such as steering a tractor-
trailer along a mountain road. Oftentimes, humans and other animals must move at
high speeds through densely cluttered environments, avoiding obstacles,
squeezing through narrow openings, and following winding paths to reach their
goals. To perform such tasks safely and efficiently, it is not enough to focus
entirely on the most nearby objects. Skillful navigation also relies on the
ability to look farther ahead and anticipate the need to reach goals that lie
beyond the immediate future. This project will investigate how people visually
guide their movement to satisfy goals over multiple time horizons. It is novel
in its focus on tasks that push the limits of human visual-motor performance to
the extreme and that could inform the development of semiautonomous driver- and
pilot-assist technologies. The research will benefit society by revealing new
visual control strategies that could be adapted for use on robots to produce
more skillful and human-like behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
adapt behavior in anticipation of future goals is often assumed to reflect
elaborate cognitive processes such as path planning that rely on internal
models. However, there are very few empirical studies of anticipatory steering
behavior and the possibility that such behavior could be captured without
invoking internal models has not yet been seriously considered. This project
combines experiments on steering and gaze behavior in humans with mathematical
modeling to explore how humans guide their movements to satisfy both immediate
and future constraints on their trajectory. Using a custom-designed, virtual
reality drone piloting simulator, the researchers will study the steering and
gaze strategies that humans use to navigate through a series of waypoints and
will conduct experiments to reveal how and in what conditions humans adapt their
movements in anticipation of future goals. They will also use modeling and
simulation to determine whether anticipatory steering behavior can emerge
without model-based path planning. Lastly, a suite of research tools for
conducting experiments in virtual reality and for processing, analyzing, and
visualizing gaze data will be developed and made available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.