* 2218845
* CCF: SHF: Small: Self-Adaptive Interference-Avoiding Wireless Receiver Hardware through Real-Time Learning-Based Automatic Optimization of Power-Efficient Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Francesco Restuccia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,912.00

The sheer number of devices in the Internet of Things (IoT) is creating an
extremely crowded and dynamic spectrum environment. As such, continuous and
seamless adaptation of wireless-communication parameters will become essential
in the next few years. On the other hand, typical radio-frequency (RF)
integrated circuits are statically optimized for a fixed set of parameters and
communication standards, which leaves limited room for real-time optimization at
the intersection of hardware and software. Indeed, many of today’s devices are
tailored for worst-case scenarios associated with a particular communication
standard, which leads to limited performance and excessive power consumption.
Conversely, real-time optimization allows to quickly reconfigure circuits for
energy-efficient operation while achieving system-level performance goals. This
challenge will be addressed by devising Radio Real-Time Machine Learning
(RadioRTML), a platform that will demonstrate the feasibility of automatic RF
integrated-circuit optimization through machine learning (ML) techniques
directly implemented with reconfigurable hardware. This research will transform
how the optimization of radio frequency systems is done today by demonstrating
that real-time ML-based adaptation of RF parameters is able to achieve
significant performance improvements. The outcomes will have long-lasting
benefits for the design and optimization of low-power RF circuits for adaptive
energy-efficient communication. Furthermore, the project will provide unique
training for graduate and undergraduate students at the crossroads of machine
learning and integrated circuit design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automatic machine-
learning-based optimization of RF integrated circuits will be investigated
through digital control of analog RF front-end circuits. Novel deep
reinforcement-learning (DRL) algorithms will be developed to deliver
unprecedented flexibility while improving energy efficiency and minimizing
interference impacts. A key challenge in the application of DRL is to design a
policy network expressive enough to achieve the required performance, yet
implementable in a resource-constrained embedded IoT platform. For this reason,
new techniques for effective and efficient policy network design will be
created. Since DRL is known to exhibit slow convergence times and high energy
consumption, this research will include the design of novel transfer-learning
techniques to speed up DRL convergence, and it will leverage edge-computing
techniques to significantly reduce the energy consumption of the platform. At
the RF circuit level, customized topologies and design techniques will be
created to construct a flexible receiver front-end. RadioRTML will be prototyped
on a System-on-Chip (SoC)-based software-defined radio (SDR) connected to a
custom-designed printed circuit board for the RF front-end chip. To thoroughly
train and test the RadioRTML algorithms, large-scale data collection will be
performed utilizing Arena (a 64-antenna 24-SDR system located at Northeastern
University), Colosseum (the world’s largest network emulator), and the NSF
POWDER testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.