* 2218949
* OPP-PRF: Exploring the Role of a Humpback Whale Cultural Foraging Innovation within the Antarctic Ecosystem in the LTER Study Region
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Allen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2024
* USD 232,842.00

Foraging innovations often develop in response to changes in the surrounding
feeding conditions, such as which prey species are available. In recent years,
bubble-net feeding has emerged as a new foraging innovation in the humpback
whales that feed in the area of the Western Antarctic Peninsula. Such strategies
can spread through a population by social learning, when individuals learn from
those they spend time with. This has led to cultural differences in how distinct
populations feed. This project will explore what is driving the spread of this
strategy throughout this population. The findings will tell us how humpback
whales may be responding to the shifts in the Antarctic ecosystem occurring due
to climate change. Additionally, this project will use humpback whales to
explore key scientific questions around culture in animal species, a topic that
is becoming increasingly important to conservation efforts. Outreach and
education materials will be developed to better engage the public with this
unique Antarctic research and its important conservation
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses long term multi-platform
data from the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) study on the western
Antarctic Peninsula with data from animal borne tags, behavioral observations,
biopsies, photo-identification, and drone footage to model how bubble-netting
has emerged and spread in humpback whales. The strategy will be modelled
relative to both demographic and environmental variables. It is hypothesized
that the behavior is a socially learned response to environmental changes in
their Antarctic foraging conditions. Ultimately the results will broaden our
understanding of how species may use social learning and culture to adjust to
the impacts of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.