* 2218455
* Market Based Climate Stress Tests
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Robert Engle, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 295,094.00

A changing climate will also create changes in the risks and opportunities faced
by investors. If banks are exposed to the risks of climate change, then these
risks could potentially affect how financial markets function. This project will
evaluate the exposure of banks and other financial institutions to climate
change risks. After these methods are carefully tested for accuracy and
reliability, the results will be updated weekly and posted freely on the
internet for regulators, investors and policy makers to see. These estimates
will help regulators assess financial system resilience in the event of climate
related shocks. This project takes a completely new approach to stress testing
for climate change. It focusses on prices of assets such as bank loans, rather
than actual damages. Such bank stress tests can show exposure to climate change
from damages that will not occur for more than twenty years but which could
bankrupt a bank over a short period of time since asset prices can fall today in
response to bad news about the distant future. These exposure measures are
essentially a way to see how resilient banks are to climate related risks by
examining the correlation between its stock return and climate risk factors. In
fact, this observation leads to the measurement of the “greenness” of any
investment by looking at the correlation between its return and a suite of
climate risk factors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will apply state of
the art statistical procedures to measure the exposure of financial institutions
to climate risks. The procedure first formulates a portfolio of investment
assets that reflects the risks of climate change. If climate change becomes more
severe, this portfolio will fall in value. Several candidates for this portfolio
are based on transition risks or physical risks or other versions of climate
risk. To assess the exposure of banks, the change in a bank’s stock market
valuation is regressed on the climate risk portfolios to see how important they
are in determining the change in value of the bank. This regression allows the
coefficients to change following the Dynamic Conditional Beta (DCB) framework as
in Engle (2016). To be certain that this accurately measures the exposure, the
project will a) develop the econometrics to estimate the confidence intervals in
the dynamic conditional beta model, b) develop additional climate risk measures
using climate efficient factor mimicking portfolios of publicly available funds
marketed as sustainable, c) determine which portfolio is the best measure of
transition risk, d) consider other risk factors for financial institutions, e)
incorporate granular supervisory data to determine the extent to which market
measures reflect actual bank holdings, f) compare the exposure rankings from the
VRI model and from supervisory measures which mostly reflect NGFS methodology. A
key feature of this research involves the use of confidential supervisory data
from central banks in different parts of the world. Together these unique data
sources will help to corroborate and improve the estimates from the
econometrics. Comparison of the findings with those from supervisors can be
carried out simply by rank correlations. However more interesting comparisons
may involve understanding where there are differences. For example, using one
set of exposures to predict another and including characteristics data will show
where the differences are most important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.