* 2218139
* Travel: Eleven Societies Travel Grants for Students, Independent Scholars, and Recent PhDs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* John Gutierrez, History of Science Society
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2027
* USD 126,088.00

This grant supports the attendance and participation of graduate students,
early-career scientists, and independent scholars at thirty-eight Science and
Technology Studies (STS) conferences organized by eleven STS societies over a
four-year period. It does so by removing the financial barriers to entry that
frequently prevent junior STS scholars from attending professional conferences.
Grant beneficiaries will become better integrated in the international and
interdisciplinary STS community by gaining access to new scientific networks,
receiving feedback designed to facilitate publication, and disseminating their
research findings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This grant will also support the
cultivation of a more diverse and inclusive STS community. To facilitate this,
all participating societies will collect demographic data about applicants and
travel grant recipients. They will also collect demographic data on all
conference attendees to better assess the role this grant will play in
increasing diversity across the eleven societies. These findings will be of
interest to members of the eleven societies, educators, university
administrators, policymakers, and the public. They will be made available to
these audiences through broadly circulated official reports and public-facing
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.