* 2218770
* Toward Analyses of Mathematics Classroom Discourse at Scale Using Tools from Applied Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jessica Bishop, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2025
* USD 351,072.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using analytic tools to
better understand how classroom discourse affects the teaching and learning of
mathematics. The project will focus on two aspects of classroom discourse: how
teachers respond to student thinking, and how teachers and students talk about
mathematical authority. The project will use quantitative methods to analyze
video data from middle-grades mathematics classrooms. Results will advance
knowledge and understanding how teachers and students use discourse in
mathematics classrooms to create community and build student understanding in
mathematics. Additionally, it will investigate how quantitative tools may help
researchers systematically analyze classroom discourse with potential to grow to
larger-scale research projects. Consistent with the Mid-Career Advancement
Program's intent, this project enables the investigator and collaborative
partners to substantively advance their research programs and career
trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use the
quantitative tools of statistical discourse analysis and social network analysis
to analyze mathematics classroom discourse. Three research aims guide this work.
First is to expand the methodological tools available to study mathematics
classroom discourse and determine the efficacy, efficiency, and scalability of
those tools. Second is to conduct temporal analyses of mathematics classroom
discourse at multiple timescales using tools from statistical discourse analysis
to understand variability in the discursive constructs of responsiveness to
student thinking and mathematical authority. Third, and finally, is to explore
the viability of social network analysis to represent social and intellectual
relationships as an indicator of community in a given classroom via mathematics
classroom discourse. The primary data is video recordings and transcripts from
an extant data set comprised of 145 mathematics lessons across 11 middle-grades
classrooms. A large part of the proposed project will be identifying and
applying appropriate methodological tools from statistics and social network
analysis to address the research aims. Proposed analytic methods include
incorporating sequential analyses and time series methods into log linear
models, using chi-square values to compare the relative frequency of certain
combinations of coding categories across varying time intervals, computational
linguistics, developing network models of classroom community using social
network analysis, and exploring properties of classroom networks (e.g., density,
node centrality, etc.) and how networks and their properties change over time.
Research findings will refine and expand analytic tools used to study classroom
discourse and provide knowledge about the discursive constructs that matter for
learning and their variability within classrooms. The project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:
BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigatorsâ€™ capacity to carry out
high-quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.