* 2218499
* SBIR Phase II:  Ecosystem Design Tool
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Daniel Fleischer, Hyphae Design Lab
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 999,592.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to enable communities impacted by air pollution and extreme
heat to design and implement solutions to these problems in a fast and cost-
effective way. Air pollution increases the risk of cancer, stroke, heart-
disease, and respiratory infections, and may play a role in Alzheimerâ€™s and
diabetes, resulting in human suffering and trillions of dollars of health care
costs globally each year. Extreme heat is a growing source of additional health-
care concerns and costs. These costs are shouldered by insurance companies,
governments, businesses, and citizens. Air pollution can be reduced by carefully
placed trees. These trees also reduce extreme heat by shading and evaporation of
water. There is potential for improving human health via targeted engineering of
tree placements. This project will develop analysis and design tools to help
with such tree plantings to generate the maximum possible health and financial
benefits, at the lowest cost and with the shortest timelines. Local businesses
can use this tool to make sure that they get paid fairly for reducing health
care cost burdens of health insurance companies, governments, and pollution
producers, while making communities and the environment more
resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While existing literature indicates that trees
may provide an effective air pollution and heat-island mitigation strategy.
Stakeholders seeking to implement such strategies need tools to ensure that the
plantings are as effective as possible. Existing planning tools are not of
sufficient resolution or site specific, and often do not employ evidence-based
design strategies. This project will perform high resolution vegetation analysis
on a wide variety of neighborhoods. This data will be used to train a set of
algorithms to infer high resolution vegetation properties from widely available,
low-cost data streams. These inferred vegetation metrics will be integrated with
a geospatial ecosystem design automation pipeline to create a software tool. The
software tool will provide environmental justice communities, ecosystem
designers, health insurance companies, governments, and local businesses with
the ability to implement cost-effective ecosystem interventions with
quantifiable air quality and heat island benefits. These benefits can be used to
calculate financial health benefits. Because the benefits quantification will be
based on ongoing validation and monitoring projects, the tool can be used to
leverage private financing for improving public health and improving the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.