* 2218351
* Conference: Toward a Holistic Developmental Science: Catalyzing Transdisciplinary Multi-Sector Collaborations to Understand and Support Human Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Nancy Hill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 39,385.00

Research to understand the complexities of human development occurs in a diverse
array of fields. Whereas specialization within a field is essential to address
research questions at a deep level, this has resulted in fragmented silos of
knowledge. However, innovations are catalyzed when research intentionally
integrates multiple disciplines and is conceptualized with policymakers,
practitioners, and the community (e.g., transdisciplinary, multisector
research). Despite its importance, transdisciplinary, multisector research is
difficult to achieve. This project provides funding to support the attendance of
early career and underrepresented scholars at a conference specifically focused
on catalyzing innovative, transdisciplinary, multisector research and a 6-month
follow up meeting at a preconference before the Society for Research in Child
Development (SRCD) Biennial Meeting. This conference upends the traditional
conference model by providing opportunities to pursue training, mentorship, and
structured space to foster new collaborations across attendeesâ€™ disciplinary
training and is integrative among researchers, community agencies, and
practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference emphasizes the process of
building and sustaining multidisciplinary and multisector collaborations. To
achieve this, keynote speakers and plenary sessions will focus on how to develop
transdisciplinary, multisector teams and projects. The main impetus of the
conference emerges from the Working Roundtables, whereby attendees are pre-
matched based on submissions into transdisciplinary and multisector teams and
provided dedicated time and mentorship to develop new innovative
transdisciplinary, multisector research ideas. Supporting attendance at this
conference will encourage and enable a new generation of transdisciplinary,
multisector research focused on understanding and supporting human development
in its full and rich complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.