* 2218077
* A Neural Network-based Optimal Control Framework for Colloidal Self-Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xun Tang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 07/31/2025
* USD 262,535.00

Controlling colloidal self-assembly for ordered structures is a promising route
to novel physicochemical properties, which stands to benefit applications in
photonics, biomaterials, pharmaceutics, energy harvest, and advanced
communication. However, high dimensionality and complex dynamics are barriers to
rapid production of ordered structures. To overcome these barriers, accurate and
generalizable state representation and a reliable and computationally efficient
approach to describe and predict the system dynamics are needed. This project
proposes a novel neural network-based optimal control framework, drawing on
multidisciplinary expertise from colloidal systems, machine learning, and
optimal control theory. The success of the work will: 1) contribute to a
potentially automatable optimal control framework for rapid production of user-
defined assembly structures, 2) benefit studies on related atomic and molecular
self-assembly systems, such as crystallization for drug production and nuclear
waste handling, as well as protein self-assembly; and 3) promote
interdisciplinary research on combining advanced machine learning techniques and
control theory to tackle complex problems that are challenging to address with
traditional domain approaches. Throughout this project, the PI will educate and
mentor students from middle school to the masterâ€™s level on molecular self-
assembly, advanced control theory and machine learning topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on an electric field-mediated colloidal self-
assembly process, the researcher proposes a neural network-optimal control
integrated approach, to tackle the long-standing challenges associated with
controlling a stochastic and high dimensional small particle self-assembly
process. A convolutional neural network will be used to represent and classify
the system state, avoiding the extensive trial-and-error exploration and
validation, and the limited transferability associated with order parameters.
The project will also deploy a stochastic neural network, to be trained with
time series of the assembly process, to capture and predict the system dynamics.
Combining the convolutional and stochastic neural network with reinforcement
learning, an optimal control policy will then be computed to guide the
manipulation of the voltage level of the external electric field, to rapidly
drive the assembly to the desired structure. The proposed work presents an
innovative solution to state representation and classification, and an efficient
system dynamics simulation of the stochastic, high dimensional colloidal system.
Due to the data-driven nature of machine learning models, the proposed framework
is transferable to systems with different internal interactions due to different
driving forces and/or different particle sizes and
shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.