* 2218517
* Resolving Contentions for Complex Control Systems with Shared Resources using Robust Model Predictive Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ningshi Yao, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2025
* USD 329,694.00

With the large scale of systems and data in modern industries and smart cities,
shared resources, such as cloud computing, communication network, and power
grid, are widely used to reduce system cost and increase maintainability. When
multiple systems need access to shared resources at the same time and the total
demands exceed the total supply, a contention occurs. Contentions can cause loss
of information, time delay or even life-threatening safety issues. Therefore,
how to schedule systems to resolve contentions is a generic problem for the
control of complex systems that are coupled or connected through shared
resources. To help address this problem, this project will develop
transformative control techniques to co-design scheduling and control strategies
for resource constrained control systems. The project combines insightful
engineering with sophisticated mathematics, towards the goal of producing
practically useful approaches that have rigorous performance. Once validated and
transitioned to actual applications, the strategies developed by this project
will have the potential to reduce congestion and pollution from traffic and
transportation systems and benefit both human society and natural environment.
Through a series of strongly integrated research, educational, and outreach
activities, the project will also help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three main
questions to advance the control theory regarding to connected systems with
shared resources: how to develop a general method which can co-design the
scheduling and control in a unified theoretical framework; how to compute a co-
design solution efficiently online for real-time systems; and how to address
real-world uncertainties in the co-design problem. To answer these questions,
this project will develop a robust contention-resolving model predictive control
(or MPC) method as the unified theoretical framework. Analytical timing models
will be established in the context of parallel machines, flow shop, and job shop
scheduling to model different types of real-time control systems with shared
resources. Then based on the timing models, an event-triggered MPC will be
designed to achieve fast enough computation in real-time. To compensate
uncertainties, the project will also develop a robust design based on forward
invariant set for contention-resolving MPC to guarantee performance under system
disturbances and perturbed event timing. The proposed approaches will be
validated through realistic simulation software packages and field experiments
to test the designs under realistic uncertainties and variations. The overall
framework will be general for various applications including higher dimensional
systems that are of compelling ongoing interest in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.