* 2218809
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Preparing for Future Pandemics: Subway Crowd Management to Minimize Airborne Transmission of Respiratory Viruses (Way-CARE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Jeffrey Shaman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,872,000.00

This Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) project focuses on strengthening
the preparedness and resilience of transit communities facing public health
disasters through the development of a sociotechnical system for crowd
management. Following the substantial drop in public transportation ridership
across the globe during the pandemic, how can subway systems respond to and
recover from a future pandemic? Mass transit, especially subways, are essential
to the economic viability and environmental sustainability of cities. This
research will elevate U.S. leadership and economic competitiveness in recovery
from pandemics, and will improve the social, economic, and environmental well-
being of those who live, work, and travel within cities. The goal of this study
is to equip public transit communities (i.e., agencies, workers, and riders)
with a sociotechnical system, “Way-CARE" (Subway Crowd Management to Minimize
Airborne Transmission of REspiratory Viruses) that: 1) enables transit riders to
make informed decisions and adapt travel behavior accordingly; and 2) provides
transit agencies engaged in planning and policymaking with recommendations for
mitigating virus transmission risks to riders and workers. People in low-income
communities are among the most impacted and are in a disadvantaged position due
to reduced accessibility to perceived safer travel modes. As such, the broader
impacts of this study include helping identify needs, target resources, and
develop more effective approaches to better ensure health and wellness,
accessibility and inclusivity, and economic vitality for residents of low-income
communities. The accompanying educational plan aims to broaden participation in
engineering of underrepresented groups via outreach programs, including programs
for Harlem public school teachers and K-12 students, as well as annual student
data science challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;True health risks inside subway
systems and future commuting patterns are unknown after the pandemic. The
technological propeller of the project is the integration of sensing, crowd and
airflow modeling, and public health knowledge on a microscale applied to subway
crowd management. Coupled airborne dispersion and epidemiological models will be
developed that account for microscale processes (transport of droplets and
aerosols) affecting respiratory virus transmission opportunities. The social
catalyst of the award is the integration of behavioral science evidence to
inform travel choices and policy making. The Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA) and two local rider communities (Harlem and Columbia) will be
engaged in the development and assessment of the sociotechnical dimensions of
the project. To assure project success, a 2-phase evaluation plan is presented
to pilot the system and the technologies. Transferability and scalability will
be investigated with input from the engaged
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.