* 2218830
* I-Corps:  Expanding Additive Manufacturing Utilization through Post Processing for Improved Mechanical Properties
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Nathan Crane, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a post-processing method to dramatically improve properties,
including a flexible geometry and inexpensive low-volume production. Additive
manufacturing opens revolutionary opportunities for fabricating complex
geometries and lowering the cost of low-volume production. However, the impact
has been restrained by the low toughness/ductility of AM polymer parts. This
project is expected to substantially expand the impact of the existing AM
manufacturing base for polymers. The geometric flexibility of low volume AM will
enable new customized products. This can allow new opportunities such as
increased customization of medical device components to individual patients. It
will also be especially value in lowering the costs of maintaining out-of-
production equipment and reduce supply chain challenges in distant
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a method to post-process parts from existing commercial processes to achieve
dramatic property enhancements. The post-processing polymer powder bed fusion
components increase ductility, isotropy, and toughness. The technology is
applicable to all commercial products or polymer powder bed fusion and is
expected to apply to a wide range of polymer materials. The system has been
demonstrated in the lab to achieve significant property improvements. This
project would identify the potential customers for this capability and quantify
the value that it would add for customers. Additionally, the project will
explore the different business models available for commercializing the
technology to assess the most feasible commercialization paths for transitioning
this ability from the lab to production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.