* 2218226
* CRII: CHS: RUI: Computational models of humans for studying and improving Human-AI interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Christopher Dancy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2023
* USD 42,756.00

Understanding the interactions between humans and systems utilizing artificial
intelligence (AI) requires an understanding of how human physiological changes
impact memory and other mental processes. To realize the beneficial societal
outcomes on, for example, interactions between humans and intelligent robots, it
is important to develop simulations to test a variety of situations where memory
under arousal states will function. In this project, the investigator
articulates a research plan to use a simulation of the human mind and body to
understand effects of physiological arousal on human memory and cognition and
the consequences for human interaction with AI agents. Human-subject studies
will be used to introduce stimuli to induce human arousal by using selected
stressors and collect physiological and behavioral data during tasks that
require cooperation between humans and AI agents. Societal benefits include an
architecture to simulate a variety of human-AI interactions under various levels
of arousal and stress. This architecture can be used to explore new ways to co-
team humans with AI agents and set expectations for positive and/or negative
behaviors that might occur in such collaborations. Undergraduate students at
Bucknell University will be heavily involved as research assistants on this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator plans to develop simulations and
elicit arousal states in human operators performing collaborative tasks with
agents enabled by artificial intelligence (AI) to understand human-AI
interaction. The goal is to better understand, through simulation, how
algorithms for intelligent agents can be advanced and expanded to respond to
human variations in behavior and memory processes under different levels of
arousal, including levels that mimic stress. The objectives include developing
simulations to examine contexts and tasks; understanding how environmental
stimuli affect interactions between humans and intelligent agents; and
determining how to advance algorithms to optimize human-AI cooperation and avoid
maladaptive interactions. The investigator has already extended Adaptive Control
of Thought-Rational (ACT-R) architecture to account for physiological influences
on declarative and procedural memory. Physio-cognitive agents will be developed
based on Bayesian and reinforcement learning to acquire knowledge of their
environment. Human-AI task simulations will be implemented in a virtual
environment to understand how arousal mediates intelligent behavior and how
interaction with external environments that include AI agents may change
performance, including through maladaptive behavior. The project seeks to
discover computationally-enabled processes and contexts to amplify human
capabilities. The resulting revised models and open-source code will be made
available to the public for further explorations in human-AI interaction. The
university is an undergraduate institution allowing significant participation of
undergraduates in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.