* 2218048
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genealogic and genetic history in an island population
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Theodore Schurr, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 32,500.00

Stories of population history are passed down in both oral and written form and
are also encoded in the genetic material passed down from generation to
generation. This doctoral dissertation research project considers how population
genetics and oral histories can be used together to elucidate the ancestry and
migration history of an Indigenous community, while simultaneously exploring how
the communityâ€™s own understanding of the past is preserved across generations.
This project examines the prehistory of an island population through an analysis
of their genetic diversity and migration history as well as an assessment of the
inter-generational stories about their ancestry. The project builds on previous
research into the prehistory of this area and involves community members in
research planning, the recording of traditional stories, and the evaluation of
the genetic data coming from the study. In addition, a local community member is
trained in genetics to help foster a future generation of Indigenous
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines how Indigenous
oral histories can guide genetic research through the formulation of research
questions and the interpretation of genetic data. Undertaken with a descendant
community consisting of individuals with genetic and cultural ancestry from the
same island, information obtained from genomic sequencing is used to search for
genetic variants in the descendant community. Any genetic variants found
specifically in that community are then screened against populations from other
island groups as well as Indigenous groups from other global regions to
determine their potential source. The selection of comparative populations from
other regions is, in part, guided by population oral histories and the current
interpretation of those histories by members of the descendant community. The
questions being explored through DNA evidence are undertaken at the direction of
the descendant community, and all results from the genomic analysis are shared
with community members as they become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.