* 2218662
* Understanding Gender Gaps in Academic Science through the Lens of Topic Fit: An Interdisciplinary Investigation Using a Big Data Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Rong Su, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 288,779.00

The participation of women in science has steadily increased since the 1960s.
However, gender disparities continue to exist in academic science around the
world, both in the quantity and in the impact of research output. In the decade
after 2000, male researchers, on average, published 35% more papers and received
34% more citations than female researchers. These gender gaps are even wider in
the United States than the global average. Understanding causes of persistent
gender gaps in research is of grave significance for improving gender equality
in academic institutions. The current project is an interdisciplinary effort to
address this question and advance knowledge across multiple fields, including
psychology, sociology, organizational behavior, human resource management, and
scientometrics. It will propose a novel theory that integrates existing
perspectives and test it using a big data
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project investigates topic fit
(i.e., the degree of subject topic similarity or congruence between any new
collaboration and a researcherâ€™s existing work) as a key mechanism for
understanding gender gaps in research productivity and impact. Drawing upon
Social Role Theory, it is theorized that gender role norms and expectations may
lead female and male scholars to have different collaboration patterns with
junior researchers and lower levels of topic fit for women, which, in turn,
would explain a productivity penalty for women. The investigators are analyzing
publication records of over 90 million researchers around the world, computing
topic fit indices using novel methods, and testing these indices as a critical
mechanism for explaining gender gaps using both path analysis at the individual
researcher level and multilevel modeling to account for the nested structure of
the data. Importantly, the project also examines differences across academic
disciplines and analyzes trends over time. Findings can inform institutional
policies and practices for advancing gender equality in academic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.