* 2218738
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Estimating the Emergence of the Anthropogenic Warming Signal in Snow Water Resource Metrics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Julie Vano, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 128,126.00

In mountainous regions, winter precipitation typically accumulates as snow that
melts in the spring and summer providing water supply for people, ecosystems,
and agriculture. As the climate warms and snowmelt occurs earlier, this natural
water storage is diminished. Since water management systems are often designed
based on historically observed variability, change beyond the range of natural
variability can result in system stress or failure. The characterization of when
and at what global warming level significant change occurs in hydrologic
conditions of headwater basins is an under-explored basic research question that
is also vital to water resource management and policy making. By working closely
with networks of communities, researchers, and decision-makers, the project will
ensure that research outcomes best inform relevant climate change adaptation and
policy decisions. The project will support career development for one postdoc
and rural campus undergraduate students, communicate the climate sensitivity of
snow water resources to decision-makers, and promote use-focused research that
reaches broad audiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Natural climate variability and
model uncertainties impede the ability to inform when climate change signals
emerge from a reference climate state. Working in the headwaters of the Upper
Colorado River Basin, this project will use a novel model framework to estimate
the emergence and magnitude of the anthropogenic warming signal in snow water
resources metrics, work with water resource decision-makers to identify relevant
metrics and time periods to support adaptation decisions, and refine mechanisms
to detect change and attribute it to warming. The project framework includes a
large ensemble with a new climate model, state-of-the-art ensemble member
selection and dynamical downscaling, an innovative process-based modular system
for hydrological modeling, and the separation of hydrologic outcomes into
dynamic and thermodynamic drivers using statistical learning. The uncertainty
will be propagated through a model chain to assess its impact on the
predictability of future snow water resources and the emergence of climate
change signals. The project will strengthen the science that underpins
hydroclimatic research while making results more actionable and better suited
for risk assessments than if a single deterministic estimate of change was
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.