* 2218402
* EAGER: Constraining the Expected Brittle-ice Behavior for the Hercules Dome Ice-core Site.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* John Fegyveresi, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 01/31/2024
* USD 90,743.00

Ice cores are a vital source of information about past climate. Research that
utilizes ice cores benefits from an undamaged ice-core record. There is often a
zone within ice sheets where the ice is brittle upon extraction in a core.
Brittle-ice behavior occurs when the rapid decompression of the core as it is
being extracted from the ice-sheet results in extensive fracturing. Ice from
this zone can compromise the undamaged record. This project seeks to improve our
understanding of the mechanisms involved in brittle-ice behavior and onset, with
the goal of helping to guide field-site operations, core handling preparation,
and planned laboratory measurement techniques for future ice-coring projects,
including the upcoming work at Hercules Dome. This project requires no field
work, as it will use existing observations and existing ice cores to gain an
understanding of brittle ice. This is a high-risk and timely proposal that is
early-concept and exploratory in nature, making it appropriate for the EAGER
solicitation. The project will support an early-career researcher and provide
training for a master’s student who is a woman. And, finally, the project will
develop educational and outreach materials for graduate and undergraduate
courses and elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine
and catalog brittle ice from several existing ice-core samples to specifically
assess various ice physical properties affecting brittleness potential,
including bubble size and number-density, ice fabric, grain statistics, fracture
characteristics, and the location and properties of grain and subgrain
boundaries. End members of this sample assessment have been identified and
include Siple Dome, which exhibited major brittle behavior and damage, and South
Pole ice core, which exhibited very-minor brittle behavior and almost no damage.
Output datasets will include calibrated relationships for bubble number-density,
mean grain and bubble sizes, subgrain prevalence and orientation, and a usable
indicator for estimating brittle-ice onset and magnitude. There is an immediate
applicability of results from this effort for the Hercules Dome drilling
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.