* 2218926
* I-Corps:  A wearable device for continuous, real-time, and multiplexed monitoring of biomarkers present in interstitial fluid
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Susan Tapert, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a pain-free, lab-under-the-skin wearable technology for
continuous, and real-time monitoring of multiple biomarkers of significance such
as alcohol, glucose, lactate, ketone bodies, testosterone, cortisol, insulin,
and more. The proposed lab-under-the-skin device may potentially promote public
health for the treatment and prevention of alcohol misuse, more effective
management of diabetes in the ever-growing population of people affected with
diabetes, and timely diagnosis, treatment, and recovery of infectious diseases
such as sepsis in hospitals or at-home settings. In addition, the device may be
adopted for performance, health, and fitness use cases, which may aid in
educating individuals in understanding their own physiology and metabolism, and
personalized nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a wearable sensor for continuous monitoring of model analytes
namely alcohol, glucose, and lactate. The proposed technology is based on a
quarter-sized electrochemical sensor that uses a microneedle array with wireless
communication to the wearer’s smartphone. The barely visible micron-scale array
of microneedles enables continuous access to the molecular information-rich
biofluid beneath the skin in a pain- and discomfort-free manner. The preliminary
results of continuous monitoring were promising for all investigated biomarkers,
with the sensors’ data being in perfect correlation with those obtained from
gold-standard metrics. Product and market validation activities by the
interviews with potential end-users, decision-makers, and influencers throughout
this I-Corps project will bring increased certainty and focus during the product
development efforts on the choice of biomarkers that are immediate needs of the
prospect market segments. In addition, the goal is to address the true need of
the end-user, and to develop what has tangible commercial value and a broader
impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.