* 2218070
* RII Track-2 FEC:Cost-effective Conversion of Natural Gas and Biomass to Hydrogen and Performance Carbons
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Mark Mba Wright, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

In this multidisciplinary and bi-institutional collaborative project,
researchers from the University of Oklahoma and Iowa State University will
investigate fundamental principles that will accelerate the development of
sustainable and cost-effective processes for production of carbon-free or
carbon-negative hydrogen and value-added advanced materials, including carbon
nanotubes and carbon nanofibers. In the past, processes to obtain these advanced
materials have been developed based on niche high-value solid products, without
focusing on the value or utilization of the gaseous by-product at a large scale.
Here, the emphasis is in the large-scale and low-cost production of CO2-free
hydrogen. Namely, the project will focus on enhancing hydrogen yields from
abundant natural gas resources using earth-abundant metals as catalytic
materials, which need to be reclaimed from the solid product for environmental
and technoeconomic reasons. Therefore, a central part of the project is the
optimization of hydrogen yield and catalyst recyclability. A secondary but
equally important part from a technoeconomic standpoint is the property
optimization of the resulting performance carbon materials that could be
employed in large-scale applications. In the latter half of the project, other
emerging high-impact technologies, such as carbon-free ammonia production and
environmentally benign energy from waste plastics will also be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes researchers with
complementary expertise ranging from experimental and theoretical modeling and
technoeconomic modeling of the catalytic processes to materials synthesis and
characterization of reactive catalytic surfaces as well as characterization of
the produced carbon nanomaterials. The research plan contemplates experimental
kinetics based on realistic models with specified sequences of elementary steps,
characterization of the materials and processes at the nanoscale, and
computational analysis ranging from first-principles density functional theory
(DFT) and ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) calculations. Machine learning and
artificial intelligence methods will be incorporated in the project to connect
the various modeling scales and predict promising surface structures. This
project will also carry a significant community outreach component, including
research opportunities for underrepresented undergraduate students, as well as
workshops with hands-on activities aimed at high school students to better
educate students on the importance of technology in energy generation while
avoiding or minimizing greenhouse gas emissions. The team will pair with
regional MSIâ€™s and tribal colleges to create research opportunities for
underrepresented groups, such as Native American students, to encourage and
empower them to pursue graduate degrees in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.