* 2218892
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: The first actinopterygian ‘adaptive radiation’: integrating fossils, function and phylogeny to illuminate innovation in a post-extinction w
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Coates, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 115,031.00

Ancient mass extinctions resulted in the loss of many species but also provided
new opportunities for surviving groups. Study of these events is central to both
understanding the origin of today’s biological diversity as well as
contextualizing the threats it faces from environmental change. This work
focuses on a major interval of crisis and recovery that took place around 360
million years ago: the Devonian/Carboniferous extinction. This study will
determine the impact of this event on the early history of ray-finned fishes,
key components of today’s aquatic ecosystems and a major commercial resource.
The project will provide training at high school, undergraduate, graduate, and
postgraduate levels, and develop educational materials for wide audiences,
including those underrepresented in STEM fields. Outreach includes a module for
high-school students at the University of Michigan, programs at three museums
with a combined annual attendance of greater than 500,000, and resources for use
in local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will examine the role of
the Devonian/Carboniferous extinction (359 Ma) in precipitating an apparent
explosion of diversity among actinopterygians, setting the stage for the group’s
dominance throughout the remainder of the Phanerozoic. The project will combine
microCT, functional anatomy, 3D morphometrics, combined-evidence phylogenetic
inference, and evolutionary comparative methods to Devonian and Carboniferous
(419-299 Ma) actinopterygians. The project team will: (i) quantify discrete
functional innovations, biomechanics, and shape for mandibles to test for
increased functional and morphological diversity following a mass extinction;
(ii) integrate anatomical, stratigraphic, and molecular data in a Bayesian
framework to develop an inclusive hypothesis of early actinopterygian
relationships and test hypotheses about the timing of evolutionary divergences
and patterns of survival across the extinction boundary; and (iii) combine
functional and morphological data with new phylogenetic hypotheses within a
comparative framework in to test for shifts in evolutionary rate and mode among
actinopterygians associated with the Devonian/Carboniferous
extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.