* 2218206
* RESEARCH-PGR: Combining machine learning and experimental analysis to define trichome and root-specific gene regulatory networks in cultivated tomato and related Solanaceae species
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Shin-Han Shiu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

Plant specialized metabolites are distinct chemicals, only made by certain
species, often in specific plant parts. Some specialized metabolites are
poisonous to plant pests, while others attract beneficial insects or microbes.
Many specialized metabolites are flavorful to humans, for example those in
basil, mint, and ginger root, while others have medicinal properties, such as
the anti-cancer drug taxol and the antimalarial artemisinin. Tomatoes produce
specialized metabolites called acylsugars, which are sticky like fly paper glue
and protect against pests. Acylsugars are only made in two parts of the tomato:
1) tiny hair-like structures on the leaf surface called trichomes and 2) roots.
Understanding how tomatoes control when and where acylsugars are produced will
teach biotechnologists how to modify or even design plants to make specialized
metabolites in designated plant parts at certain developmental stages. Our first
goal is to combine bench experiments and computational analyses to uncover the
DNA sequences and proteins that control acylsugar production in trichomes and
roots. Next, we will compare DNA and proteins across tomato relatives to reveal
how acylsugar production has evolved in trichomes and roots. Beyond research,
our team will lead two activities to engage the public about our scientific
approaches and findings: “Code-Like-A-Girl'', designed for elementary and middle
school girls to practice computational thinking, and “Why are Plants So
Smelly?”, which introduces participants to plant specialized
metabolites.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specialized metabolites are synthesized in
specific cells or tissues, indicating they are under tight regulatory control.
However, the cis-regulatory sequences and DNA-binding transcription factors
regulating tissue- and cell type-specific expression of specialized metabolism
genes are often unknown. Because tomato acylsugars are synthesized specifically
in trichomes and roots, our goals are to utilize the acylsugar pathway as a
model to: (1) identify the cis/trans mechanisms regulating spatially-specific
expression of metabolic genes and (2) assess the contribution of regulatory
evolution to metabolic diversity. These goals will be addressed using Solanaceae
species, focusing on the cultivated tomato, Solanum lycopersicum, and its wild
relative, S. pennellii. This project will generate trichome and root gene
regulatory networks, describing genome-wide connections between transcription
factors, the cis-regulatory sequences they bind, and their target genes in each
species. Comparison of acylsugar regulatory components across Solanaceae species
will reveal the molecular changes underlying trichome- and root-specific
expression evolution. These findings will provide new details on how cis/trans
regulatory innovations influence spatial expression patterns and ultimately
contribute to adaptive functions of specialized metabolites. This project
provides a natural platform for interdisciplinary scientific training because it
includes experts in biochemistry, computational biology, evolutionary biology,
genetics, and genomics. In addition, the project will host undergraduates each
summer from the PlantGenomics@MSU REU program, a 10-week research-intensive
experience including computational biology training, a weekly STEM career
workshop, a weekly seminar engaging students on diverse research themes,
professional development opportunities, and oral/poster
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.