* 2218601
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Philosophical Commitments of University Scientists across Disciplines
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Troy Hall, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 90,509.00

This award supports a collaborative research project at the interface of
philosophy of science and social studies of science. Researchers in philosopher
of science, sociology, and anthropology will conduct an empirical study of the
philosophical commitments of scientists across a broad range of scientific
disciplines. It is often thought that these commitments are shared within each
scientific discipline, that they differ considerably between scientific
disciplines, and that these differences pose a serious challenge to engaging in
effective cross-disciplinary research. This project will be the first study of
philosophical commitments to be conducted with a large representative sample of
scientists across many disciplines. The study has two fundamental goals: to
achieve an analytical depth of understanding of how the philosophical
commitments of scientists influence their scientific practices, and to achieve a
deeper understanding of the extent to which prior cross-disciplinary experiences
of scientists shape their philosophical commitments. Beyond enhancing the
efficacy of cross-disciplinary research, this project will serve to enhance
public literacy of science by providing insights for revising the tools that
experts in public understanding of science use to investigate how the views of
non-scientists about science or scientific thinking relate to their views on
social issues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Philosophical commitments refer to how
scientists conceptualize the world and its scientific study, framing how
scientists understand and conduct their research. These philosophical
commitments have three dimensions: what methods are effective in acquiring
knowledge (epistemology), what categories are fundamental (ontology), and what
social values are important (axiology). The project will begin by interviewing
approximately 50 scientists to determine their philosophical commitments and how
they manifest in their scientific practice. The interviews will facilitate the
development of survey instruments that are to be used on a much larger scale to
measure the philosophical commitments of scientists. These instruments will then
be used to survey a national sample of approximately 3,500 US scientists from a
wide range of scientific disciplines. The survey data will then be analyzed to
test the hypotheses that philosophical commitments align with scientific
disciplines and that such philosophical commitments vary when scientists have
had prior cross disciplinary research experience. The measurement instruments to
be developed in this project will be generalizable; they can subsequently be
used by others to investigate philosophical dimensions of scientific practice
both within and outside of STEM fields, to inform science education, and efforts
to facilitate cross-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.