* 2218467
* Synthetic Adhesome Cells: Engineering Interfaces Between Synthetic and Live Cells for Controlled Delivery
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jeanne Stachowiak, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Multicellular organisms represent a remarkable transition in evolution, wherein
single cells began working together to form a cohesive and coherent unit known
as tissue. This transition was made possible by the emergence of cell-cell
adhesion. Adhesions within tissue allow cells to communicate with their
neighbors, both directly and indirectly, creating an integrated multi-cell
circuit. In one form of communication, cells can directly transfer material from
one cell to another, which is a grand challenge for engineers that are trying to
emulate cellular processes for delivery purposes. This research team will focus
on user-defined transfer of material between synthetic cells and living cells,
which will ultimately lead to new delivery mechanisms to alter biological
behavior for biotechnology, chemical sensing, and biomedicine. Finally, the
project seeks to explore ethical issues with the proposed technology by
collaborating with an ethicist and a variety of students from diverse
backgrounds and to define design laws surrounding the use of synthetic cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic cells offer the promise of combining complex
cellular machinery with precise molecular triggers and logic-gates to control
cell-like processes for a variety of applications in biotechnology, chemical
sensing and production, and biomedicine. A key capability of live cells, which
has not been recapitulated by synthetic cells, is organization into functional
multi-cellular tissue – the defining characteristic of all metazoans. Cells
within multi-cellular tissue communicate and contact one another through cell-
cell junctions, such as adhesive junctions and junctions that enable diffusion
of solutes from cell to cell, which are called gap junctions. The Belardi lab
has developed synthetic cells that form functional adhesive junctions. This work
makes use of adhesive and regulatory proteins – both natural and synthetic – to
engineer multi-synthetic cell systems. In parallel, the Stachowiak lab has shown
that synthetic cells containing gap junction proteins can be used to transfer
molecular cargo directly into the cytosol of live cells. Here, the project seeks
to combine these two nascent capabilities to solve a key bottleneck in
biotechnology – regulated delivery of biomolecules to the interior of cells.
Specifically, the collaboration will build upon the natural ability of adhesive
junctions to regulate the assembly of gap junctions, allowing precise,
engineered control over molecular transfer between synthetic and live cells. By
providing regulatory control – a feature that native cells possess - this work
will enable synthetic cells to reach their transformative and safe potential.
The objective in this proposal is to take components and biophysical principles
from adhesive cells and create “Synthetic Adhesome Cells”, with new
functionalities that depend on optical triggers, co-adhesive partners and
ligation-dependent logic-gates. The overarching goal with the Synthetic Adhesome
Cell platform is two-fold: i) to create systems with user-defined control over
intracellular delivery and ii) to shed light on the biophysical mechanisms
underlying junction formation and communication at cell-cell
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.