* 2218309
* Dense water pathways feeding the Faroe Bank Channel Overflow
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,042,443.00

The overflow of dense water across the Greenland-Scotland Ridge (GSR), and its
subsequent entrainment, is a fundamental component of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) which helps maintain Earth’s climate. It is
critically important to determine the mechanisms, forcing, and variability of
the AMOC. The proposed collaborative program, including a mooring array,
hydrographic surveys and modeling, will provide a major contribution towards
this goal. This project will determine where the densest water is formed in the
Nordic Seas, how this water progresses to the GSR, and how it is modified along
the way, including the role of atmospheric forcing. This in turn will provide a
better understanding of the means by which the warming climate may impact the
AMOC. The project is part of a separately funded large international program. It
will fund a post-doctoral investigator and two part-time guest graduate
students. An outreach program will be undertaken that includes a project website
and a host of activities engaging the public in the fieldwork. A professional
photographer/filmmaker/illustrator/writer will participate on one of the
shipboard surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would maintain a one year
high-resolution mooring array to measure the Iceland-Faroe Slope Jet, which
appears to be the main source of dense water feeding the Faroe Bank Channel
overflow, and which in turn accounts for roughly half of the total overflow
transport across the Greenland Scotland Ridge. Accompanying shipboard
hydrographic/velocity surveys will trace the flow upstream to its source
region(s), and also document its downstream evolution to where it overflows in
the Faroe Bank Channel. The use of a Global Climate Model, idealized model, and
simple theory will put the observations into a dynamical
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.