* 2218406
* Understanding habit formation in complex tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* John Krakauer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2025
* USD 498,314.00

Much of our daily behavior is supported by habits, which we usually only become
aware of when our behavior needs to change. For example, if we need to switch to
driving a right-hand-drive vehicle while on vacation, we find ourselves
habitually looking in the wrong location for the rear-view mirror and reaching
with the wrong arm for the handbrake. Habits can be beneficial because they
enable skills to be performed well without much conscious thought. However,
habits can also be detrimental because they limit our capacity to change our
behavior. It is therefore critical to understand how we acquire and eliminate
habits. Habit formation has been widely studied using simple tasks in which
people learn to associate visual cues with specific responses. This body of
research has given rise to an “all or nothing” view of habits, in which behavior
is either flexible or habitual. In more complex skills, however, some aspects of
our behavior might be habitual while others remain flexible. For example, a
worker in a production facility might have substantial flexibility in being able
to assemble many different types of devices. But if the layout of their
workspace is re-organized, they may habitually reach for the old (now wrong)
location to retrieve a needed tool or component. It can therefore be critical to
ensure that seemingly flexible behavior does not mask latent habits. The goal of
this project is to develop systematic approaches to identifying which aspects of
a behavior are habitual, understand how and when different components of a
complex skill become habitual with practice and determine how formation of
different types of habits can be shaped based on how we practice. Being able to
identify and target specific habits during learning will help improve training
programs to foster good habits and avoid or eliminate bad ones. While this
project will focus on the role of habits in learning complex skills, the
findings will also be applicable to other domains where habits play an important
role, such as understanding consumer behavior, promoting a healthy lifestyle,
and developing strategies for rehabilitation from injury or
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, human participants will learn and
practice a variety of tasks which require them to use multiple component
processes to determine appropriate responses to visual stimuli. Over the course
of practice over multiple sessions, the investigators will track whether and
when the different underlying components of behavior become habitual. Whether or
not each component of behavior becomes habitual is assessed by altering the
requirements of the task in a way that is specific to each component, and then
measuring the incidence of habitual ‘slips-of-action’ in which participants
revert to the pattern of behavior they originally practiced. In further
experiments, participants will be trained under conditions designed to promote
formation of one type of habit while inhibiting formation of
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.