* 2218775
* Fundamental Studies of Flow-Induced Polymer Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 667,684.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When polymers crystallize, only
about half of the material is crystalline, with amorphous material in between
crystals that gets trapped and cannot crystallize. Applying a flow to the molten
polymer enables the polymer to nucleate many crystals rapidly, resulting in a
finer scale structure with superior mechanical properties. With small enough
crystals, each long polymer chain can span many crystals, with connections
between crystals referred to as tie chains. Stronger flows stretch polymer
chains and create more tie chains for superior toughness. This study aims to
provide deep fundamental understanding regarding the control of structure and
mechanical properties of semicrystalline polymers by applying flows of various
strengths prior to crystallization. If successful, the fundamental knowledge
generated from this research will result in the understanding needed to be able
to design polymeric materials for a variety of applications. This new knowledge
will be of use to industry to tailor/improve the mechanical properties of
engineering thermoplastic materials. The project also includes extensive
teaching and training of students at all levels and academic and industrial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brief intervals of shear flow can strongly accelerate
nucleation of semicrystalline polymers, and this drastically changes the final
morphology and mechanical properties. There are two morphology transitions. For
weak shear flows, faster nucleation creates a fine micron-scale morphology,
while stronger flows can create a shish-kebab morphology. Above a critical shear
rate needed to stretch the longest chains, shear thinning starts and smaller
crystals are formed by accelerating nucleation. Above a critical shear stress, a
second morphology transition to shish-kebab morphology occurs. A fundamental
study of flow-induced crystallization (FIC) is proposed using three polymer
types that each have strictly linear chains, to decide which aspects of FIC are
universal to all semicrystalline polymers and which are polymer-specific. We
exploit a vital experimental finding regarding “melt memory”; the interval of
shear creates nucleation precursors that are very stable to thermal cycling as
long as temperature is never raised above the equilibrium melting temperature.
That allows using a wide array of experimental methods to study the effects of
those precursors on subsequent crystallization and morphology development. These
methods include differential scanning calorimetry, flash scanning chip
calorimetry, X-ray scattering, polarized optical microscopy, atomic force
microscopy, and mechanical properties. This precursor stability also potentially
provides a means to greatly enhance nucleation kinetics during polymer
processing, as long as the temperature is not too high; this will also be
explored. Since the longest chains stretch first, more long chains will be added
to see whether this enables a larger FIC effect. Since nanoparticles can also
nucleate crystals, various particle loadings will be studied to understand the
competition between particle nucleation and flow-enhanced
nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.