* 2218130
* Collaborative Research: Frustration, glassiness and spin liquids: from dirty to pristine materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Arthur Ramirez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 266,775.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, immense global
experimental efforts are directed at finding quantum spin liquids (QSLs), a
theoretically-predicted state of magnetic materials in which the spins, or atom-
size bar-magnets, exhibit liquid-like properties down to the lowest possible
temperatures. QSLs can be efficiently used to create quantum bits, “qubits”, as
they can store information encoded simultaneously in the states of multiple
spins, and hence protected from local noise. Thus, QSLs hold great promise as a
platform for future computing and communication technology. A present barrier to
their realization is randomly located impurities and defects that can convert a
QSL into another state of matter, “spin glass”, in which the spins freeze in
random orientations, similar to how silicon atoms possess random positions in
window glass. This research investigates the effect of impurities and defects on
the fundamental properties of geometrically frustrated magnets, the largest
class of materials in which QSLs are being sought. Through systematically
controlling defects during material synthesis, and theoretically modeling the
resulting behavior, the team is laying the foundations for future engineering of
QSL-based devices. The broader impacts of this research are both the development
of synthesis methods for reducing defects in crystalline specimens and the
theoretical understanding that will inform future processing endeavors. In
addition, the research helps train junior researchers directly involved in the
project, as well as the broader community through instructional media and data
that are accessible on open-source platforms such as the NSF’s Crystal Sample
Archive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is a combined experimental and theoretical effort to systematically
investigate the effect of quenched disorder on collective magnetism in
geometrically frustrated (GF) materials and to determine the synthesis barriers
to obtaining pure materials. The research includes synthesis of materials
spanning the entire range of spin density from dilute spin, to concentrated
disordered spins, to dilute impurities, en route to ultra-pure materials. Part
of the work uses quenched disorder as a probe of fundamental properties of GF
magnetism. The measurements of the thermodynamic properties of disordered GF
materials aim to uncover microscopic Hamiltonians of GF systems, reveal possible
universality classes of disorder-induced spin-glass transitions, investigate the
origin of the recently discovered “hidden energy scale” in these systems and
reveal the nature of elementary excitations in them. The work includes
theoretical calculations of the thermodynamic manifestations of the microscopic
details of the Hamiltonians, exploring the interplay of different types of
disorder in GF media and constructing models for the “hidden energy scale” and
the behavior of heat capacity in GF magnets, which is used to make prediction
and explain experimental data. Part of this research may result in obtaining
materials that exhibit strong quantum-spin-liquid behavior and demonstrating the
irrelevance of quenched disorder in them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.