* 2218063
* RII Track-2 FEC: Explainable and Adaptable Artificial Intelligence for Advanced Manufacturing
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Yifeng Zhu, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Advanced technologies have radically transformed manufacturing and are essential
to modern economic prosperity. The goal of this project is to leverage emerging
technologies, i.e., artificial intelligence (AI), 3D metal printing, and
robotics, to increase the quality, capability, safety, and sustainability of
Advanced Manufacturing (AdvMfg) in northern New England. The project will also
encourage the adoption of new technologies in industry to address manufacturing
challenges facing the region. These two objectives will be accomplished by
creating a scientifically- and geographically-interlinked team, i.e., Northeast
Integrated Intelligent Manufacturing Lab (NIIM), consisting of members from the
University of Maine, University of New Hampshire, University of Vermont,
Dartmouth College, Southern Maine Community College, and Vermont Technical
College communities. Although initial funding for NIIM is from a National
Science Foundation (NSF) Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused
EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award, NIIM will sustainably impact the
EPSCoR jurisdictions of Maine (ME), New Hampshire (NH), and Vermont (VT) for
years to come. NIIM will draw on the unique strengths and rich assets of each
state, and fully leverage existing state and federal investments. The project's
research team, led by early career faculty and senior mentors, will investigate
how to integrate state-of-the-art AI techniques into modern manufacturing
processes and systems. A proactive large-scale workforce and economic
development assessment will identify the technological needs of firms in the
region, which will inform project research and outreach activities, as well as
identify skills gaps and opportunities for training and building career pathways
in AdvMfg. The project will extend STEM experiences to undergraduates and
graduates, especially those underrepresented in STEM fields. This project will
also create new components for Upward Bound for low-income high school students,
who will potentially be first-generation undergraduate students, and Northeast
Passage for disabled students and workers at community and technical colleges.
The team will work closely with the manufacturing extension partnership programs
(MEPs) in the three states, an industrial advisory board, industry partners, and
the US Economic Development Administration University Center for Economic
Development. Working with these organizations will ensure that this Track-2
project remains closely tied to state and regional economic development
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this era of Industry 4.0, intelligent tools
and techniques are opening new dimensions to optimize manufacturing processes
and systems. The Northeast Integrated Intelligent Manufacturing Lab (NIIM),
established in this project, aims to create a new, explainable and adaptable AI
framework that fills existing and future technology gaps in manufacturing, such
as long and expensive experiments and simulations, lack of coordination among
multiple machines, and difficulty in programming robots for complicated
manufacturing tasks. Our convergent research teams across three EPSCoR
jurisdictions (ME, NH and VT) will work closely with industry to create: (a) new
AI models with intrinsic interpretability and increased adaptability to support
Advanced Manufacturing (AdvMfg); (b) AI-guided design for additive manufacturing
of metals that seamlessly connects multi-scale modeling and property predictions
without unnecessary trial-and-error; (c) self-aware CNC machines that optimize
the coordination and control in subtractive manufacturing; (d) industrial robots
that efficiently and safely learn from video demonstrations for cellular
manufacturing; (e) an industry-driven, unified hybrid manufacturing framework;
and (f) an understanding of the factors that influence the adoption of new
technologies by manufacturing businesses. The project anticipates specific
outcomes that will be of immediate relevance to AdvMfg companies in Northern New
England. For example, it is expected that the project will yield sample-
efficient robot learning techniques that will enable factory workers to teach
robots new skills through visual demonstrations, allow robots to learn from
failure and request relevant demonstrations, and generate risk-bounded safe
policies using uncertainty aware learning. This project will serve the northern
New England manufacturing sector through relevant research, workforce
development, and education. Diversity and inclusion efforts are integrated to
remove barriers to STEM education for underrepresented, low income, potential
first-generation, and/or disabled individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.