* 2218373
* Reversing open reading frames to create a pseudo-mirror image of life
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Christophe Herman, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project explores the consequences of reversing the order of amino acids in
a protein. Reversing the order in which a protein is made has the potential to
discover enhanced or completely new protein functions that can help improve
daily life. Proteins that speed-up chemical reactions are routinely used in
washing detergents, toothpaste, and fuel treatments, to name a few household
items. These active proteins are taken from nature and can be improved to do
their job better. However, with each improvement, further improvements become
harder to attain. Reversing a protein recreates a natural protein in a new way
that may be able to break through these barriers to further improvement.
Research on these reverse proteins is being conducted with students that include
members of underrepresented groups in science so that the next generation of
scientists will be ready to better our lives with these active proteins. As the
synthesis of new life forms opens up several lines of bioethical inquiry, these
are addressed, first within the group, and then more broadly, with academic
bioethics reports and with the general public through an established seminar
series at a local museum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To make reverse proteins that
function researchers at Baylor College of Medicine will use the machine learning
algorithm AlphaFold2 to identify amino acid residues that prevent proper folding
of reverse proteins. These identified amino acids are being changed in silico to
determine if a different amino acid at that position improves folding. These
computational predictions are also being tested experimentally to determine if
they improve folding and function of the reverse protein. In a parallel
approach, the functions of reverse proteins are being improved through directed
evolution. These improved reverse proteins are being purified and tested for in
vitro function, thermal stability, and suitability for protein crystallization
so that their 3D structure can be determined. The findings from these
experiments are improving understanding of how proteins fold and function and
allowing scientists to create new proteins with enhanced or new
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.