* 2218987
* Travel Support for the 2022 American Control Conference; Atlanta, Georgia; June 8-10, 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Dennice Gayme, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 14,750.00

This grant will provide opportunity for around 30 students from groups
underrepresented in control science and engineering -- women, minorities,
persons with disabilities, veterans, first-generation students, and students
from non R1 institutions -- to participate in person in the 2022 American
Control Conference where they will attend lectures, present their research, and
network with other students, faculty, and professionals in the field. The
American Control Conference is internationally recognized as a premier
scientific and engineering conference, dedicated to the advancement of control
theory and practice.

The technical program for the conference will comprise presentations in regular
and invited sessions, tutorial sessions, poster sessions, and special sessions
along with workshops and exhibits. Attendees will have opportunities to discuss
the latest trends and newest scientific findings in the field, attend
educational and training-based sessions, and develop and expand their scientific
and professional networks. Applications of automatic control considered in this
conference include cutting-edge challenges in energy systems and smart grids,
manufacturing networks, finance and risk management, autonomous vehicles,
systems biology, and security and resilience of cyber-physical systems, all
areas of research relevant to the mission of the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.