* 2218384
* RUI: Causes and consequences of early quitting in visual search: Investigating the role of distractors
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Jeff Moher, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2024
* USD 223,136.00

Distractions are everywhere in modern life, and they bring consequences ranging
from the mundane to the deadly. It is well established that distracting objects
can attract attention when a viewer first looks at a scene. For example, a
flashing roadside billboard may take a driver’s eyes off the road for a moment.
But might distractions change behavior in other, more subtle but equally
critical ways? Another key aspect of visual attention arises when a person
searches for something that may or may not be present and must decide whether or
not they’ve found what they are looking for. An important illustration of this
is that when a radiologist searches a medical image, there may or may not be an
area of concern present in the scan. In these searches, there is a strategic
decision component in which the searcher must decide that they’ve looked
thoroughly enough to be confident that indeed no “target” is present. However,
there is a gap in our knowledge – there has been little research on how
distracting objects might affect this decision component. In the current
project, the investigators explore the phenomenon of distractor-induced
quitting, in which distracting objects alter this decision process and cause
people to terminate search earlier than they otherwise would. This early
quitting causes people to entirely miss targets that they would otherwise likely
find. Knowledge gained from this project will advance our understanding of how
distractions are processed, leading to new insights into human behavior in the
fields of attention, distraction, and decision-making. Furthermore, these
results have potential real-world implications for tasks that involve high-
stakes searches for targets, such as medical image screening or x-ray baggage
inspection. In particular, it is worth considering that the use of salient
signals (e.g., from artificial intelligence) to convey information to a human
observer may inadvertently trigger this exact problematic situation. For
example, if a computer system is trained to scan images and highlight potential
areas of interest for a radiologist (or security personnel) by using a salient
signal, these quitting effects might offset any benefits the computer guidance
system might otherwise afford. Finally, undergraduate students participate in
the design of these experiments, collection of data, and the presentation of
results at conferences including those focused on medical imaging. Some of these
students are recruited from the Science Leaders program at Connecticut College,
a program dedicated to providing opportunities in the sciences for students from
historically excluded identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salient signals can alter
search strategies when people are looking for targets. More precisely, in recent
work, the investigators have discovered that task-irrelevant distractors can
cause people to quit searching early. As a result, people more frequently miss
targets when these distractors are present. In this project, the investigators
use a variety of experimental protocols to explore the impact of salient
distractors on visual search in tasks where targets may or may not be present.
Participants search for simple targets in visual displays with multiple non-
targets and press a key to indicate whether a target is present or not. Eye-
tracking is employed to investigate the specific mechanisms that cause
participants to quit early as a result of visual distraction – for example, when
a distractor is present, does it cause participants to scan the display less
exhaustively? Or does it cause participants to look at each item for a shorter
time, making them more likely to look at a target but fail to process it
correctly? Next, the investigators establish factors that can modulate and
potentially eliminate this distractor-induced quitting, such as giving
participants control over the appearance and disappearance of a salient cue that
may or may not highlight the target. Finally, the investigators examine how the
information content of salient signals can impact distractor-induced quitting –
in other words, if salient signals sometimes draw attention to the target, do
those signals cause as much (or perhaps more) disruption on the occasions where
they do not draw attention to the target? Results from these studies may aid our
understanding of human visual attention and visual search. Findings are shared
with the scientific community at large, but also (more specifically) with
colleagues in radiology in order to spark new discussion on how the
investigators might apply this research to help improve communications from
artificial intelligence systems to human observers in medical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.