* 2218818
* Collaborative Research: From ecological dynamics to adaptive evolution during the origin of life
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Emily Dolson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 303,254.00

This study explores the idea that the earliest adaptive evolution operated on
self-amplifying cycles of chemical reactions, in contrast to most prior studies,
which have assumed that evolution requires elements that carry information in
the form of nucleic acids (DNA or RNA). Understanding how the origin of life
came about is important because it shapes our expectations about life on earth
as it exists today and because it aids us in making predictions about whether
and in what form life may exist elsewhere in the universe. This project combines
theoretical and laboratory research to address the fundamental question of how
mixtures of chemicals could self-organize into evolving systems, as must have
occurred during the origin of life. The project tests the hypothesis that
interactions among multiple such cycles can change over time, similar to the way
in which natural ecosystems change as species invade or go extinct, and that
such chemical ecological change can gradually morph into more familiar gene-
based evolution. In addition to helping explain how life came to be, the work
will likely yield new computational tools for ecological and biochemical
research and has the potential to lead to new strategies for chemical
engineering. Moreover, the work contributes to breaking down boundaries between
the fields of evolutionary biology, ecology, computer science, and systems
chemistry. The research will bring together and train a diverse team of
researchers whose primary expertise is in biology, chemistry, physics, or
computer science. Lastly, this project will produce a set of educational
resources, designed to make this new perspective on the interplay between
chemistry, ecology, and evolution accessible to students across these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails three strands of theoretical
research. First, the researchers will develop mathematical and computational
tools for analyzing chemical or ecological networks and detecting adaptive
evolutionary dynamics. Second, they will conduct analyses of digital ecosystems,
composed of numerous digital species interacting in a virtual environment, to
understand how patterns of species-species interaction and the spatial structure
of the environment affect the capacity for ecological change to resemble
evolution. Third, the team will use computer simulations of realistic chemical
reaction networks to see if similar factors affect the emergence of adaptive
behaviors in chemistry and ecology. These theoretical studies will be combined
with laboratory experiments in which the chemical composition of complex
mixtures that are driven out of equilibrium by periodic dilution using a flux of
chemical food will be tracked over time using liquid-chromatography mass-
spectrometry. Statistical analyses of the resulting time courses will be used to
detect adaptive behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.