* 2218064
* Energy burden and the meaning and making of home
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kristin Phillips, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2025
* USD 226,632.00

Anthropologists and social scientists have long recognized the importance of
home for generating well-being. It is well known that structures and functions
of homes are easily disrupted by material, infrastructural, and social
shortfalls, yet precisely how this arises remains unclear. This project
investigates the significance of severe energy burden (spending a
disproportionate share of annual income on energy costs) in affecting how people
conceptualize and make homes. It asks how low-income people accommodate high
energy bills and how energy burden impacts the ability to meet their basic
needs, as well as those of individuals with whom they share a home. The project
contributes to anthropological science by modeling the varied roles that energy
plays in producing human habitats, sociality, and social differentiation. The
project generates a range of broader impacts, including student training in
anthropological research methods, community employment opportunities, impacts on
energy policy, and increased public understanding of utility operations and
regulation. Results are broadly disseminated to academic and non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of ethnographic, archival,
and qualitative research over a period of three years. It centers on several
questions: (1) How do low-income people use domestic energy and how do they
understand the role of energy in making homes? (2) How does energy help and
hinder people in meeting their basic needs? (3) What histories, issues, and
factors shape energy affordability? And (4) how do utility politics and
regulation impact low-income peopleâ€™s ability to pay electric bills? What
consequences does this have for their welfare, individually, societally, and in
relation to others in their homes? Methods include archival analysis of energy
policies, media analysis, ecological momentary analysis of daily behavior and
experiences with energy and utilities, key stakeholder interviews, and media
analysis. Results will shape how scientists understand the complex interplay
among material structures, institutional and energy infrastructures, and social
subsistence strategies for homemaking and family
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.