* 2218762
* CICI: SSC: SciTrust: Enhancing Security for Modern Software Programming Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Yanfang Ye, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 439,273.00

Software plays a vital role supporting scientific communities. Modern software
programming cyberinfrastructure (CI), consisting of online discussion platforms
(such as Stack Overflow) and social coding repositories (such as Github), offers
an open-source and collaborative environment for distributed scientific
communities to expedite the process of software development. Within the
ecosystem, researchers and developers can reuse code snippets and libraries, or
adapt existing ready-to-use software to solve their own problems. Despite the
apparent benefits of this new social coding paradigm, its potential security-
related risks have been largely overlooked; insecure or malicious codes could be
easily embedded and distributed, which could severely damage the scientific
credibility of CI. Therefore, there is an urgent need for developing scalable
techniques and tools to automatically detect these open-source insecure or
malicious codes. To address this issue, this proposed project seeks to explore
innovative links between Artificial Intelligence (AI) and cybersecurity to
enhance the security of modern software programming CI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key components of the proposed research are three-
fold: (1) a novel AI-based solution (iTrustSO) utilizing social coding
properties is developed to automatically identify suspicious insecure code
snippets on Stack Overflow; (2) a cross-platform model is constructed to
represent the complex interplay between GitHub and Stack Overflow; deep learning
techniques are then utilized to build a predictive model (iTrustGH) for
automatic detection of malicious codes on GitHub; and (3) a user-friendly tool
(SciTrust) is developed to enhance code security for software development. The
broader impacts of this work include benefits to scientific communities and the
whole society by promoting the efficiency of cyber-enabled software development
without sacrificing the security. The establishment of a Cybersecurity Lab
through this project enhances the education and workforce training in
cybersecurity. The project integrates research with education through curriculum
development and student mentoring activities for the newly-established
cybersecurity degree program. It is also expected to increase the participation
of underrepresented groups including minority and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.