* 2218557
* CAREER: Neural Mechanisms of Stereotypic Vision
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Jonathan Freeman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 33,929.00

Through cultural learning, people develop simplified associations (stereotypes)
about different types of people and social categories (e.g., race, gender, age).
We may not agree with these stereotypes at a conscious level, but they are also
stored outside our awareness. Once activated, these unconscious stereotypes can
lead to involuntary biases in how we evaluate and interact with others. Past
research suggests that unconscious stereotypes are activated only after the
brain is finished with visually processing a person. Contrary to this, the
present project tests whether stereotypic associations influence the brain's
initial visual processing, in turn creating systematic distortions in how a face
or object is perceived. These distortions make faces or objects appear more
visually consistent with stereotypes than they are in reality. Such a phenomenon
of stereotypic vision contrasts with everyday beliefs that visual perception is
an accurate reflection of reality. By distorting visual perception in line with
stereotypic associations, such effects may deepen and maintain stored
stereotypic associations. By providing a better understanding of the neural
mechanisms that underlie stereotypic vision and their capacity for change, this
project could pave the way for new techniques to reduce unintended biases. In
doing so, this project could address the difficulty in creating long-term change
in stereotypic associations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project builds on
Dr. Jonathan Freeman's cutting-edge brain-imaging and behavioral methodology to
test his model of stereotypic vision. Through his specialized software, a
computer mouse-tracking technique will be used to measure the trajectory of hand
movements en route to response alternatives on the screen while they are
presented with faces or objects. Despite conscious responses, hand trajectories'
simultaneous attraction to an unselected alternative provides a sensitive
measure of the effect of stereotypes on the process of perception with
millisecond precision. These behavioral effects will be linked with functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) pattern analyses, permitting an assessment of
how biases in perception relate to biases in a face or object's visual
representation in the brain. Seven studies will test whether (a) stereotypes
bias the visual representation of a face or object, driven by the interplay of
brain regions involved in face processing and visual predictions; (b) this
effect of stereotypic vision is automatic, rather than conscious and deliberate;
(c) this effect is flexible, such that it is not limited to pre-existing social
categories (e.g., race, gender, age) but arises with newly acquired categories,
and importantly, can be reduced by counter-stereotype interventions. This
project will advance a cutting-edge behavioral methodology in tandem with fMRI
pattern-analyses. They have the potential to be transformative across
psychology, neuroscience, cognitive science, and related fields, providing a
paradigm to reveal the neural representation of 'hidden' cognitive states.
Knowledge gained through these studies will be leveraged to develop new mouse-
tracking platforms for the general public to raise awareness of subtle forms of
bias, generate data for future research, and pave the way for improved
techniques to reduce real-world biases.