* 2218101
* Collaborative Research: Biocultural context linking the gut microbiome, iron, and reproduction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Adetola Louis-Jacques, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 219,800.00

The lived and physiologically embedded experience (‘embodiment’) of racism has
been proposed to account for health disparities. In the United States there are
disproportionately high rates of sickness and death among Black mothers due to
iron deficiency anemia. A framework of embodiment, informed by both biocultural
and evolutionary considerations, offers a particularly relevant yet understudied
lens to look the role of gut health in iron status as a key nexus linking lived
experience and reproductive outcomes among U.S. Black women. This project
strengthens the relationships between researchers and maternal-child community
organizations in the U.S. by engaging a community task force in the design,
execution, and dissemination of the research and through the training of
underrepresented students in biological anthropology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study uses both critical biocultural approach and a life history theory
framework to understand how experience, the gut microbiome, iron status, and
reproduction interact to create health disparities among women in the U.S.
Specifically, this study will assess: 1) whether the gut microbiome is a pathway
of embodiment between women’s experiences of racism and their iron status, and
2) factors affecting offspring size, timing of birth, and risk of iron
deficiency during pregnancy, birth, and postpartum. A longitudinal study design
is used that will follow women over time, from early pregnancy to 6 months
postpartum; data are collected at four time points regarding women’s experience
of racism, stress, diet, iron status biomarkers, microbiome composition and
function, and reproductive outcomes. Methods to quantify gut microbiome
composition and function include third generation sequencing and metabolomic
analysis. We predict that Black women’s social experiences and diet are
associated with higher enrichment of pro-inflammatory bacteria, which are in
turn associated with poorer iron status and poorer reproductive outcomes for
mother and infant. This work, combined with qualitative exploration of the
contexts of racism in participants’ lives, will contribute to building a
biocultural context for understanding maternal racial health
disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.