* 2218083
* Search for the minimal requirements for sustainable and tunable cell cycles in synthetic cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Qiong Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,089,282.00

Almost every living being on Earth has an internal biological clock, known as
circadian rhythms, to drive patterns of many important bodily functions, such as
sleep-wake cycles in animals. Likewise, all cells rely on another clock, called
cell cycles, for precise timing of cell growth and cell division. Although both
circadian rhythms and cell cycles have been studied for decades, these
biological clocks are themselves complicated networks interacting with other
cellular networks to orchestrate various downstream events and are frequently
connected to diseases from insomnia to cancer. The complexity of these systems
makes it very difficult to isolate the core machinery to understand their
minimized requirements. This project aims to make further major advances in the
direction of understanding cellular oscillations by reconstituting and
investigating minimal cell-cycle clock systems in synthetic cells. The knowledge
gained from this research is disseminated to the broader community through
publications, conferences, courses, and hands-on demonstrations. The major
broader impact activities involve the early exposure of underrepresented
students to frontier research and retention of these students in STEM fields.
College level students are introduced to the state-of-the-art technology
developed in this project. The project also develops and implements outreach
programs to disseminate the scientific findings to the broader public through
the collaborations with the University of Michigan Museum of National History.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological oscillators, including the cell cycle, have a
significant impact on the ability of organisms to establish morphogenetic
patterns in embryos and maintain basic physiology in adults. It is thus crucial
to understand the design and function of these biological clocks. Such
understanding provides fundamental knowledge of development and guidance to
create synthetic oscillators. Despite its importance, the minimized design
principles for constructing versatile and resilient oscillators remains elusive.
This research combines several strategies to ascertain the essential rules
underlying a fundamental out-of-equilibrium process, the mitotic cell cycles.
Specifically, the project builds a unique synthetic cell system, using
microemulsion droplets, to dissect the circuit-function relation of an in vitro
cell-cycle network and uses the knowledge gained to create a minimized cell-
cycle network from the bottom up. The synthetic cellular system is composed of
the smallest possible sets of proteins, mRNAs, and ATP as the energy source. A
successful project will provide significant insights into the minimal
requirements of the network topology that is responsible for the desired cell-
cycle performance and response to environmental
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.