* 2218860
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-R: Economic Networks and the Dynamics of Wealth Inequality: A Longitudinal Cross-Cultural Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Eleanor Power, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2025
* USD 21,980.00

This project examines the social determinants of material wealth inequality in
human communities. In particular, the research examines the ways that
individuals and households leverage their social networks to buffer livelihood
risks and realize economic opportunities. This award supports longitudinal
fieldwork in a diverse sample of small communities, where collaborators collect
standardized data on variables such as material wealth, social networks,
demographics, educational attainment, food security, and kinship relationships.
The comparative findings contribute to interdisciplinary scholarship on the
processes that lead to wealth inequality and the consequences of inequality for
economic livelihoods and related outcomes, such as food security. The project
supports work and training among diverse collaborators, including women,
underrepresented minorities, and early-career researchers, contributing to the
goals of broadening participation in science. The findings are shared with local
communities and with broader audiences via educational modules in open-access
economics courses. The methodological tools being developed for the project can
facilitate similar comparative studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project examines the dynamic social processes that contribute to material wealth
inequality. The research includes data collection in over forty communities that
vary in terms of subsistence orientations, political organization, kinship and
descent, and demographics. The research design focuses in general on the
economic consequences of variation in the structure of social support networks.
In particular, the study shows the extent to which advantageous positions in
community networks can mitigate economic risks and enable material gains.
Simultaneously, the researchers collect and analyze data on other variables that
are hypothesized to effect dynamic variation in material wealth, including
variation in education and skills, occupations and status, and family
structures. These data contribute to comparative analyses that consider the
relative effects of these variables on changes in material wealth and
inequality. The findings have relevance for debates about the determinants and
consequences of wealth inequality in both historical and contemporary societies.
Methodologically, approaches for organizing and analyzing longitudinal data are
being developed and shared across research communities to build capacity for
similar multi-sited projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.