* 2218078
* Collaborative Research: Peripheral Neighborhoods in City Creation
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Melissa Baltus, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2027
* USD 185,779.00

The goal of this project is to understand how neighborhoods at the geographical
margins of a city may or may not be socially peripheral to that city and how
that affects the historical trajectory of that city. Specifically, the research
team will undertake research to study the relationship between people’s
investment of time, energy, and resources into urban neighborhoods, their
identity in relation to their neighborhood and the city overall, and the length
and intensity of their occupation. Archaeology is uniquely situated to address
these questions over the course of a city’s history, with a focus on material
evidence for engagement, identity, and inequality. By considering neighborhood
diversity in relation to level of investment in the city, one can understand
whether social, economic, and political ties created through intentional
engagement lead people to stay and continue to participate in that city or,
conversely, whether a lack of such ties may lead to more rapid abandonment of
those neighborhoods. This may help people understand the nuanced relationship
between social investment and local participation, diversity of neighborhood
identities, and the futures of modern cities from a bottom-up, grass-roots
perspective. Additionally, this project will provide a space for students to
learn techniques of archaeological survey and excavation as well as
opportunities for the local community, which is largely comprised of immigrant
or first-generation community members, to engage with and understand the
similarities and differences between their modern experience of a city and those
of people living in that space in the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on
the lived experiences of people in different neighborhoods in an ancient city,
researchers will consider the local investments (e.g., architecture,
infrastructure, neighborhood organization) and the potential benefits (e.g.,
access to certain goods, spaces, or activities) that coincide with actively
participating in the city and its goings-on. Researchers will address these
questions at a prehistoric city which was occupied by both local and non-local
peoples for roughly three centuries. Using non-invasive geophysical survey to
search for subterranean archaeological features, soil coring, and targeted
excavation, researchers will compare two neighborhoods at the physical periphery
of the city to gauge whether occupants were also socially peripheral or whether
they were fully engaged in central city projects, activities, and ideas.
Researchers will examine architectural style and neighborhood organization,
including distribution of public buildings, proximity to causeways connecting
areas of the site, mound-and-plaza groups where community ceremonies would have
occurred, and areas of leveling or filling for habitation which are indicative
of local level of physical and social investment. Finally, researchers will
compare the proportions of material types that are typical of the central
portion of the site to see if people living in these peripheral neighborhoods
had access to the same kinds of objects, raw materials, and food as people
living closer to the city center, i.e., is there a social benefit to fully
engaging in the urban project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.