* 2218904
* Collaborative Research: Learning In and From the Environment through Multiple Ways of Knowing (LIFEways)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Nancy Maryboy, Indigenous Education Institute
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2026
* USD 419,774.00

Many urgent environmental challenges, from soil degradation and water pollution
to global climate change, have deep roots in how complex systems impact human
well-being, and how humans relate to nature and to each other. Learning In and
From the Environment through Multiple Ways of Knowing (LIFEways) is based on the
premise that Indigenous stewardship has sustained communities on these lands
since time immemorial. This project is collaboratively led by the Indigenous
Education Institute and Oregon State University’s STEM Research Center, in
partnership with Native Pathways and the Reimagine Research Group, Swinomish
Indian Tribal Community, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry, World Forestry
Center, and a national park network in the Pacific Northwest. The aim of this
partnership is to deepen the informal learning field’s understanding of how
Indigenous ways of knowing are currently or can be included in outdoor learning
environments such as parks, nature preserves, and tribal lands. The project will
share practices that center Indigenous worldviews to build awareness of their
value and enhance STEM learning in outdoor settings. These approaches engage
Native community members in continuing their traditional knowledge and
practices, and help non-Native audiences learn from the dynamic
interrelationships of the environment in authentic, respectful ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional outdoor education is mostly grounded in
Western concepts of “conservation” and “preservation” that position humans as
acting separately from nature. This Research in Service to Practice project will
identify “wise practices” that honor Indigenous ways of knowing, and investigate
current capacities, barriers and opportunities for amplifying Indigenous voices
in outdoor education. A team of Native and non-Native researchers and
practitioners will draw upon Indigenous and Western research paradigms. Methods
include Talk Story dialogues, a landscape study using national surveys, case
studies, and a Circle of Relations to interpret and disseminate research
findings. LIFEways will also document partnership processes to continue to build
on the Collaboration with Integrity framework between tribal and non-tribal
organizations (Maryboy and Begay, 2012). Findings from the LIFEways project will
be shared broadly through a series of webinars, local and national meetings,
conferences, and publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants. With co-funding from the Directorate of Geosciences’ (GEO),
Research, Innovation, Synergies, &amp; Education (RISE) Program, this project
will further advance efforts related to the application of traditional
ecological knowledge to the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.