* 2218777
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Generating Actionable Research to Investigate Combined Climate Intervention Strategies for Stakeholder Use
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Cheryl Harrison, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2027
* USD 224,915.00

This project explores how a portfolio of combined climate intervention
strategies including mitigation, carbon dioxide removal, and solar radiation
management could achieve a climate-resilient future. The focus is on scientific
research activities concerned with climate outcomes that are responsive to the
priorities and needs of diverse stakeholder groups. The convergent team
encompasses experts from climate science, engineering, behavioral science and
ecology. This interdisciplinary team will work to transform the climate
interventions research landscape, moving it to more integrated approaches for
research and assessments. This will be achieved through the establishment of a
shared conceptual and theoretical framework for scenario generation, model
application, impact assessment and stakeholder
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main objectives: 1)
Advancing state-of-science climate intervention studies through exploring the
assumptions, model deficiencies, interactions, and impact assessment methods of
a portfolio of climate intervention scenarios consistent with keeping warming
within 1.5 degrees C from CMIP6 baseline pathways, with the climate intervention
scenarios based on methods already developed by the project investigators; 2)
Developing an approach for co-production of modeling products from Earth system
evaluations through extensive stakeholder engagement to further actionable
research into combined climate intervention scenarios and their evaluation; and
3) Designing scenario and impact assessment toolkits for the wider community to
engage in investigating intervention strategies that are responsive to their
unique information needs and priorities through the extension of and adaptation
of the co-designed scenarios and assessment
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.