* 2218876
* Development of a Plate-scale Distributed Strain Sensing System:  A Candidate for Earthquake Early Warning
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 137,255.00

On the boundary between many continents and their neighboring seafloors, stress
builds up from the process in which the seafloor tectonic plate slides beneath
the continental tectonic plate. As the seafloor plate (sometimes called the
“downgoing slab”) is slowly subducted below the continent (moving at a few
inches per year, on average), friction along the boundary causes both plates to
elastically deform. The stress built up by this mechanism can ultimately be
released in a large, potentially devasting earthquake. This is often accompanied
by a tsunami – the combination poses a significant hazard to many coastal areas,
including the Pacific northwest portion of the United States. While the built-up
stress is readily observed on land using permanent GPS stations, deformation of
the seafloor is more difficult to observe because the satellite signals used by
GPS cannot penetrate seawater. Consequently, other means must be used to observe
the deformation. The project aims to establish the feasibility of measuring
deformation of the seafloor with a long optical fiber cable (up to 100 km)
connected to a series of shorter, sensing optical fiber cables. Light sent
through the optical fibers can detect very slight length changes in the cable.
If carefully attached to the seafloor, changes in the length of the optical
fiber cable indicate deformation in the underlying material. By observing
seafloor deformation, researchers hope to one day be able to detect sudden
deformation changes caused by an offshore earthquake and transmit the
information to a land-based network faster than the associated shaking reaches
land, facilitating an early-warning to the earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical approach in this project has been demonstrated on a small scale. An
optical fiber, tensioned between two seafloor anchors separated by a few hundred
meters is interferometrically probed to track length changes. A solid state
laser at one end of the optical fiber cable injects light into an optical fiber
beamsplitter. Part of the light travels along the stretched optical fiber cable
to a mirror at its far end, which reflects the light back towards the splitter.
Another part of the laser light travels to a local mirror at the end of a length
of reference optical fiber wound onto a fixed glass mandrel. When the two
reflected light beams are recombined at the splitter, they interfere, creating
fluctuating light levels that can be processed to reveal changes in length at
the nanometer level. In this project, the established method will be expanded to
include a series of interferometric sensors attached to a cable whose length
could cover the entire continental shelf, where the most hazardous stress
buildup occurs. The method of time-division multiplexing in postulated to be
capable of probing ten strain sensors distributed along the long cable, thereby
expanding coverage adequately to monitor strain changes in a 100 km long
profile. The tests to be performed are to be done in the laboratory testing the
time-division multiplexing approach in optical fiber lengths appropriate for
these geophysical measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.