* 2218293
* Combining Theory, Deep Learning, and Lidar to Test Climate and Slope Controls on Tree Throw Production on Hillslopes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Brian Yanites, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 409,423.00

When trees fall over and uproot, they suddenly heave soil and rock from deep in
the soil mantle to the surface. This process, called tree throw, is an important
contributor to sediment transport on hills and influences soils, water, carbon,
and ecology in forested landscapes, yet quantifying the frequency of such events
is challenging because events are infrequent. However, tree throw leaves a
topographic signature: a pit in the location of the fallen tree and a mound of
“thrown” sediment immediately downslope. The topographic signature of tree throw
persists for many decades or centuries so that the land surface represents a
history of tree throw events and offers an opportunity to quantify the process.
Further, because tree throw is often driven by extreme weather, the topographic
signature of tree throw may serve as an archive of extreme events. Building on
theory that describes the roughness of the land surface due to the periodic
creation of pits and mounds, the investigators will leverage topographic
signatures from high resolution topographic data, theory, and machine learning
to map tree throw instances across large areas. The team will engage K-12
teachers through the Indiana University’s Education for Environmental Change
program that consists of a week-long workshop that focuses on experiential
learning and curriculum development. Finally, by combining Earth science and
deep learning, graduate students working on this grant will be trained in cross-
disciplinary methods and will be able to address problems in science, industry,
and informatics-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tree throw occurs when
extreme atmospheric events exert forces on forest canopies that can exceed soil
and root strengths. The uprooting creates a topographic signature in forest
floors, which creep-like processes rework and degrade. Thus, the spatial
patterns of topographic roughness contain process information of tree throw
rates and the events that drive them. This project will establish new methods
for automated mapping of pit-mound couplets in topographic data and theory to
interpret roughness in process-based terms. The researchers will use lidar data
at select sites in Indiana, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and
Tennessee to identify pit-mound couplets. They will also augment publicly
available data with higher resolution lidar datasets that they will collect
using an unmanned aerial vehicle equipped with a lidar unit. To map pit-mound
couplets across large areas, the researchers will develop and train deep
learning algorithms that automatically map the locations of pit-mound couplets.
They anticipate mapping several million features across southern Indiana where
they have already demonstrated a high density of tree throw pit-mound couplets.
The research team will combine the automatically mapped inventory of tree throw
events with existing theory to provide new insights on what controls the rates
and spatial patterns of tree throw.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by a collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.