* 2218808
* CCSS: AI-Assisted Reconfigurable Dual-Input Load-Modulation Transmitter Array for Energy- and Spectrum-Efficient Massive MIMO Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xun Gong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The scarcity of spectrum, especially in the sub-6-GHz frequency range, has
motivated the spectrally efficient massive multi-input multi-output (mMIMO)
communications. However, the use of large and dense antenna array with multiple
high-power radio frequency (RF) transmitters creates technical challenges of
antenna-amplifier impedance mismatch, efficiency degradation, and sharp
temperature rise. The overarching goal of this project is to shift the paradigm
of transmitter operation from ‘static and model-driven’ to ‘dynamic, intelligent
and data-driven’ to significantly enhance the energy and spectrum efficiencies
of next-generation wireless systems. The AI-based reconfiguration framework for
RF transmitter array can be applied to many other reconfigurable RF circuits and
subsystems, e.g., mMIMO receivers with dynamic spatial filtering, tunable
filters, antenna tuners, and RF signal processors, making truly intelligent
radios feasible. Beyond wireless communications, outcomes of this research may
also impact on a variety of other antenna array systems, such as active phased
array radars, wireless imaging and sensing, and wireless power transfer.
Moreover, the proposed learning-based method for solving such a highly dynamic
and non-stationary problem can be generalized to other complex real-time systems
including robotic control, intelligent transportation systems, and next-
generation wireless networks. The impact of this project will be further
expanded through the following integrated educational efforts: a) attracting and
retaining underrepresented students through appropriate programs; b) engaging
undergraduate students through appropriate programs; c) integration of research
findings in graduate and undergraduate courses at University of Central Florida;
d) outreach to local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RF power amplifier
(PA) has conventionally been designed and deployed under the assumption of
static/quasi-static load impedance and ambient temperature. Nevertheless, these
assumptions are invalid for the multi-antenna mMIMO systems due to strong
antenna and thermal couplings, leading to degraded spectral and energy
efficiencies at system level. To address this fundamental challenge, this
project aims to transform the cutting-edge AI/machine-learning (ML) technologies
into the hardware-centric RF transmitter design. Specifically, a novel dual-
input hybrid load modulated balanced amplifier (DI-HLMBA) is proposed, offering
unparalleled efficiency, bandwidth, and linearity. More importantly, the highly
reconfigurable nature of DI-HLMBA in both digital and analog domains enables
dynamic closed-loop control to counteract antenna mismatch and temperature
upsurge during mMIMO operation, which can be generalized as a reinforcement-
learning (RL) process. Additionally, the problem of dynamically optimizing DI-
HLMBA will be formulated with a RL framework based on nonstationary Markov
Decision Processes and a meta-stability-based hardware implementation strategy
with reconfigurable field programmable gate array (FPGA) technology, tightly
coupled to achieve real-time low-latency optimization. Furthermore, the AI-
assisted operation as well as multi-band multi-standard capability will be
extended from the individual PA/transmitter to the mMIMO array through a unique
design method for the wideband fractal-shaped antenna array. Overall, this
research establishes a cross-disciplinary design methodology based on a holistic
integration of digital backend, RF frontend, antenna array, sensing, AI
algorithm, FPGA acceleration, and inter-module interfaces to form an energy- and
spectrum-efficient mMIMO system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.