* 2218577
* Data Entry, Labor Identity, and Inequality in Computer Automation
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Corinna Schlombs, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 12/31/2024
* USD 140,140.00

This history of technology research project focuses on computer automation with
an eye towards providing historical lessons for contemporary developments in
artificial intelligence and robotics technologies, which are expected to uproot
the balance between human and machine labor. When modernizing corporations first
began installing digital electronic computers, it became clear that large
amounts of information had to be converted from paper into computer-legible form
before they could be processed automatically. Computer automation thus created a
rapidly ballooning need for data entry, much of which was done manually. The
outcomes of this project will make menial data entry a visible part of the
history of computing by addressing pertinent questions such as: How did computer
automation change work processes? Who took up the newly emerging routine data
entry work, under what conditions, and why? In addition to funding scholarly
research and publications, the project provides undergraduate student training
opportunities in public history and creates a virtual exhibit that engages
broader audiences with questions raised by the history of data entry about work
processes and technological change today.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Focusing on
banking automation in the United States, West and East Germany from the 1950s to
the 1970s, this project investigates computing technology and inequality at the
height of the Cold War. It examines changes in the participation and identity of
data entry workers and their work conditions; in addition, it raises questions
about social and economic implications from bank automation, and the effects of
competitive pressures on banking services for marginalized communities.
Methodologically, the project supplements archival research and professional
technical records with an analysis of popular magazines, newspapers, and oral
history interviews to circumvent current limitations of archival collections.
For the history of computing, the project shifts attention from
professional—mostly male and white—programmers to unskilled data entry typists,
countering linear narratives of technological progress. A transatlantic
comparison will serve to provide a localizing corrective to generalizing
assumptions about worker identity and technology in different political
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.