* 2218046
* RII Track 2 FEC: Building Research Infrastructure and Workforce in Edge Artificial Intelligence
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jia Di, University of South Alabama
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,006,595.00

Using Artificial Intelligence (AI) currently requires access to the internet and
very large and complex remote computers for making decisions and predictions.
This causes long delays and privacy and security concerns. The latest techniques
in AI, known as “Edge AI”, avoid these problems by collecting and analyzing data
directly on cameras, smart phones, and wearable devices. However, Edge AI is
still in its infancy and there are several important technical problems that
need to be solved. This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused
EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award is a collaboration between six
universities (including two minority-serving institutions) and several private-
sector partners in Alabama, Arkansas, and North Dakota. As a test of the
project's new technology, the project team will build a smart wearable device to
predict the onset of diabetes by monitoring a patient's own breath without the
need for a doctor to interpret the results. It will provide research training
opportunities for advanced college students and will also train high-school
teachers in lessons to educate their own students in the principles of Edge AI
to seed the future US workforce in these essential concepts for tomorrow’s
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this RII Track-2 FEC award is to develop
integrated research infrastructure and workforce in Edge AI. Fundamental
contributions and technical innovations to be developed by the team include: (i)
light-weight AI-empowered reasoning and machine learning algorithms for edge
platforms; (ii) a new Application-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASIC) design
methodology to enable AI ASICs with ultra-low power, reconfigurability, and
short development cycles; (iii) a sensor device platform for Edge AI based on
novel functionalized nano-scaled sensing materials with nano-3D printing
techniques; and (iv) an Edge AI device platform exploiting the previous advances
to meet the requirements of different use cases. Based on the developed
infrastructure, targeting the use case of diabetes care, the team will design,
prototype, and test a low-cost smart wearable device for personalized diabetes
management. The developed wearable diabetes device will enable significant cost
reduction and high power efficiency compared to existing techniques. The leading
institution is the University of South Alabama; the collaborating institutions
are North Dakota State University, the University of Arkansas, the University of
North Dakota, Alabama A&amp;M University, and Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College. The
team will work closely with multiple industry partners to adopt and adapt the
developed Edge AI infrastructure in different use cases. Research outcomes of
this project will accelerate the development of Edge AI and will increase the
competitiveness of the United States in AI. Also, this project will integrate
research, education, and workforce development in order to provide effective
training at multiple levels. The project will develop an Education-to-Workforce
Pipeline from high school to undergraduate, graduate, Post-Doctoral training,
junior faculty, and industry practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.