* 2218294
* Ecofriendly Control of Mine Tailings Dust through Establishment of Biocrusts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lianyang Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 381,962.00

The mining industry generates a significant amount of mine tailings, pulverized
rock that remains after the valuable metal-bearing minerals have been extracted.
The generated mine tailings are collected and transported in the form of a
slurry or paste to large on-site impoundments. The tailings impoundments range
in size from a few hundred to a few thousand acres. Water in the tailing slurry
is recovered for reuse and the solid material is left for long-term storage. In
arid and semiarid areas such as the regions of the southwestern United States,
mine tailings can become wind borne and result in particulate emissions. The
environmental impacts of this dust include reducing visibility, degrading air
quality, and contaminating surface water and soils. Although different methods
have been attempted for mine tailing dust control, they all have limitations.
There is an urgent need for developing ecofriendly and cost-effective methods
for mine tailing dust control. The overarching goal of this research is to
investigate the effects of factors on the establishment of biocrusts
(specialized organisms covering the surface) on mine tailings and evaluate the
physical, chemical, mechanical, and environmental behavior of biocrust-
stabilized mine tailings at multiple scales. Successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge that could lead to an ecofriendly and cost-effective dust control
technology for addressing the adverse effects of mine tailing dust. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and educational activities
including the mentoring and training of one graduate student for the duration of
the project and two undergraduate students per year at the University of
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mine tailings in arid and semiarid areas are prone
to wind erosion and the associated contaminants can be dispersed throughout the
environment as dust particles, causing serious deleterious effects on the
environment and human health. The overall goal of this research is to develop an
ecofriendly and cost-effective method for sustainable mine tailing dust control.
To achieve this goal, the proposed research takes a multi-scale and multi-
disciplinary approach and will 1) conduct systematic laboratory studies to
define and optimize the parameters for culturing cyanobacteria and growing
biocrusts on mine tailings, 2) characterize the biocrust-stabilized mine
tailings to relate the macro-scale behavior to the micro/nano-scale
characteristics and understand the underlying mechanism of stabilization and
dust control based on biocrust establishment, and 3) demonstrate and validate
the integrated biopolymer stabilization and biocrust establishment technology
dust control and other environmental benefits by conducting field tests. The
proposed technology for ecofriendly mine tailing dust control is based on
integrated biopolymer stabilization and biocrust establishment and may lead to a
new paradigm for dust control and environmental protection. The study
systematically investigates the effect of different factors on the establishment
of biocrusts on mine tailings and evaluates the physical, chemical, mechanical,
and environmental behavior of biocrust-stabilized mine tailings at multiple
scales. Successful completion of this project will elucidate the fundamental
science on biocrust-mine tailing interactions and lead to better understanding
of the underlying mechanism of stabilization and dust control based on
integrated biopolymer stabilization and biocrust establishment. Additional
education and outreach activities include a summer camp for K-12 students
through the Summer Engineering Academy at the University of Arizona,
development, and display of an exhibit at Biosphere 2, and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.