* 2218314
* Experimental Investigation of Mechanisms for High Pore Fluid Pressure Associated Slow Faulting
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wen-Lu Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 398,338.00

Slow slip at various subduction zones provides a new opportunity to study the
state of megathrust faults in between great earthquakes. Elevated pore fluid
pressure in the subduction zone is often detected in regions where slow slip
events occur, but it is not well understood how this high pore pressure is
actually linked to the slow slip. This project explores this link between fluids
and the mechanisms for slow slip through laboratory experiments on how rocks
deform. The project will use a new imaging technique, dynamic microtomography,
that helps image the interior of a rock sample as it is pressed to the point of
failure. These experiments can be conducted at different levels of pore pressure
and at different and variable speeds to explore the range of conditions that can
lead a fault to move from fast slip to steady slow
slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental studies show that high pore fluid
pressure can stabilize both fault propagation in intact rocks and decelerates
frictional slip in rocks with an existing fault. Dilatant hardening under
undrained conditions is thought to be responsible for these observed
stabilization effects. Preliminary experimental data show that high pore fluid
pressure can also impede fault growth under nominally drained conditions. This
project is a systematic set of fracture and friction experiments to understand
the role of elevated pore fluid pressure on stabilizing faulting and frictional
slip. The goal is to 1) characterize the real-time microstructure evolution
using dynamic microtomography. This will result in a quantitative assessment of
the spatio-temporal distributions of permeability, porosity, and pore shape,
thus better constraints of the drainage conditions during brittle failure; 2)
elucidate the role of dilatant hardening in the transition from stick-slip
events to slow slip events along a pre-existing fault. The researchers will use
different gouge materials to produce different drainage conditions and
investigate the mechanical link between high pore fluid pressure and slow slip
behaviors; 3) identify diagnostic characteristics of fault geometry and off-
fault damage associated with slow faulting. The findings of this study will lead
to a better understanding of different instabilities and the mechanical
processes responsible for them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.