* 2219770
* Equipping for Praxis: Advancing Computer Science Teachers Through Endorsement
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Christopher Mayfield, CodeVA
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2025
* USD 999,968.00

Over half of the school districts in Virginia provide computer science pathways
through Career and Technical Education (CTE); however, many CTE teachers lack
the content area expertise to teach higher-level technical courses. In addition,
Virginia requires that licensed teachers attain a computer science (CS)
endorsement by passing the CS Praxis exam or by completing several hours of
computing-specific coursework from a regionally accredited college or
university. This research-practitioner partnership between CodeVA, James Madison
University, and three public school districts across the state addresses this
need to effectively prepare Career and Technical Education teachers for the
Praxis exam. The project will focus on CTE teachers who teach introductory-level
CS in schools with large populations of underserved students (low income, rural,
and students of color) and who need CS endorsement to be able to teach more
rigorous and advanced CS courses. By defining personal learning goals, each
teacher will receive training that resonates with the individual teacher’s
students, schools, and communities. The specific needs of their high school
student populations will be further addressed as the teachers gain pedagogical
skills that account for inclusion and cultural responsiveness. The project will
relieve current teacher shortages in underserved school districts, thereby
increasing the number of students engaging in high-quality CS coursework. The
professional development resources developed in this project will be shared
throughout the state and nationally, especially in those 22 states that also
confer computer science endorsement through the CS Praxis
exam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research-practitioner
partnership (RPP) are to design and implement new professional development,
demonstrate that the professional development addresses the individual needs of
teachers, show that teachers gain self-efficacy and identity related to teaching
CS content to underserved students, and demonstrate professional development
scalability. This will result in CTE teachers who are able to pass the CS Praxis
exam and gain CS endorsement, who gain confidence in offering CS content in
their classes, and who gain identity as CS teachers who plan to teach over the
long term. The professional development program has two innovative elements: (1)
personalized learning trails, defined as curricular sequences co-constructed by
the RPP and teacher participants that align with participants’ unique prior
knowledge, background, and needs, preparing them to pass the Praxis; and (2)
professional development content that extends beyond Praxis knowledge and skills
to support rigorous CS teaching for intermediate and advanced student learning
in schools with high student diversity. This project will contribute evidence in
support of a personalized professional development approach to train teachers to
not just teach advanced CS content but have confidence in their ability to
develop lessons and identify as an advanced CS teacher. CS teacher self-
efficacy, specifically teacher perceptions of preparation and readiness, is
required for teachers to effectively implement the curriculum, and CS teacher
identity provides the foundation for sustained motivation, job satisfaction, and
commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.