* 2219752
* The role of wave and wave breaking directionality in modulating the wave-induced drift at the ocean surface
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nick Pizzo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 449,859.00

Surface waves modulate the physical coupling between the atmosphere and ocean. A
better understanding of the physics of these small-scale processes is
fundamental for improved approximations (or parametrizations) to be used in
models of weather and climate that link ocean and atmosphere, particularly as
Earthâ€™s climate changes. This proposal examines the effects that surface-wave
direction and wave breaking have on the transport caused by waves. The
applications of this research will be global and are expected to lead to
improvements in the understanding and modeling of the interaction between the
ocean and the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
understanding of the geometry, kinematics, dynamics and statistics of ocean
surface waves and wave breaking and their role in air-sea interaction using
theoretical, numerical, laboratory and observational techniques. High-resolution
field observations of non-breaking and breaking wave statistics will be used to
compute the wave-induced drift, and to provide parametrizations of this
transport as a function of the environmental variables. Analyses will quantify
the errors associated with ignoring, or not properly resolving, directional wave
effects, and will consider the directional effects of waves and wave breaking on
mass transport in the upper ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.