* 2219060
* Understanding interphase layer formation at the cathode/solid-electrolyte junction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matthias Young, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2025
* USD 537,725.00

Improving the safety and performance of lithium-ion batteries is necessary to
support a broad range of technologies from consumer electronics to electric
vehicles. Current lithium-ion batteries employ organic liquid electrolytes that
allow lithium ions to move rapidly between battery electrodes during charge and
discharge. But these liquid electrolytes are flammable and allow for the growth
of lithium metal tendrils (referred to as dendrites) between the electrodes,
leading to the risk of short-circuiting and runaway cell reaction. Over the last
30 years, researchers have been working to develop solid electrolyte materials
to replace liquid electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries for improved safety,
lifetime, and energy density. However, these electrolyte materials fail rapidly
in battery test cells. Researchers at the University of Missouri will work to
understand the origins of failure in these electrolytes arising from reactions
between the solid electrolyte and the cathode of the battery. To accomplish
this, University of Missouri researchers will isolate and understand the
individual contributions of different reactive species on the overall failure
behavior using a combination of species-selective membrane coatings, electron
microscopy, and electrochemical characterization. This research will fill a
critical gap in understanding of the reactions that underpin failure of solid
electrolytes and is expected to help researchers develop safer and higher
performance batteries. These research activities will be complemented with the
development of hands-on interactive learning modules to make electron microscopy
measurements of battery interfaces tangible and engaging for early high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish mechanistic
understanding of interphase formation between oxide cathode materials and
sulfide solid electrolytes. Researchers will employ advanced transmission
electron microscopy and other complementary characterization techniques to
observe interphase formation between nickel-cobalt-manganese (NMC) cathode
powder and Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) SE with and without nanoscale polymer membrane
coatings formed on the NMC cathode using molecular layer deposition (MLD). These
MLD membrane coatings are tunable as single or mixed conductors of electrons,
cations, and anions and will help serve to isolate and understand each of these
speciesâ€™ contributions to interphase formation reactions. The project will (1)
understand native cathode/solid electrolyte interphase formation versus the
state of charge of the cathode, (2) understand the role of electrons, cations,
and anions in cathode/electrolyte interphase formation, and (3) understand the
impact of barrier coatings on solid state battery performance. This work will
help researchers rationally propose solutions to block unwanted reactions while
preserving desirable functional properties at the cathode/solid electrolyte
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.