* 2219418
* Computer Science for Appalachia: Expanding a Research-Practice Partnership to Integrate Computer Science and Literacy in Rural East Tennessee Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lynn Hodge, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,980.00

This project supports teachers in teaching computer science (CS) in substantial
and meaningful ways that build on the cultural and linguistic resources of
students in East Tennessee. Building on an existing Research Practice
Partnership, the team is developing a CS-Literacy curriculum with a focus on
storytelling as a regionally relevant practice. In addition, the team is
developing teacher professional development to support the curriculum. Design-
based research guides the planning, development, and refinement of the
curriculum and teacher professional development. Participating teachers will
implement the curriculum in their classrooms to support students’ learning of CS
and literacy. The teacher participants will form a CS for Appalachia Teacher
Network in order to provide educators with a community to make sense of CS
Literacy integration in their schools and classrooms. The findings will provide
a model for how rural school districts create opportunities for teachers and
students to engage meaningfully with CS in elementary
grades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three strands of research guide this project. The
first strand focuses on teacher identity related to CS and the role of the
teacher PD in shaping CS identify. Data will be collected via surveys,
interviews, and video recordings of work sessions. Inductive/deductive coding of
qualitative data will be used to provide rich descriptions of teacher identify
related to CS and quantitative data will be summarized using descriptive
statistics. The second strand of research focuses on student learning and
engagement related to CS. Data will include student assessments, work products,
and exit tickets that capture student engagement. Content analysis will be used
to analyze student assessments and descriptive statistics as well as
hierarchical linear modeling will be used to analyze student learning and
engagement over time. The third strand focuses on the CS for Appalachia Teacher
Network. Data will be collected via teacher surveys. Network analyses will be
conducted as well as regression analyses to determine the characteristics and
factors that contribute to greater or fewer connections among the network
participants. The findings from this project will contribute to knowledge about
the importance and utility of teacher networks for supporting improvement and
reform efforts in CS education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.