* 2219332
* C-STEM for sustainability: Preparing elementary-school teachers to integrate computer science into linguistically inclusive, transdisciplinary STEM instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Radoff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 08/31/2025
* USD 721,534.00

Computer science (CS) literacies are essential to a well-rounded education in
the 21st century. Yet, many elementary schools do not offer age-appropriate CS
education and in particular, English Learners (EL) disproportionately lack
access to CS education. The lack of age-appropriate CS education is a problem
that emerges from a confluence of factors, including limited time in the school
day for CS instruction, elementary teachers’ lack of opportunities to learn to
teach CS, and the jargon-heavy nature of most age-appropriate CS materials
(making them hard for ELs to use). Furthermore, many initiatives to introduce CS
into elementary schools are funded by grants, and most grant-funded
interventions die out when the funding runs out. In addition to CS education,
there is also a need for 21st century classrooms to address issues of
environmental sustainability. Addressing complex environmental issues requires a
“transdisciplinary” approach, synthesizing knowledge across many disciplines
including mathematics, civics, science, and computer science. Thus, this project
focuses on environmental sustainability (ES) as the primary contextual anchor
for authentic transdisciplinary CS learning since these topics align with
standards across grade levels in both science and social studies and invite the
use of computational practices, concepts, and tools. Additionally, these topics
provide rich points of connection to students’ everyday experiences and ideas,
which supports linguistically inclusive pedagogies. This project leverages the
expertise of a multidisciplinary team of educators, researchers, content
specialists, and state and district representatives to develop CS-integrated
curricular modules and training materials for elementary school teachers who
work with ELs. Since teachers generally lack time to design completely new
lessons “from scratch,” the project will focus on modifying existing lessons to
include more ES and CS content. Sustained impact is baked into the project’s
structure; the training model developed by the project team will live on as part
of a course in the well-established University of Maryland (UMD) master's degree
program in STEM teacher leadership, and the modules will be published online and
distributed by state and district representatives. &lt;br/&gt; The project
includes three phases. In Phase 1, the research practice partnership (RPP) team
will modify district-issued lessons, pilot these lessons in RPP teachers’
classrooms, and develop design principles for transdisciplinary lesson
modification. In Phase 2, the team will develop an instructional model for
teacher professional learning and pilot the model in a permanent UMD course for
in-service K-12 teachers called Teaching and Learning Computer Science. In Phase
3, the team will disseminate materials, design principles, and the professional
learning model in a web-based resource for teachers and teacher educators.
Throughout the project, data will be collected to evaluate the efficacy of the
design principles, lessons, and professional learning model and to build new
knowledge about teaching and learning CS, specifically for English Learners. The
project’s research will explore: (1) What opportunities and challenges arise
when an RPP team with diverse needs and expertise works to support authentic,
sustainable transdisciplinary integration in elementary schools? (2) What
opportunities and challenges to transdisciplinary integration do RPP
stakeholders identify as they pilot modified lessons, particularly with respect
to EL students' participation in CS-infused transdisciplinary STEM? and (3) What
affordances does the professional learning model have, if any, for influencing
teachers’ perspectives on transdisciplinary STEM and computer science
integration in elementary teaching and learning? Video and artifacts from RPP
teachers’ implementations of modified lessons will be collected and analyzed.
Curated implementation videos will also be published online as a pedagogical
resource. Video of RPP meetings and surveys/interviews of RPP members will
support analyses of RPP dynamics. Video and artifacts from the pilot
professional learning implementation (in the UMD course for teachers) will be
used to iterate the learning model and contribute to the field’s understanding
of how to support sustainable teacher learning and belief
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.