* 2219785
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-ED: CNS: MBARKA: A Multi-tier Basic Architecture for fault-toleRant and K-secure IoT-based Autonomous campus monitoring systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Habib M Ammari, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This research project focuses on the analysis, design, and development of
energy-efficient, optimized, fault-tolerant, and secure Internet of Things (IoT)
for the deployment of monitoring systems, and particularly, campus monitoring
systems. It aims at establishing a solid theoretical foundation to build such
systems using a combination of computational geometry techniques, which are
based on graph models and convex polyhedra, and cryptography techniques. The
former techniques help address the problems of coverage and data gathering and
delivery in these IoT-based systems, while the latter ones help cope with the
existence of injected bad sensors. This theoretical foundation for fault-
tolerant and secure monitoring systems enables the development of a TAMUK campus
monitoring system with a special focus on campus people traffic
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project helps recruit, train, and mentor
underrepresented minority students and female students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines, which gives them exposure to
the theory and practice that support the design and development of fault-
tolerant and secure IoT-based campus monitoring systems. In particular, it
allows the students to get exposure to various concepts related to polyhedral
space-fillers, graph theoretical approaches, cryptography techniques, and real
sensor deployment. This research project helps integrate research and education
via the development of curriculum and resources for teaching, thus expanding
access to advanced higher education to a broader spectrum of undergraduate and
graduate students. Furthermore, this theoretical foundation can serve as the
basis for building a unified fault-tolerant and secure IoT-based campus
monitoring systems, including environment, building energy, facility, and road
traffic. This theoretical foundation can also help build cost-effective, fault-
tolerant, secure IoT-based monitoring systems of national importance, such as
U.S. boarder surveillance. The findings and results of this research project can
be disseminated using local, national, and international conferences, and also
published in prestigious and highly reputed journals, such as ACM Transactions
and IEEE Transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.