* 2219913
* I-Corps:  Training device for healthcare and other professionals that simulates a hemorrhagic emergency
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Brittany Bankhead, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a hemorrhage-control training device. As uncontrolled bleeding
remains the leading cause of preventable death from trauma, effective
hemorrhage-control training may be the difference between life and death for a
trauma victim. Though existing training programs have been successful in
reaching large groups of people across the globe, these training programs are
limited by the use of unrealistic training models. The proposed technology,
while remaining portable and affordable, is designed to realistically simulate a
hemorrhagic emergency. For institutions who educate the public, their students,
or their employees on hemorrhage-control techniques, this technology may offer
better training without increasing training time. As interest and mandates
surrounding widespread hemorrhage-control training beyond the healthcare setting
continue to expand at the local, state, and national levels, it is imperative
that trainees are provided with a realistic training experience to ensure that
they are prepared to act in a real-life hemorrhagic
emergency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a portable, affordable, and realistic hemorrhage-control training device that
utilizes real-time biofeedback mechanisms to model a physiological response to
application of proper hemorrhage-control techniques. Though hemorrhage-control
training models exist, they are not feasible for use in widespread training due
to high costs. Research suggests not only that current training programs lack
realistic simulation, but that this shortcoming may compromise the effectiveness
of these programs on preparing individuals to perform life-saving skills in a
real-life trauma situation. The most commonly reported elements of hemorrhage-
control training programs that lack realism include demonstration of bleeding,
the actual pressure needed to stop a bleed, the stress and urgency of a real-
life emergency, and the reaction of a wounded patient to intervention. To
address these shortcomings, the proposed technology may include a traumatic
wound with pressure sensors that read pressure applied directly to the wound as
well as through application of a tourniquet. Upon application of adequate
pressure, hemorrhage cessation will be demonstrated. Additionally, a speaker
will be embedded to simulate a patientâ€™s reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.