* 2219184
* Manufacturing of Metal Sulfides for Next Generation Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Colin Wolden, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2025
* USD 387,765.00

This grant supports research that contributes to new knowledge related to the
sustainable production of metal sulfides, a class of materials that are needed
in many advanced technologies. The high cost of these materials reflects the
high temperature, energy intensive processes currently employed for their
production and purification. This award supports fundamental research generating
the required knowledge for the development of a solution-based process for the
manufacturing of these materials that is grounded in the principles of green
chemistry and engineering. The critical reagents and solvents employed are
recycled in a circular economy. The new process will enable scalable
manufacturing of metal sulfide nanocrystals at ambient conditions with the
ability to tune their size and shape to optimize performance in subsequent end-
use applications. This research focuses on metal sulfides central to next
generation battery technologies, addressing the critical storage bottleneck that
constrains expanded deployment of renewable electricity required to stem global
warming. Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and
society. This research involves several disciplines including manufacturing,
solution chemistry, separations, and materials science. The multi-disciplinary
approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education through the introduction of
entrepreneurship into the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cascaded
metathesis process transforms low cost sodium sulfide and metal chlorides into
the desired metal sulfide at room temperature with common table salt as the
byproduct. However, some scientific barriers are yet to be overcome to realize
the full application potential of this approach. Sulfide synthesis is guided by
solvent engineering which considers the roles of solvent polarity, donor number
and molecular structure on solubility and reactivity. The intrinsic properties
of the resulting metal sulfides will be fully characterized, and structure-
property-performance relationships will be developed for solid-state
electrolytes and advanced cathodes using an array of physical and
electrochemical characterization techniques. The solution-based approach will be
extended to enable roll-to-roll manufacturing of the sulfide–based alloys and
composite materials employed in solid state batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.