* 2219242
* MCA: Enhancing the Resilience of Interdependent Natural-Built Infrastructure Systems in Urbanized Coastal River Floodplains with Geomorphological Solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Inci Guneralp, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,498.00

This project aims to improve the resilience of flood-vulnerable communities
inhabiting low-lying, urbanized coastal river floodplains. Many residents
belonging to approximately 40% of the U.S. population, who are living in coastal
counties, may benefit from this project. The project will examine how the
interdependencies among natural and built infrastructure systems influence flood
risk and how natural habitats can be utilized to mitigate flood impacts. The
knowledge generated will strengthen the ability of decision-makers to maximize
national security, public safety, the quality of life, and the protection of
natural habitats. The project will broaden the participation in STEM research,
education, and workforce by advancing a research program founded on convergence
science and innovation, mentoring, science communication, and creating diverse,
equitable, and inclusive environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the conceptual and methodological framework for flood resilience by co-
creating a deeper understanding of flooding-induced disruptions on the
integrated natural-built infrastructure of low-lying, urbanized coastal river
floodplains. The project adopts a convergence science approach that integrates
disciplinary cultures, theories, methods, and data from the fields of
geomorphology and transportation engineering. The project will generate
fundamental knowledge on geomorphological networks, interdependencies between
geomorphological networks and built infrastructure networks, the impacts of
these interdependencies on cascading failures from floods, and the potential of
geomorphological habitats as nature-based solutions. The knowledge and tools
generated will allow for observing, understanding, and exploring the potential
trajectories of natural-built infrastructure interactions during floods and
strengthen the ability to mitigate flood risks and impacts while maintaining and
enhancing natural habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.