* 2219258
* MCA - Exploring Algal Carbon Capture Potential in High pH Laboratory- and Field-Scale Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Mary Watson, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 259,850.00

Creative strategies are needed to manage atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) to
mitigate the consequences of climate change. This research examines, through
experiment and modeling, the potential of high pH algal cultures to maximize the
amount of inorganic carbon (through dissolved carbon species derived from
atmospheric CO2) available for conversion of CO2 to algal biomass. This biomass
can then be used for other purposes, such as bio-diesel fuel. To date, high pH
algal growth systems have not been adequately explored even though, at these
conditions, carbon dioxide is chemically consumed at the air-water inference. To
better understand the potential of the high pH/algal system, experiments and
mathematical modeling of the data will be used to explore high pH/algal carbon
capture processes, feasibility, and performance. The model can be used by
researchers and practitioners to estimate the carbon offsets of large-scale
cultures aimed at production of high-value produces (e.g., biofuels). Through
model development, the research will clarify the role of carbonate and describe
how total dissolved inorganic carbon species kinetically interact during algal
growth. The impacts of nitrogen-source cycling as a natural, cost-effective
strategy to manage pH and improve carbon capture will also be explored. Broader
impacts of the work include benefits to society by supporting climate change
management and workforce development through designing algal production systems
that maximize atmospheric carbon dioxide removal. This can serve as part of an
integrated carbon management plan to minimize a myriad of economic, ecological
and social consequences of rising temperatures due to high concentrations of
greenhouse gases. To carry out the work, students from underrepresented groups
in the sciences will be actively recruited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
entails experiments with mixed algal cultures and the primary product will be an
expanded, validated, algal growth model for predicting algal biomass production
and carbon capture as a function of interconnected parameters of total dissolved
inorganic carbon aqueous species availability, nitrogen source type, and culture
pH. High pH is being investigated because at high pH most dissolved total
inorganic carbon is converted to dissolved carbonate, whose suitability as an
inorganic carbon source has received little attention. Thus, this research seeks
to expand and validate a mathematical model to quantify mixed freshwater algal
growth in high pH systems to inform future carbon capture experiments. The
experiments will be conducted at the Clemson University's Partitioned
Aquaculture System. Project goals are to characterize and model total dissolved
inorganic carbon-limited growth in batch reactors through the lens of four
objectives, the first being to identify and quantify the accuracy of analytical
methods for measuring inorganic carbon species at high pH. The second and third
are to determine to what extent carbonate kinetically impacts algal growth and
determine an appropriate formulation of the Monod-total dissolved inorganic
carbon-limited growth rate of mixed culture algae. The fourth goal will be to
quantitatively measure carbon capture by the algal cultures in open batch
reactors, data that will be used to support model validation. An additional
objective will be to explore how nitrogen source cycling could be used to manage
pH for carbon capture in the culturing reactor so impacts of nitrogen on pH and
biomass production can be estimated and to deliver estimates of carbon capture
based on several nutrient loading scenarios. During the project, a graduate
student and several additional students will be
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.