* 2219959
* ATD: Quantifying Human Mobility using Topological and Time-Frequency Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Shannon Harper, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The immense amount of data at hand in modern applications creates challenges in
storing, processing, and mining the data. These challenges are particularly
difficult when the data concerns human behavior and involves both spatial and
temporal components. This project aims to address challenges posed by such
datasets in an effort to better understand human dynamics and mobility. This
project has the potential to benefit society in several ways. First, by
developing more accurate and efficient mathematical algorithms for processing
spatiotemporal data, the project results can lead to improved anomaly and threat
detection. Second, the project will contribute to STEM workforce development
through training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates, curriculum
development, and outreach activities. Third, results of the project will provide
avenues for incorporation of new algorithms for analyzing datasets that describe
human behavior. Fourth, the project will address the ethical, legal, and
societal impacts of the research, especially societal concerns regarding the
collection and analysis of data as well as disparate impacts resulting from the
processing of that data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop new results and a toolkit of algorithms, applicable to a wide variety of
spatiotemporal datasets, in topological data analysis for anomaly detection.
These new results and algorithms focus on combining topological data analysis
for the representation of spatial components of datasets and time-frequency
analysis for the representation of the temporal components. The new algorithms
will focus on anomaly detection in volumetric traffic data and US census data,
but will be generalizable to other spatiotemporal datasets. The proposed
research will also address algorithmic unfairness and biased datasets,
developing strategies to mitigate disparate impacts that may occur as a result
of our novel algorithms. The project will model human mobility across political
boundaries across multiple scales, in order to identify and predict residential
instability. The project will also address societal concerns regarding the
deployment of automated decision making technologies--such as artificial
intelligence--in the context of human dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.