* 2219920
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Understanding User Needs for Access Control Systems in Smart Settings
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 166,000.00

Smart devices are increasingly popular. The use of smart locks, bulbs, switches,
surveillance systems, sensors, thermostats, voice-enabled speaker systems,
utility systems, and Internet-connected office/house/factory appliances has
grown exponentially in a short period of time. According to recent figures,
there will be close to 40 billion devices connected to the Internet by 2025, and
more than 11.1 trillion dollars will be invested in manufacturing such smart
devices in the next five years. In a smart environment (e.g., smart home, smart
office, smart factory, etc.), devices are usually connected to a central hub
such as Samsung's SmartThings, or Apple's HomeKit. Multiple users can access
this plethora of devices typically with conflicting, complex, dynamically
changing demands and current smart environment platforms do not allow
conflicting demands of the users to be expressed explicitly. Indeed, the current
access control mechanisms in smart platforms offer coarse-grained access
controls that may cause safety and security issues and cannot resolve the
conflicts automatically. Most importantly, our understanding of the usage of the
emerging smart technologies across different settings is significantly limited.
To address these challenges, in this EAGER project, we aim to investigate the
actual needs of the users for a multi-user and multi-device aware access control
mechanism in different smart environments in a comprehensive manner. Clearly,
improving the security of smart environments and platforms has a direct and
profound impact on millions of users. As smart devices have become one of the
most vulnerable and most exploited systems, the ability to understand different
design challenges and user desires/demands to increase the security of smart
devices via this project presents rich opportunities for industrial and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of fine-grained access control mechanisms
in the world of smart devices limits the abilities of users, practitioners, and
tools to prevent malicious behavior and unintended access. Current smart devices
and platforms and traditional approaches cannot address complex, conflicting
demands in a multi-user smart environment with numerous devices. Moreover, these
environments often deploy numerous devices from multiple vendors with different
technologies. This situation is exacerbated by the fact that the smart
technologies are fast introduced to the market without fully understanding the
constraints, the user needs, and the security and privacy aspects. Hence, the
detailed understanding of the practical techniques, ideas, and the necessary
tools that will be needed for the design of better access control systems in
smart settings is an important first step. Specifically, this project will study
the needs of users for the necessary access control capabilities to perform the
tasks effectively, and in a secure and privacy-aware manner. Because smart
devices are already becoming pervasive in our lives, workplaces, industrial
settings, and are sometimes being compromised, the outcomes of this project will
facilitate the design of safer and more secure systems. The proposed work will
investigate the needs and desires of users for (1) their conflicting and complex
demands, (2) flexible and configurable designs, (3) proper security and privacy
settings via dedicated user studies. The project will also investigate the
feasibility of successful transition-to-practice aspects of multi-user and
multi-device aware access control mechanisms for smart
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.