* 2219287
* Fidelity and Regulation of Signal Recognition Particle
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Shimon Weiss, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,418,552.00

Understanding the cellular ‘mail distribution’ system of newly synthesized
proteins is of fundamental importance for understanding life itself and for
harnessing and engineering organisms to solve societal needs such as food and
clean energy. In addition to the basic understanding and support for societal
needs, this project will provide excellent opportunities for science education
and the associated challenges that emerged from the COVID-19 pandemic. The
results of the research will be disseminated through publications in academic
journals and presentations at scientific conferences, as well as lecture forums
that directly interface with the general public. The education component of the
project will emphasize the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars in multidisciplinary biochemical and biophysical research. It will also
expose high school and undergraduate students to state-of-the-art research tools
and provide leadership experience for the graduate students and postdocs.
Finally, the project will generate valuable reagents, tools, and assays that are
useful to many other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotic cells are
highly compartmentalized, with each organelle harboring a unique set of proteins
that endow the organelle its structure and functions. To maintain the higher
order structure and proper functioning of the cell, all newly synthesized
proteins need to localize to their correct cellular destinations. To accomplish
this, cells have evolved a universally conserved protein targeting machine,
signal recognition particle (SRP), to recognize and deliver newly synthesized
proteins to the appropriate cellular membrane. This project aims to understand
how SRP is regulated in the cell to ensure the organelle specificity of protein
localization, and how its complex with the SRP receptor and the nascent protein
is disassembled at the target membrane to allow efficient insertion of nascent
proteins. The proposed project will combine the expertise of the Shan lab in
mechanistic biochemistry and the Weiss lab in biophysics to decipher the
sophisticated spatiotemporal regulation of SRP. The results will reveal
generalization principles that ensure the proper functioning of the “mail
delivery” system in the cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.