* 2219129
* Low Dimensional Transition Metal Oxyanion Mulitferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 566,530.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
will allow researchers at Clemson University to focus on the synthesis of new
materials displaying unusual optical and magnetic properties. Particular
emphasis is placed on the growth of high-quality single crystals in high
temperature, high pressure water (the so-called high temperature hydrothermal
method) that enables accurate characterization of complex physical properties
such as magnetic structures. The target materials can display nonlinear optical
or frustrated magnetic behavior which can lead to new quantum materials and
enable a more detailed understanding of the compounds used in quantum computing
and quantum communication. The project pays particular attention to the
development of the next generation of researchers, supporting graduate students,
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. It will also specifically educate new
researchers on the targeted growth of single crystals, an area of considerable
current need in the United States. Another important activity involves
significant student collaboration with the state-of-the-art neutron and magnetic
research facilities at Oak Ridge National Lab. These interactions with an
advanced national laboratory provide invaluable learning experiences for the
next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
researchers at Clemson University will focus on the synthesis and
characterization of new materials with interesting magnetic and nonlinear
properties. The use of a high temperature hydrothermal method leads to the
efficient growth of high quality single crystals with minimal lattice defects
and negligible site disorder, which will enable accurate determination of
physical properties. One specific goal is to gain a greater understanding of
systems with coupled physical properties, such as multiferroics and
magnetoelectrics. Emphasis will be on materials with potential magnetic
frustration, especially those with low dimensional (1-D or 2-D) structures, so
as to generate different intra- and interchain coupling of magnetic vectors.
Such couplings can induce standing electric dipoles and perpendicular magnetic
vectors leading to magnetoelectrics. This project will attempt to generalize the
factors that cause such multiferroic behavior and design and synthesize new
systems displaying more complex coupling. One important factor in the program is
the collaboration with the neutron scattering facilities Oak Ridge National Lab.
The initial focus will be on the elastic neutron scattering measurements to
determine the static magnetic structures, followed by more complex inelastic
measurements to determine coupling values. The ability to grow large single
crystals is particularly important to understand the behavior of the magnetic
structures in externally applied magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.