* 2219772
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: Active and Passive Internet Measurements for Inferring IoT Maliciousness at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Elias Bou-Harb, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 259,999.00

Smart sensing technologies within the context of the Internet-of-Things (IoT)
paradigm continue to be deployed in key sectors such as health, agriculture,
energy and manufacturing. Indeed, it is estimated that around 30 billion IoT
devices will be instrumented by 2030 to increase efficiencies and usability
while decreasing costs and maintenance time. Nevertheless, such IoT devices lack
even the most fundamental security measures, access policy controls, and patch
management capabilities, making them attractive targets for attackers and state-
sponsored actors who will abuse them to gain illegitimate access into critical
networks while orchestrating them in order to impair other Internet-connected
entities. Given the widespread deployment of such IoT devices, it becomes
extremely challenging to promptly address their security concerns at-scale. This
is mainly due to the lack of scalable methods, which could analyze large-scale,
representative data, and the shortage of techniques that are efficient enough to
be operated in near real-time. To this end, this project servers NSF’s mission
to promote the progress of science by developing empirically-driven methods and
techniques to quantity IoT insecurities at-large, while offering digital
forensics means to comprehend the causes of their inherit vulnerabilities. The
project also offers IoT-centric remediation tactics for supporting Internet
security. The project fosters a number of educational activities while
organizing female-focused workshops in addition to mentoring students within
underrepresented groups from the three collaborating minority
institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project devises data-driven
methodologies operating on actively and passively-collected network traffic and
associated service banners to establish unique malicious IoT labeled empirical
datasets. The project then designs and implements algorithms and formal methods
rooted in supervised deep learning to fingerprint Internet-scale exploited IoT
devices while developing IoT-specific feature engineering and clustering
algorithms for characterizing and analyzing the malicious orchestration of IoT
campaigns. Additionally, the project executes malware automated disassembly,
decompilation, and analysis while engineering computational approaches on packet
sequences via solving linear equation sets to investigate IoT stateless scanning
modules and related deceiving techniques. This is leveraged to establish bogus
connections with the infected devices using crafted packets in order to capture
key IoT malware and digital forensic artifacts. To support operational IoT-
specific cyber security operations, the project builds and makes available to
the public a cyberinfrastructure, which indexes the inferred compromised IoT
devices along with their related threat information including employed malware
binaries and attacks’ tactics, techniques, and procedures. This aims at enabling
proactive IoT security remediation, hands-on research and training, and forensic
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.