* 2219562
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Consortium at the 2022 VL/HCC Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Thomas LaToza, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support participation by 6 Ph.D. students from U.S.
educational institutions, along with the PI and 2-3 other distinguished research
faculty as mentors, in the Graduate Consortium (workshop) being organized in
conjunction with the 2022 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric
Computing (VL/HCC). The conference, which is sponsored by the IEEE Computer
Society's Technical Committee on Multimedia Computing, will be held September
13-16 in Rome, Italy. Established in 1984, the mission of VL/HCC is to support
the design, theory, application, and evaluation of computing technologies and
languages for programming, modeling, and communicating, which are easier to
learn, use, and understand by people. VL/HCC occupies a unique niche among HCI
and programming language conferences, in that it focuses specifically on how to
help end users successfully develop and use software. This year, the
conference's emphasis is on Human-Centric AI; more information may be found
online at https://conf.researchr.org/home/vlhcc-2022. The PI and the members of
the organizing committee will make special efforts to attract a diverse and
interdisciplinary group of student participants to the Graduate Consortium, with
special attention paid to recruitment of students from underrepresented
institutions and women. To further increase diversity, no more than two student
participants will be accepted from any given institution (and if two are
accepted, then at least one of them must be from an under-represented group in
STEM fields), and returning students will be given priority for approximately
1/3 of the slots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid advances in computing have led to
continually deeper integration with human society, prime examples including
online marketplaces, social media systems, massively multiplayer online games
and open-source repositories. Yet as socio-technical systems have grown in
complexity, they have become increasingly difficult for end users to completely
understand and direct toward productive ends. Therefore, a major goal of this
year's VL/HCC Graduate Consortium, a full-day event that will immediately
precede the conference on September 12 and be the 18th to be funded by NSF in
this series, is to stimulate graduate students' thinking about how to exploit
cutting-edge techniques from the earliest stages of problem solving. What
methods, diagrams, and tools can people leverage to create mental models of
complex socio-technical systems that can be used when making design decisions
and for collaboration? Effective approaches will bring users and software
together in creative and productive ways that bear directly on the needs of
modern society. The Graduate Consortium will help shape ongoing and future
research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of relevance to a
great many people within our society. The student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the workshop and will receive constructive
feedback, both from the faculty mentors and the other students, that is geared
to helping them understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative
to other human-computer interaction research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether the results are appropriately analyzed
and presented. This will promote discovery and learning, while also building
community among young researchers working from the perspectives of diverse
fields including computer science, the social sciences, and education. To get
feedback from a broader slice of the VL/HCC community, every student participant
will present a poster or demo at the Showpieces event during the main
conference, and a 2-page extended abstract of each student participant's work
will be published in the conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.