* 2219767
* I-Corps:   Active fingerprinting security feature embedded in sensors of cyberphysical systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Hany Abdel-Khalik, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cybersecurity paradigm that is expected to improve the
cybersecurity posture of critical infrastructure that rely on IoT (internet of
things) devices for their day-to-day operations. The IoT revolution has
significantly improved the efficiency of supply chains by providing unprecedent
levels of data-driven insight but has opened up the dark side of cyberthreats.
The key value of the proposed technology to adopters is minimized losses due to
ransom payouts and system downtime that has significant downstream effects on
the national economy and public confidence in national security. Investing in
the proposed technology is expected to pay for itself multi-fold by preventing
just one cyberattack each year. A nation-wide adoption of the technology would
allow the energy industry to leverage the benefits of the IoT revolution without
sacrificing security. In addition, the proposed technology may bring next-
generation technologies to the forefront that can significantly reinforce the
energy resiliency of the US and augment renewable sources. In light of the
looming energy crisis, promoting such technologies plays a pivotal role in
ensuring self-sufficiency and maintaining an edge against state-sponsored
adversaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an active fingerprinting security feature embedded in sensors of
cyberphysical systems that serves as a last line of defense against insider
threats, while also providing an avenue for data recovery even if the system is
hacked. It relies on the inherent redundancy of the physics of the system to
store a permanent incorruptible record of the system's operational history,
which may then be cross-referenced for both intrusion detection and data
recovery if the system is compromised. The proposed technology is designed with
zero-impact and zero-observability conditions in mind, i.e., the implementation
must not affect the system operation and remain covert to a third-party
malicious agent inspecting the data. This significantly deviates from overt
security measures such as encryption and other active techniques, which may be
visible, leave a footprint on the system and/or be reverse-engineered by
artificial intelligence (AI). To the contrary, the proposed technology is
rendered immune to detection by AI and cannot be bypassed even by insiders
intimate with the system due to its zero-impact and zero-observability
conditions, and is further enhanced by a cryptographically secure one-time-pad.
Due to the ability to understand the physics of the system, a key merit of the
prosed technology is its ability to recover data immediately using the physics
itself without requiring additional vault-like data storage and backup
mechanisms, all of which cause significant downtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.