* 2219787
* The Interrelationship Between Friction and Fracture in Needle Insertion
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alison Dunn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 648,664.00

This award will advance understanding of the fundamental mechanics of needle
insertion. Despite the ubiquity of needle-based medical procedures and a wealth
of needle insertion studies, there are critical gaps in understanding.
Quantification of the sliding friction and material fracture during post-
puncture needle insertion is needed to evaluate new needle designs and the soft
materials into which they may be inserted. The current shortcomings in
computational prediction stem in part from a missing description of the effect
of friction and fracture on one another. A more detailed understanding is
critical to the successful expansion of minimally invasive methods to areas
beyond the body’s surface. Successful description of the fundamental mechanics
of these effects will both facilitate control schemes and enable rapid
evaluation of novel needle designs. This research is expected to ultimately
result in reduced patient discomfort, healing time, and procedure costs. This
research will be implemented with a team of graduate researchers who will
receive management training to coordinate the effort of undergraduate trainees.
The researchers will share their experiences and findings via social media with
the aim of illuminating the challenges, rewards, and process of mechanics of
materials research for the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
quantify the simultaneous and reciprocal effects of sliding friction and
material rupture during post-puncture needle insertion. Initial goals will guide
the work toward first understanding the influence of fracture on surface
morphology and the latter’s influence on friction. Once gained, these separate
effects will be unified in the primary goal of simultaneously describing
interfacial mechanics along the needle shaft and fracture at the needle tip.
Tests will be performed at quasi-static to surgically-relevant rates. First,
surface damage morphology will be systematically varied by controlling both the
energy available to fracture (via tip radius and boundary conditions in planar
and needle geometries) and material constitutive response using two well-
characterized materials systems typical of needle insertion studies, but having
different failure behaviors: oil-diluted silicone (tougher) and hydrogel (more
brittle). Second, the effect of surface damage morphology on frictional
resistance to sliding will be measured to establish correlations and critical
regimes as a function of rate and normal force. Finally, using these
correlations, planar cutting geometry conditions will be mapped to the
cylindrical needle-insertion geometry to quantify frictional effects which will
be further tuned via surface modification. This mapping will be initiated via
local failure criteria obtained from full field strain measurement during in
situ needle insertion and cutting. The resulting fundamental understanding of
the interrelationship between friction and fracture will inform the development
of more robust computational models of needle insertion and lead to more refined
and improved models for robotic needle insertion. Both advances will enhance the
development of minimally-invasive, tissue-specific needle
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.