* 2219089
* ECO-CBET: Modular Electrochemical Processes for Simultaneous Nitrogen Recovery and Carbon Dioxide Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 820,584.00

Livestock farming is an essential branch of agriculture that provides protein-
rich food products to humans. However, ruminant animal systems produce
substantial amounts of greenhouse gas emissions and can have deleterious
environmental impacts. Such livestock systems are increasingly under pressure to
become more environmentally sustainable. Many of the environmental issues stem
from the release of livestock manure constituents, including nutrients,
pathogens, and organic matter, into the environment. These releases contaminate
surface and ground waters, increase the risk of climate change, cause nuisance
odors, and, ultimately, pose a threat to human and animal health. In addition,
manure’s high water content and low nutrient density increase the transportation
cost to farmlands and limit its effective use. Recovering nutrients from manure
can improve nutrient management and minimize the possibility of negative
environmental impacts. Climate impacts could be further mitigated by converting
the carbon dioxide in the biogas generated from manure processing into fuels and
other useful products. This project, a collaboration between investigators at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
seeks to overcome the challenges facing manure processing systems through the
development of novel modular electrochemical processes. The proposed system will
integrate electrochemical processes to simultaneously recover ammonia from
livestock manure as fertilizer and convert carbon dioxide to locally-valuable
chemicals. The knowledge generated from this research will address the growing
need for sustainable and effective livestock manure management. The team will
engage K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in STEM outreach and research
experiences. Students identifying as a member of an underrepresented group in
STEM will be recruited and mentored through partnerships with on-campus
organizations. Benefits to society will also be achieved through outreach and
education activities for farmers, policymakers, agriculture educators, and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Livestock manure can lose nutrients,
pathogens, and organic matter to the environment, degrading both surface and
ground water quality, contributing to climate change, and creating human and
animal health issues. Processing manure to recover embedded nutrients can
mitigate these impacts by increasing nutrient density, making a more manageable
fertilizer that can be economically transported to remote locations. The overall
goal of this ECO-CBET project is to develop modular electrochemical processes to
tackle carbon, nutrient, and water challenges in livestock manure systems by
recovering ammonia as fertilizers with increased nutrient density and producing
valuable chemicals from carbon dioxide for on-site application. These
electrochemical processes are uniquely enabled by redox reservoirs, which
reversibly store electrons and specific ions while serving as interchangeable
counter electrodes for flexible integration with complementary electrochemical
half-reactions. The ammonium-rich manure wastewater can be fed into a galvanic
cell with a bioelectrochemical anode and a redox reservoir cathode that
selectively extracts ammonium cations from the milieu. The redox reservoir is
introduced into an electrolytic cell, where it serves as an anode, releasing
ammonium, and is paired with a carbon dioxide-reducing cathode for co-generation
of useful products, including formic acid, a supplemental animal feed
preservative, and methane, a renewable feedstock that can be injected into
natural gas pipelines. The specific objectives are: 1) develop the pretreatment
of livestock manure, synthesize and characterize new redox reservoir materials,
and demonstrate the feasibility of redox reservoir-enabled selective ammonia
recovery from manure; 2) integrate ammonia recovery with carbon dioxide
conversion to value-added products in modular systems; and 3) perform techno-
economic and life cycle analyses of individual and combined modular systems. The
success of this project will introduce transformative concepts for more
efficient nutrient and carbon resource recovery from manure, generate new
insights for distributed and sustainable chemical manufacturing, train the next
generation of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers, and provide exciting
STEM outreach and education opportunities at the intersection of the farmers,
policymakers, agriculture educators, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.