* 2219660
* Development of a High-throughput, Temperature-controlled LED-based Instrument to Characterize the Wavelength Dependence of Photochemical Reactions in Aquatic Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Collin Ward, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2025
* USD 233,955.00

Aquatic photochemistry is an interdisciplinary field that examines how sunlight-
driven reactions impact the fate and composition of diverse materials in surface
waters, including major and minor elements, inorganic and organic pollutants,
and biomolecules. Arguably the largest knowledge gap in the aquatic
photochemistry discipline is the wavelength dependence of sunlight-driven
reactions. That is, while the suite of possible reactions is reasonably well
understood, knowledge of how the reaction efficiencies and rates vary by
wavelength is limited, largely owing to key shortcomings of current
instrumentation. This project aims to overcome these shortcomings by designing,
developing, and validating a light-emitting diode (LED) based instrument that
improves sample throughput, offers a wider range of sunlight wavelengths to
probe, is temperature-controlled, and is field portable. The researchers expect
that this new instrument will permit rapid growth in knowledge about the
wavelength dependence of a wide variety of photochemical reactions in natural
and engineered systems, and, consequently, improve estimates of photochemical
reaction rates across space and time. The researchers will serve as a mentor in
the Community College Research Experiences at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, a program focused on promoting ocean science, technology, and
engineering skills and capacity building among community college students, an
underappreciated and underutilized resource of talented and diverse
undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate assessment of photochemical
reaction kinetics in surface waters requires knowledge about the light available
at different wavelengths throughout the water column and the photochemical
reaction efficiency, or apparent quantum yield (AQY; mol product mol-1 light
absorbed) at those wavelengths. However, current approaches to characterize AQY
spectra have many disadvantages, including costs, sample throughput, ease of
use, and portability. The researchers have developed and validated a prototype
reactor assembly to directly probe AQY spectra of aquatic photochemical
reactions. The prototype uses ultraviolet (UV) and visible LEDs to generate high
power, narrow banded, and spatially uniform irradiance. In this project, the
researchers will scale-up and improve upon the prototype by designing,
developing, and validating a new instrument that is electronically-controlled,
has upward of a four-fold greater sample capacity, has at least ten-fold higher
optical power, has an extended wavelength range from the UV-C to the visible
light region, is temperature-controlled, and is field
portable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.