* 2219248
* OPP-PRF: Investigating Fire-Biotic Disturbance Interactions and Their Sensitivity to Climate in the North American Boreal Biome
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Katherine Hayes, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 321,333.00

Boreal forests are important because they store large amounts of carbon. Almost
30% of all forest carbon is stored in this biome. The frequency of disturbances,
such as forest fires, pests, herbivores, and diseases, are increasing with
climate change. More frequent fires combust carbon on the forest floor of boreal
black spruce forests, which can prevent spruce from growing back. When black
spruce trees fail to grow back after fire, deciduous species such as birch,
aspen or willow grow instead. New insect outbreaks and diseases are showing up
in the North American boreal forest, which threaten to kill many of these
deciduous trees. However, little is known about the causes and effects of these
new outbreaks, and how they may continue to affect carbon storage in boreal
forests. This research will use computer simulations to better understand (1)
the extent, impact and potential threats of new pests, herbivores, and diseases
in Alaskan boreal forests; (2) how new outbreaks of pests, herbivores, and
diseases may interact with fire and climate to alter how boreal forests store
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boreal biome is a globally important
terrestrial carbon sink: Approximately 30% of all terrestrial carbon is stored
within boreal forests and the soils and permafrost (frozen soil) underneath.
However, the future fate of boreal carbon depends on the impact of climate
change on multiple disturbances and their interactions. Boreal forest fires are
sensitive to climate and are increasing in frequency, size, and severity.
Increasing short-interval fires combust legacy carbon in surface organic layers
of black spruce stands and drive transitions in post-fire species regeneration
from spruce to broadleaf dominance. Altered forest regeneration following short-
interval fires creates a pulse of emissions, causes shifts in carbon stocks from
below to aboveground and alters the vulnerability of subsequent carbon
accumulation. New biotic disturbances are concurrently emerging in the North
American boreal forest that could cause widespread broadleaf tree mortality and
threaten to release the carbon accumulated in broadleaf biomass. However, little
is known about the causes and consequences of these emerging biotic
disturbances, and how they may further alter boreal carbon storage. This project
will use process-based forest modeling (1) to develop a systems-based framework
leveraging available and emerging data to model new impacts of biotic
disturbances and their interactions, synthesizing current understanding of these
emerging threats; and (2) apply that framework to a suite of climatic and biotic
agent scenarios, testing the impact of fire-climate-biotic interactions on
ecosystem carbon and successional trajectories at landscape scales under current
and future conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.