* 2219046
* A tango between magnons and phonons in 2D van der Waals insulating magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xianglin Ke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 417,410.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Magnons and phonons, which are quanta of spin waves and
lattice vibrations respectively, represent two fundamental collective
excitations in condensed matter. In general, magnons and phonons are studied
separately. Nevertheless, in magnetic solids with strong spin-lattice
interactions, magnon-phonon coupling plays a key role in determining magnetic
and thermal properties. Thus far, experimental studies of magnon-phonon coupling
in van der Waals magnets, which emerge as a fertile playground for the discovery
of novel physical phenomena, remain a largely unexplored research frontier. This
project studies the magnon-phonon coupling in van der Waals insulating magnets
by utilizing neutron scattering and thermal transport techniques. This project
offers an excellent educational experience for young researchers to utilize
cutting-edge facilities for scientific research on quantum materials. In
addition to training graduate and undergraduate students, this project also
supports scientific research activities by engaging K-12 students, attracting
underrepresented students to research, and developing workshops. Importantly,
this project serves as a platform to train the next-generation of neutron
scattering scientists and therefore grows the user community of cutting-edge
facilities in national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project studies magnon-phonon
coupling in van der Waals insulating magnets to understand the roles of magnons,
phonons, and magnon-phonon coupling on thermal transport and thermodynamics of
these systems. Specifically, the work addresses the following key scientific
questions with neutron scattering and thermal transport techniques: (i) how does
the magnon-phonon coupling depend on the symmetry of magnetic ground states?
(ii) how does the spin-lattice interaction depend on the electron occupancy on d
orbitals of magnetic transition-metal ions, and what is the impact of this on
the magnon-phonon coupling? (iii) How does the magnon-phonon coupling vary with
the spin-orbit interaction? (iv) How does the magnon-phonon coupling affect
materialsâ€™ thermal transport and thermodynamics properties? The answers to these
questions provide unprecedented knowledge about the coupling between magnons and
phonons as well as their impact on thermal properties of van der Waals
materials, which are essential for applications of these materials in spin
caloritronics and magnon spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.