* 2219650
* Conference: FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Michael Scanlon, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2023
* USD 28,301.00

Scientific meetings enable the exchange of new findings from international
experts in specific areas of state-of-the-art research, while also providing a
forum to enhance the training and networking of younger scientists who represent
the future of research in the discipline. Plant developmental biology is the
study of the processes whereby plants form all the specialized cells, tissues,
and organs of the adult plant, beginning with the fertilization of the single-
celled zygote and encompassing all the subsequent stages of development
including embryo formation and germination, vegetative development of leaves,
roots and stems, and culminating in the formation of spores, seeds and/or
flowers and fruits. This NSF award will be used to organize an international
meeting in the area of plant developmental biology, which will feature talks and
poster presentations from experts in the field. In addition, the meeting will
feature talks selected from young scientists at early-career stages, and from
scientists from under-represented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics. Furthermore, the meeting will also host interactive sessions
where young plant developmental biologists will meet with established experts to
discuss strategies toward establishing successful careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the organization of the 19th
international FASEB Mechanisms in Plant Development, which brings together
leading researchers in world of plant developmental biology to exchange
unpublished ideas and advance concepts in the field. Likewise, the meeting will
promote the participation and recognition of early-career scientists. Activities
include invited speaker sessions, early-career speakers selected from abstracts,
minority participation, poster sessions, and career development workshops. Plant
developmental biology is a core discipline that studies self-organization of the
multicellular plant. Discoveries in plant cell-to-cell signaling,
transcriptional networks, and physiology are relevant to the wider field of
developmental biology. Nonetheless, there are unique aspects of plant
development that require a dedicated meeting where scientists can discuss and
exchange technical/conceptual innovations and provide a point of inspiration for
young plant developmental biologists. This year’s proposed topics span focus
areas for NSF IOS and MCB programs. The meeting provides a critical forum for
graduate students and postdocs. The small size of this meeting (&lt; 150
participants) facilitates interaction among participants from all career stages
at meals, poster sessions, and “meet the experts’ sessions addressing career
concerns of young scientists. This year’s meeting will feature 14 short talks
selected presented by earlier-stage researchers. Participation by minority and
female scientists is strongly encouraged; more than half of the invited speakers
at the conference are women. Furthermore, participation of other
underrepresented groups will be an emphasis of short-talk selections. The
outcomes of the conference will be disseminated through student-generated
journal publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.