* 2219891
* NCS-FO: Conformable, expandable neural interface devices to assay natural cognitive maturation of the developing brain
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Dion Khodagholy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 963,539.00

Investigating brain circuit development can facilitate understanding of how the
brain becomes capable of performing complex cognitive functions. A key missing
strategy is the ability to monitor brain activity as an organism transitions to
successful performance of behaviors requiring cognitive processes. This project
involves using bioelectronic devices that can interface with different brain
structures as they naturally grow&lt;br/&gt;to monitor immature rodents as they
perform behaviors in naturalistic environments. These devices will be made out
of soft, organic materials that can establish an effective interface with
biological tissue with minimal damage. The overall goal of this project is to
identify neurophysiologic signatures of emerging cognition, using computational
analysis on acquired longitudinal data to track developmental
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this research will improve the
efficiency of biomedical devices and provide key insights into principles
underlying formation of brain circuits that can support cognition. This work
holds promise for guiding public health initiatives that could enable
appropriate monitoring of childhood development. From an educational
perspective, this project aims to expand training in interdisciplinary
initiatives, specifically&lt;br/&gt;focusing on creating partnerships between
engineering and neuroscience trainees and highlighting the iterative feedback
process required to transition a device from development to functional
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to addresses focus areas (i)
neuroengineering and brain-inspired concepts and designs, and (ii) cognitive and
neural processes in realistic, complex environments of NSF Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems. The overall objective
is to use an integrated implantable neural device that enables longitudinal
acquisition of neurophysiological data to investigate
neural&lt;br/&gt;correlates of cognitive processes as animals become capable of
performing advanced naturalistic behaviors. The central hypothesis is that
organic electronics in combination with soft, expandable substrates can enable
monitoring of local field potentials and action potentials from the developing
brain without restricting spontaneous behavior. This data will identify
predictors of capacity for neural computation&lt;br/&gt;supporting cognition in
individual organisms. The rationale for this high-risk/high-payoff research is
that novel monitoring approaches that merge engineering and neuroscience
expertise are required to derive insight into how cognitive processes emerge in
complex environments. The materials, approaches, and data generated by this work
have the potential to provide notable medical and social benefits, such as:
(i)&lt;br/&gt;soft, conformable interfaces for acquisition of neurophysiological
activity from the human body; ii) approaches to safely expand neuroelectronic
devices to use in pediatric age groups; and iii) accessible wearable
bioelectronics for preventive medicine and lifestyle management. Generation of
novel datasets from animals involved in naturalistic behavioral and social
situations will benefit the neuroscience&lt;br/&gt;community and lead to further
scientific discoveries. The educational aspects particularly emphasize improving
diversity of trainees engaged in STEM research, and providing these trainees
with the skills required to form, participate in, and manage projects that
require strong interdisciplinary collaboration and involve individuals from
disparate training backgrounds. Summative evaluation will be implemented
for&lt;br/&gt;these efforts to evaluate overall success in integrating training
about core principles of bioelectronics with neuroscientific analysis, with the
goal of creating new opportunities for synergy between engineering and
neuroscience fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.