* 2219284
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: Repository and Benchmarking Dashboard for Campus Climate Data on Sexual Misconduct
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kevin Swartout, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2025
* USD 356,800.00

Campus climate surveys ask college students about their experiences on campus.
Climate surveys also measure students’ perceptions of a college and knowledge of
its policies and practices. Many campuses have used the same surveys to assess
campus climate related to sexual misconduct. Despite the potential for these
surveys to improve understanding of the issues surrounding sexual misconduct,
including national rates and the relationship between sexual misconduct and
student experience, there is no public database of campus climate survey data.
This project creates such a database, giving the opportunity for US colleges and
universities to share, compile, and analyze climate survey data. Access to these
data permit researchers and campus staff to better assess the impact of their
policies, programs, and procedures on student wellness and security, advancing
work in the social sciences, higher education, and STEM and medical
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Human Networks and Data Science
Infrastructure project creates a data repository and public benchmarking
dashboard for campus climate data. This infrastructure makes it easy to store
and analyze campus sexual misconduct climate data from US colleges and
universities. Data from over 125 US institutions of higher education are linked
in the repository to information about the institutions such as size and
location. An important component of the project is preparing the data for the
dashboard in ways that maintain the privacy of each institution and its
students. The self-sustaining web dashboard, developed with input from campus
staff, researchers, and students, is accessible to a diverse national community
of researchers, campus staff, and other citizens who are interested in advancing
data-intensive research and campus evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.