* 2219863
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Specifying and Verifying Network-wide Properties of Dynamic Data Planes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ratul Mahajan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 374,998.00

Computer networks connect users to bank accounts, online commerce, information
about government, social media, and other cloud services. They are essential for
modern business and everyday life. However, managing such networks is difficult
and error-prone. As a result, damaging outages that have shut down everything
from food deliveries to plane flights to critical information services occur all
too frequently. This research project develops new technology for verification
of a key component of modern computer networks---their data planes---which
traditionally have been used just to forward traffic, but are increasingly used
to implement complex network control logic and next-generation applications. The
verification tools being developed will check network configurations both prior
to deployment of those configurations, and also as those configurations execute,
thereby making networks more reliable, and preventing many future outages before
they can occur. This research project also provides educational opportunities
for a diverse range of students, teaching them key skills in both networking and
the application of formal verification methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Spurred by
the recent development of programmable network switches and programmable network
interface cards (NICs), the data planes of industrial computer networks are
becoming highly dynamic, allowing them not only to forward traffic but also to
implement network control logic that can adjust to evolving network conditions.
The goal of the proposed research is to make these new networks substantially
more reliable via tools that can formally specify and verify network-wide
behavior. These specifications use a common language of events to represent data
plane activity (e.g., packet arrivals), control plane messages (e.g., routing
announcements), and application layer events (e.g., installation of a cache
entry) in a uniform way. The verification technology to validate these
specifications uses a combination of static and dynamic techniques. Static
verification catches bugs before network program changes are deployed, while
dynamic verification, via monitors synthesized from high-level specifications,
checks that static assumptions hold up, bridges scaling gaps, and provides
defense in depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.