* 2219493
* Symmetry, entanglement, and far-from equilibrium perturbations in 2D materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Despina Louca, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 563,899.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A crystal lattice is the
geometrical arrangement of atoms inside a crystal. Theoretical approaches often
rely on the assumption that materials have perfectly periodic lattices. However,
in reality, disorder - in the form of defects, vacancies, or some other
cooperative atomistic modulation - is quite common and relevant to the
underlying interactions and can be the driver for new and interesting behaviors.
The goal of this project is to advance fundamental knowledge on the role and
properties of the crystal lattice across variable length and time scales,
allowing for predictions of physical properties. Specifically, a family of
quasi-two dimensional compounds known as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
will be investigated as they offer an incredibly rich range of novel and poorly
understood properties. Constructed by simple stacking principles, layers of a
transition metal alternate with a chalcogen ion. TMDs are important in a broad
scientific context, and can find their way to many technologies because of their
tunable characteristics. This project seeks to identify universal features of
TMDs and ways to control their properties. Novel pump-probe experimental
techniques and neutron scattering will be used in the course of this study,
providing students with training opportunities in cutting-edge experimental
techniques and exposing them to novel capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
approaches often rely on the assumption that materials have perfectly periodic
lattices but, in reality, disorder - in the form of defects, vacancies, or some
other cooperative atomistic modulation - is quite common and relevant to the
underlying interactions and can be the driver for new and interesting behaviors.
The primary objective of this project is to identify lattice distortions at
relevant length and time scales, and their effects on how spins and electrons
self-organize in real materials - new local patterns that define the
characteristic charge density wave (CDW) modulations as well as new magnetic
signatures that might serve as evidence of quantum spin liquids (QSLs) in 1T-MX2
(M = Ta, and X = S, Se, or Te). This project provides the opportunity to explore
an exotic form of superconductivity given its close proximity to QSL and seeks
to obtain a fundamental understanding of CDW-enabled transitions to
superconducting and QSL states. The effects of disorder and reduced
dimensionality on the static and dynamic properties, at thermal equilibrium and
away from equilibrium will be studied through isovalent doping. The research
combines high-resolution and high-intensity neutron and x-ray scattering
techniques, as well as real-space analysis probes, using single crystals and
powders, supplemented by thermodynamic measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.