* 2219285
* Measuring 210Po in Seawater: A Comparison of Methods
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,737.00

The natural radionuclides lead-210 and its granddaughter polonium-210 are
present dissolved in seawater and have multiple applications for understanding
ocean processes, including determining how fast other similar elements are
removed from the oceans and as indicators of the sinking of particulate organic
carbon from the photic zone. The latter process is an important control on the
level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and is thus important to measure.
Significantly, the two radionuclides have very different geochemical behaviors-
lead is taken up on particle surfaces while polonium can be incorporated into
organic matter and recycled with it. From the 1970â€™s to the present, these
radionuclides have been measured on many oceanographic cruises. Two methods have
been used to extract them from seawater for measurement. One involves
precipitating iron hydroxide from a water sample; the other involves
precipitation of a colloidal chelating agent added to the samples. Historical
and recent results suggest that both methods give comparable results for
lead-210, but the latter method can produce higher concentrations of
polonium-210 than the former. This research hypothesizes that polonium-210 in
seawater can be associated with dissolved organic matter, especially in the
upper water column where organic matter cycling is high, and this can prevent
its extraction from a seawater sample by precipitation of iron hydroxide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to determine under
what circumstances the two methods give comparable results for polonium-210
concentrations in seawater. This research will compare the two methods at a
long-established oceanographic site (DYFAMED) in The Mediterranean Sea, where
prior results are available for these radionuclides. The work will involve field
sampling and a series of laboratory experiments with the iron hydroxide method.
This will enable recommendations of best practices for utilization of the
methods going forward, even if different methods are used on different
oceanographic campaigns such as GEOTRACES and EXPORTS. The project will support
one graduate student and outreach events at American Natural History Museum, New
York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.