* 2219611
* HBCU-RISE: Enhancing Cybersecurity Research and Education Infrastructure
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Mohamed Chouikha, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST) Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Research
Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (RISE) program, this project aims to
develop a new paradigm to securing connected smart systems and contribute to the
development of skilled cybersecurity professionals. While the world is getting
more interconnected than ever before with the recent advances in information and
semiconductor technologies, the new emerging “smart” networked society also
exposes the nation’s critical infrastructures to an elevated risk of
cyberterrorism. This project at Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) seeks to
help address the shortage of skilled cybersecurity professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the security threats facing modern connected
computing systems, this project aims to develop a strong graduate program that
will complement current capacity building efforts in cybersecurity at Prairie
View A&amp;M University by: (1) developing novel security architectures for
computing systems that will address software and hardware-level vulnerabilities
in tandem; (2) training a new cohort of experts with vertical knowledge across
the whole system design stack, including hardware, operating system, firmware
and software; (3) increasing the production of highly qualified doctoral
graduates from groups underrepresented in STEM in a rapidly growing field; (4)
establishing a sustainable pathway to doctoral programs at PVAMU through an
outreach plan to Inclusive Engineering Consortium member institutions; and (5)
developing a Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board approved graduate
certificate program in cybersecurity. The project outcomes will contribute to
security enhancements in critical applications such as energy, financial,
health, education, transportation, and defense sectors. The CREST HBCU-RISE
awards support the development of research capability at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.