* 2219279
* EAGER:  Evolutionary mechanisms and repeatability of adaptive evolution in urban heat islands
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Shane Campbell-Staton, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 150,657.00

Predicting the responses of living systems to ecosystem alteration requires a
framework for understanding the pace and pattern of evolutionary change. Because
of urbanization, cities now host the majority of the human population. As a
result, more wildlife must contend with the novel and extreme environments posed
by urban landscapes. A major consequence of urbanization is ecological
homogenization, wherein urban environments across the globe are more similar to
each other than they are to adjacent undisturbed surroundings. This
environmental similarity begs the question: Do species that successfully
colonize cities follow predictable evolutionary paths to success? This study
examines evolutionary mechanisms involved in adaptation to urban heat islands
using a widespread lizard species (Anolis cristatellus) that has independently
colonized several cities across Puerto Rico. This research will detail the
extent to which urban populations display greater heat tolerance than their
forest counterparts. The study will measure diverse performance traits over a
range of temperatures. Those data will be used to identify groups of genes
involved in thermal acclimation that display elevated divergence within each
urban-forest pair. Additionally, an audio documentary series for the general
public will be produced which focuses on the various ways human activity shapes
the biology of nonhuman species. This high risk-high reward research exploits a
novel methodology that could greatly advance our understanding of the genetics
underlying thermal physiology and adaptation on anthropogenic time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data show that three of these colonization
events are associated with signatures of selection at the organismal,
regulatory, and genetic levels. This suggests candidate mechanisms that drive
parallel selection in urban environments. The research will integrate population
and physiological genomics to identify the genetic basis of thermo-hydric
phenotypes important for adaptation to urban heat islands. This study will
integrate several modern physiological approaches into a single experimental
design. The plan is to conduct simultaneous high-throughput quantification of
thermal performance curves across 21 subordinate traits associated with
metabolic, respiratory and pulmonary physiology. These populations will then be
examined for patterns of allele specific expression to identify evolutionary
mechanisms of repeated adaptive regulatory evolution. Comparing divergent
physiology, gene expression, genetic variation, and the mechanisms by which they
have evolved across the three focal population pairs will provide unprecedented
insights into adaptive physiological evolution in the face of anthropogenic
habitat alteration. The mechanisms driving local adaptation and plasticity of
thermal physiology are likely to play important roles in colonization of novel
environments, adaptive divergence, and resilience to environmental
perturbation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.