* 2219452
* Impacts of and Impediments to a District-wide Diffusion of Equity-centered Computer Science in Elementary Schools in an Urban District
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Keisha Green, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,197,134.00

This research-practice partnership project is studying the impacts of and
impediments to a district-wide diffusion of an equity-centered computer science
curriculum in 32 elementary schools. The partnership is employing a teacher-co-
designed curriculum that integrates the concepts and practices defined in the
Massachusetts Digital Literacy and Computer Science framework with other
standards-based elementary English language arts, mathematics, science, and
social studies curricula. The project is using a phased approach for adapting
and fully implementing the curriculum in three cohorts of ten to eleven schools
each year, including updating and improving on the curriculum, ensuring the
curriculum is taught to all students, connecting to student identities and
critical perspectives, and preparing elementary students to enter pathways ready
to achieve the goals of the district for its graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project uses a Diffusion of Innovation theory framework in its research and
evaluation to guide the diffusion of computer science knowledge, instructional
skills, and diversity, equity, and inclusion practices within every school
towards a sustainable model for integrated elementary-level computer science
learning. The project focuses on curriculum implementation/revision,
professional learning communities, and coaching. Surveys, other data collection,
and case study observations in classrooms and schools will examine student
learning, teacher uptake and efficacy, professional learning community
structures, and fidelity to the curriculum and to included culturally responsive
pedagogies. Research outcomes will inform a continuous curriculum revision and
implementation process throughout project and afterwards. The project will
determine how equity-centered and integrated computer science and computational
thinking instruction diffuses over time in the target elementary schools, how
these diffusion activities affect the depth and rate teachers become aware,
adopt, initiate, and routinize integrated computer science and computational
thinking instruction, and how we may understand the cultural and system factors
influence the diffusion of the computer science and computational thinking
curricula. This project is funded through the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.