* 2219830
* Collaborative Research: Response of the upper tropical Pacific Ocean to greenhouse gas forcing in observations and models
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Christina Karamperidou, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 267,901.00

The tropical Pacific Ocean is a well-established driver of global climate
anomalies and the largest oceanic source of ùê∂ùëÇ2 flux into the atmosphere. Its
response to rising greenhouse gases (GHGs) will strongly influence future global
climate means and extremes and the carbon cycle. Climate models simulate a
warming in this region for the last several decades, which is not seen in the
observational record. There is not a clear explanation of this difference or
what it means for future projections. This work will be a uniquely detailed
analysis of the tropical Pacific Ocean response to GHG-driven thermodynamic and
dynamic forcing focusing on comparisons to observed and reanalyzed changes in
ocean circulation and temperature. While much research has focused on the
tropical atmosphere‚Äôs response to rising GHGs there has been much less work on
the tropical oceans. This project will therefore by an important intellectual
advance in understanding, in the context of radiatively-forced climate change,
the ocean side of the coupled tropical atmosphere-ocean system. Determining how
the tropical Pacific responds to rising GHGs is critical to projecting changes
in regional climates worldwide and climate-carbon feedbacks that influence
atmospheric ùê∂ùëÇ2. The work will advance knowledge important to climate change
mitigation and adaptation. The work will support two early-career researchers
(postdoctoral and graduate) and a female faculty member to make fundamental
advances in understanding how a key component of the climate system responds to
anthropogenic forcing. The lead PI is well integrated into the community
researching evolving drought risk over North America, for which the equatorial
Pacific is a key driver, and its societal impacts. Results will be communicated
there to identify errors and narrow uncertainties regarding near-term
hydroclimate projections under GHG-induced change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amidst
the global warming accompanying the sharp rise in GHGs since circa 1960
observations show little warming or even cooling in the equatorial Pacific cold
tongue. In contrast, models within successive Coupled Model Intercomparison
Projects (CMIPs) simulate warming of the cold tongue. It has been argued that
this discrepancy is due to strong internal variations in nature rather than a
response to GHGs. Yet various studies all show it is unlikely that CMIP models
can match the observations, though they differ on just how unlikely. On the
other hand, it has been hypothesized that rising GHGs lead to strengthening of
the zonal SST gradient, Walker circulation and trades, a dynamically-shoaled
thermocline and enhanced cooling by upwelling. Models, it is argued, have a
largely opposite response due to biases in simulating the tropical Pacific
atmosphere-ocean system. This project will address how the temperature, currents
and thermal structure of the upper tropical Pacific Ocean respond to rising
GHGs. It is a deep investigation with observations and models of the period to
date for which models can be evaluated. The work is organized around hypotheses
that address the questions: 1) what are the relative roles of thermodynamic and
dynamic processes in determining the tropical Pacific Ocean response to rising
GHGs? 2) do biases in climate models (excessive cold tongue, overdeveloped
southern convergence zone, too-warm eastern subtropical stratus cloud and
upwelling regions) lead to biased SST responses in upwelling and subducting
regions and biased transport pathways into the Equatorial Undercurrent? 3) do
model biases influence the response of tropical Pacific SSTs to GHG forcing? The
main goal is to better understand the active role of nature‚Äôs ocean in the
response to rising GHGs. Models are primary tools for this investigation. In
response to rising GHGs the work will examine: how heat added at the surface is
mixed down and transported in the interior after subduction in the subtropics;
how changes in wind stress impact currents, upwelling, thermal structure and
SST; how mean wind stress influences interior pathways between the equator and
the subtropics and, hence, the temperature of water upwelling in the cold
tongue. The responses will be decomposed with experiments with ocean models
using European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasts reanalyses for
validation. The experiments will impose, in various combinations, modeled and
observed fields, GHG-induced heating, and reanalyzed and CMIP6 mean and
anomalous wind stresses. Heat budgets, tracers, Explanatory Artificial
Intelligence methods and causal pathway analysis will reveal the mechanisms of
ocean responses to observed and CMIP6 wind stress trends, how this depends on
the mean ocean state being perturbed, and the relative roles of passive and
dynamical ocean processes in determining trends in tropical Pacific
SSTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.