* 2219389
* Beyond Access and Participation in CSforAll: Measuring Equitable CS Learning Environments.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Cheri Fancsali, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

There is a need to broaden participation and engagement in computer science,
particularly for students who are underrepresented including girls, students who
are Black or Latinx, students with disabilities, low-income students, English
language learners, and students living in rural communities. As schools,
districts, and researchers work toward this goal, they need tools to measure how
new approaches to teaching and learning computer science are supporting the
success of all students. The goal of this project is to develop tools that would
gather information about teachers’ and students’ experiences in computer science
learning. The project has a particular focus on approaches to teaching that
address systemic and structural barriers in computer science and empower
students by engaging them in learning that is relevant to their experiences and
identities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create and validate
instruments to measure culturally responsive-sustaining education for computer
science in middle and high school classrooms. Culturally responsive and
sustaining educational experiences should affirm students’ multiple identities,
empower students as users and creators of technology, and support their
learning, growth, and achievement in computer science. The instruments to be
developed include a teacher survey, a student survey, and a classroom
observation tool. They will be designed in collaboration with a community-based
working group of teachers, students, and parents and guided by an advisory board
of experts in culturally responsive pedagogy and education research. The project
will build on previously designed instruments to create tools specific to
computer science education, which will then be tested through expert review,
cognitive interviews, and a pilot in a small number of classrooms. Based on
those findings, the instruments will be refined and field-tested to explore
whether the implementation of culturally responsive-sustaining education is
associated with improved student outcomes in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also funded through the
CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.