* 2219643
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Global Electric Circuit by Data Mining of Electric Field and Radar Observations from Ground Based, Airborne and Satellite Platforms
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Wiebke Deierling, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 139,000.00

The Global Electric Circuit (GEC) refers to the continuous movement of
atmospheric electricity between the lower atmosphere, ionosphere and
magnetosphere, principally driven by lightning. The work that will be conducted
under this award will address several unknown or uncertain aspects of the GEC.
The importance of the GEC to society is that electric currents in the atmosphere
have impacts on communication and aircraft navigation. The project also includes
significant training opportunities for the next generation of scientists at a
Minority Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to reduce uncertainties in two major components of the Global Electric Circuit;
the upward current from electrified clouds and the downward fair-weather
current. To quantify the upward current the research team will examine electric
field observations above clouds that were collected from field campaigns over
the past three decades, and derive a relationship between those observations and
remote sensing measurements such as from the TRMM and GPM satellite missions.
Downward fair-weather current would be quantified through electric field
observations in Alaska, Colorado, and Texas, with a focus on refining the
definition and uncertainties of fair-weather conditions using cloud and aerosol
data. Six specific science questions are posed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;• Q#1: In
the spectrum of electrified clouds, is it possible to separate the more
important clouds having large contributions to the GEC from those that can be
neglected, based on properties seen from radar, microwave radiometers, or other
satellite-based measurements? What types of electrified clouds supply
significant electric current to the GEC? &lt;br/&gt;• Q#2: What is the role of
electrified extratropical synoptic systems in the GEC, especially from those
with freezing rain and thundersnow? Can their fractional contribution to the GEC
be quantified?&lt;br/&gt;• Q#3: Can the estimated current be refined based on
the vertical and horizontal structures of the electrified clouds from
measurements of radar, passive microwave radiometers, or other satellite-based
measurements? &lt;br/&gt;• Q#4: What are the regional, seasonal, and diurnal
distributions of the various thunderstorms and electrified shower clouds (ESCs)
and their Wilson current contributions to the GEC?&lt;br/&gt;• Q#5: Can the
understanding of local influences to surface electric field be improved by using
a collection of observations of cloud and aerosols in northern Alaska, and the
differences in the diurnal variations of electric fields obtained at other
stations? &lt;br/&gt;• Q#6: How would thunderstorms and ESCs in the Arctic vary
under a warming climate? How is the local electric field related to the
variations of cloud systems in northern Alaska?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.