* 2219936
* EAGER: Water Continuity on the Performance of Osmotically Driven Membrane Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Lianfa Song, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 248,767.00

Osmotically-driven membrane processes (ODMPs) leverage the difference in
chemical potentials between two solutions that are separated by a semipermeable
membrane (i.e., osmotic pressure) to move water from the low solute
concentration side (feed water) to the high solute concentration side (draw
solution). This ability to transport water through a membrane via osmotic
pressure, without applying an external hydraulic pressure driving force, can be
used to supply clean water and produce renewable energy directly from saline
waters. However, low water flux across the membrane limits the performance of
ODMPs and their potential to meet global water and energy needs. A phenomenon
called internal concentration polarization (ICP) has received much of the blame
for the low water flux under an osmotic pressure-driving force alone. The
prevailing theory is that a strong ICP develops in the membraneâ€™s porous support
layer and diminishes the effective osmotic pressure driving water across the
active (skin) layer relative to the total osmotic pressure of the membrane draw
solution. Yet, membranes designed to minimize or eliminate ICP and, thus,
improve water flux have yielded few technological breakthroughs. This project
will consider the controversial idea that the collapse of water continuity
across the membrane, instead of ICP, is mainly responsible for the low water
flux under osmotic pressure. Successfully demonstrating that water continuity
within the membrane is a key factor in ODMP performance has the potential to
transform the field of membrane-based water treatment and purification. The
project will also provide opportunities for graduate student training and STEM
outreach through the Texas Tech University Chapter of the Society for the
Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to demonstrate that the loss
of water continuity inside the membrane of an ODMP is a principal factor
contributing to low water flux. A custom membrane system will be constructed
such that hydraulic pressure can be independently manipulated on both the feed
water and draw solution sides and that the pressure in the feed chamber can be
measured when it is sealed and detached from the feed water tank. The membrane
system will be used to observe the buildup of negative pressure in the sealed
feed chamber under osmotic pressure. Under typical ODMP operating conditions,
the system is expected to exhibit a process of negative pressure buildup and
abrupt dissipation, wherein the negative pressure is relieved by the collapse of
water continuity (i.e., cavitation). In addition to demonstrating the breakup of
water continuity, the study will systematically examine the relationship between
water flux in ODMPs and the status of water continuity as a function of
operating conditions and membrane material. The independence of the hydraulic
pressures applied to the feed water and draw solution sides will also be
evaluated. The research is expected to generate new insights into osmotic
pressure-driven water transport mechanisms across
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.