* 2219759
* Collaborative Research: NCS: Foundations of learning: individual variation, plasticity, and evolution
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,604.00

Humans have remarkably plastic brains; adaptations for learning are perhaps the
hallmark evolutionary trait of our species. This project will examine learning-
related aspects of brain organization in great ape species that are close
evolutionary relatives of humans – bonobos and chimpanzees – using noninvasive
tests and archived brain samples and images. The work focuses on two learned
skills that were important factors in human evolution: tool use and language.
One analysis will use archived brain images from previous studies combined with
new behavioral tests of skill learning. Apes will receive training in
evolutionarily-relevant, naturalistic tool use skills, and the investigators
will measure how individual variation in brain organization is related to skill
learning. Another analysis will examine brain organization in apes that have and
have not undergone training to use language-like systems, including hand signs
and pictogram boards. The investigators will examine how language training is
related to learning-related changes in the brain. Results are expected to shed
light on probable brain changes during the evolution of the human species,
provide insight on neural mechanisms of real-world skill learning in primate
species closely related to humans, and facilitate understanding of how
individual variation in brain structure is related to individual variation in
behavior and cognition.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use a cross-
disciplinary, comparative, integrative approach to examine how individual
variation in brain anatomy influences learning trajectories in the context of
real-world, evolutionarily relevant skills. It also examines the interaction
between acquired, plastic changes in the brain resulting from learning during an
individual’s lifetime, and evolved, heritable changes resulting from natural
selection across generations. The project brings together methodological and
theoretical approaches from neuroscience and neuroimaging, anthropology,
archaeology, and animal behavior. Identification of plastic changes resulting
from language training in great apes will provide a new window on the evolution
of language circuits in our own species and will for the first time add crucial
neurobiological information to landmark, long-running language-training studies
in apes. Additionally, individual variation in chimpanzee and bonobo brain
anatomy will be linked to differences in learning trajectories in two
evolutionarily-relevant, real-world skills: simple stone tool knapping and nut
cracking. Together, this research will provide important new insight on brain
changes underlying acquisition of learned skills both on the timescale of
individual lifetimes (plasticity) and the timescale of evolved, species-level
change (adaptation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Integrated Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS)
program, which is jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.