* 2219888
* Support for the U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Claudia Giulivi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2025
* USD 412,797.00

This award supports three years of funding for the U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office
to coordinate and support the activities of investigators at U.S. institutions
who are fulfilling the GEOTRACES mission, specifically: “To identify processes
and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and
isotopes (TEIs) in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these
distributions to changing environmental conditions.” To fulfill this mission,
and achieve benefits derived from doing so, GEOTRACES is making observations
spanning a global array of ocean sections in close collaboration with modeling
and synthesis, and supported by a solid foundation of ongoing intercalibration
of analytical methods. A program-wide data management system ensures that the
results of the program will live long after the program is completed. The U.S.
GEOTRACES Project Office takes leadership in ensuring success of U.S.
contributions to the mission and in promoting the international GEOTRACES data
management and synthesis initiatives. This award provides support for Project
Office personnel, for planning and expedition-related workshops, for activities
contributing to GEOTRACES synthesis, and for activities that facilitate the use
of GEOTRACES products by the broader scientific community as well as learners,
policy makers, and other stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. GEOTRACES is
in the second half of its plan to complete a prioritized sequence of ocean
sections. This award will fund the U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office to carry out
its role, namely to coordinate the implementation of two upcoming expeditions,
including the organization of workshops that support the dozens of principal
investigators involved in each expedition, together with their students and post
docs and to provide a research framework from planning through sampling to data
synthesis. At this phase of the Program, synthesis is a priority, that is, to
interpret measured distributions of TEIs with the goal of identifying the
principal sources of TEIs in the ocean, quantifying the rates of processes that
regulate TEI supply and removal, and assessing the role of TEIs in
biogeochemical cycles of carbon and major nutrients. Many of these synthesis
activities not only transcend disciplinary boundaries but involve international
partnerships. The Project Office will continue to promote and facilitate these
activities through a combination of large synthesis meetings and smaller
synthesis working groups. Products of these activities will feed into modeling
of the ocean biogeochemical cycles that assesses the sensitivity of TEI
distributions to changing environmental conditions. The Project Office will lead
efforts in the U.S. to exploit GEOTRACES findings to use the ocean in a more
sustainable fashion as part of the UN Decade of Ocean
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.