* 2219422
* Developing curricula and supporting teaching of computer science and computational thinking for multilingual learners in grades K-8
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kip Tellez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 993,213.00

This project will prepare both teachers-in-training and veteran teachers to
develop curriculum and instructional methods that will help low income,
multilingual learners in grades K-8 grow their skills in computer science and
computational thinking, The researchers will collaborate extensively with
practitioner-experts in the schools to create a teacher learning pathway that
builds their confidence and experience with this curricula. The project also
leverages the strengths of the students’ community by engaging families in
project-based learning experiences. The overall aim is to develop teachers'
ability to integrate Computer Science and Computational Thinking into their
science classes and to increase student learning and identity formation,
particularly for those who are underrepresented in the STEM fields. By
addressing the specific needs of multi-lingual learners in economically
disadvantaged schools, this project will expand students’ opportunities to
develop skills and knowledge that will be crucial to their success in the future
job market. The results will be shared with schools nationwide as a model of
equitable and inclusive computer science education for multilingual
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will examine how to develop and
sustainably implement innovations that can support K-8 teachers’ ability to
engage their students in computer science and computational thinking in a manner
that is relevant to the learners’ lives and communities. The project will employ
a design-based research approach collaboratively designing innovations with
teachers, students and their families, testing these in classrooms and the
community, and refining them over the span of the project with the aim of
scaling up their impact and increasing the overall capacity of the district to
support computer science education for all students. Data analysis will utilize
a quasi-experimental design to measure multilingual learners’ achievement and
teacher learning. The data will include observations of the curricular
innovations and teacher professional development, participant surveys, and
student achievement data. Results from this work will contribute to our
understanding of (1) how coherently integrating computer science/computational
thinking into K-8 science curriculum can increase student learning in core
content areas and computer science/computational thinking, particularly for
multilingual learners, (2) how a teacher professional development model that
spans different stages of teacher learning – from preservice to in-service – can
build computer science/computational thinking experience and confidence for
teachers over time, and (3) how at-home, family-engaged project-based learning
experiences can increase computer science/computational thinking identity
formation for all students, particularly multilingual and low-income
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.