* 2219133
* MCA: Phylogenetic and Biogeographic Analyses and Infrageneric Classification of Hypoestes (Acanthaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wendy Applequist, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2025
* USD 183,422.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project will study the evolution and taxonomy
of the plant genus Hypoestes, a group of over 130 known species, most of which
are native to the biodiversity hotspot of Madagascar. The diversity of this
group in Madagascar is poorly known and evidence suggests that there are many
undescribed species. To better understand the biodiversity and conservation
status of the group in Madagascar, it is necessary to clearly identify species
and understand their evolutionary relationships. This project will use DNA
sequence and other data to identify species and reconstruct their evolutionary
history, laying the groundwork for an improved taxonomy and understanding of
biodiversity in the group. This MCA project will allow the principal
investigator to work with an expert collaborator to develop new skills that will
enhance their research and training program, generate opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate student research experience, and provide for public
education and engagement through outreach programs at the Missouri Botanical
Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A phylogenetic study of Hypoestes will be conducted
using the Angiosperms-353 probe set. This method consistently supplies over
100,000 base pairs of low-copy nuclear DNA sequences and can be used on degraded
DNA. Most samples will be extracted from herbarium specimens using a modified
CTAB method. Specimens will be tentatively identified using an unpublished
resource prepared by the PI and comparison to online type specimen images. Some
will be identified as possible new species, and undergraduate research interns
will aid in species descriptions. Five other genera of tribe Justicieae will be
used as outgroups. Genomic libraries will be prepared using commercial kits,
pooled, enriched using the Angiosperms-353 myBaits® Expert Panel target capture
kit, multiplexed, and sent to a commercial laboratory for Illumina® sequencing.
Four different analytical methods will be used to produce gene and species trees
from cleaned and aligned sequence data. Two methods will be used to produce
dated trees calibrated using Acanthaceae fossils, and ancestral geographic
ranges will be predicted. An infrageneric classification of Hypoestes globally
will be proposed, which will recognize subgroups supported by both molecular and
morphological characters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.