* 2219379
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Locating Memory Corruption Vulnerability with Core Dump
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Xinyu Xing, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 97,869.00

Modern operating systems integrate various security mechanisms to prevent
software faults from being exploited. To bypass defenses and hijack program
execution, an attacker therefore needs to constantly mutate an exploit and make
many attempts. While in their attempts, the exploit may terminate a running
process abnormally, and leaves behind a snapshot of its crashing state in the
form of a core dump. While a core dump carries a large amount of information,
which has long been used for software debugging, it barely serves as informative
debugging aids in locating software faults, particularly memory corruption
vulnerabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to explore,
design and develop lightweight, systematic and automated approaches that turn a
core dump to an informative aid in tracking down memory corruption
vulnerabilities. The proposed research has three key components. First, the
project will develop a technical approach to improve the quality of information
extracted from core dumps. Second, the project will explore a set of technical
approaches to enhance this readily-available information. Last but not least,
the project will develop a technical approach to automatically analyze enhanced
core dumps and pinpoint the root cause of software crashes. This project will
make an important step towards improving information available to developers and
analysts debugging vulnerable software.