* 2219857
* Development and Validation of an In-Situ Particle Tracking Velocimetry System for Ocean Turbulence Measurement
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nicholas Ouellette, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2025
* USD 489,375.00

Large-scale models of ocean flows require models of small-scale processes such
as the turbulence that drive mixing. However, our understanding of such
processes is highly uncertain, particularly in a density-stratified medium like
the ocean. Attempting to measure the relevant turbulence quantities using
existing oceanographic instrumentation requires making assumptions about these
small-scale flows that may not always be valid. This project will bridge this
gap by developing and validating a new optical instrument that is capable of
measuring the complete small-scale details of turbulent ocean flows in relevant
real-world settings. By adapting measurement tools developed for laboratory
fluid flow studies for use in the field, this project will help to bring field
measurement capabilities closer to what is possible with state-of-the-art
laboratory diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stirring of the
density field by small-scale turbulent fluctuations is the fundamental process
driving mixing in the ocean, and is thus a key element of ocean models.
Quantities such as the dissipation rate are essential for parameterizing mixing,
but cannot be measured without assumptions using traditional instruments.
Theoretical investigations of stratified turbulence have also been limited by
considerations of which quantities are measurable rather than which are most
important. This project will address both of these gaps by developing and
validating a 3D particle tracking velocimetry (PTV) system capable of making in-
situ measurements of the full microscale structure of stratified turbulence in
the ocean. Unlike previous submersible image-based measurement tools, this
system will be capable of resolving all three components of the velocity field
in a 3D volume rather than a plane, with sufficient resolution to measure all
components of the instantaneous velocity gradient
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.