* 2219212
* Collaborative Research: A Partnership in Central Missouri in the Era of Multi-messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Marco Cavaglia, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,116.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). A new research and education partnership will be developed in
central Missouri as a pilot program between Lincoln University of Missouri and
the Missouri University of Science and Technology (S&amp;T). The core mission of
this new partnership is to provide training and increase research opportunities
in astronomy and astrophysics among underrepresented and underserved students in
central Missouri, building on a nascent astrophysics program. This two-year
project is a pilot program toward the creation of a longer-term partnership
which leads eventually to a formal S&amp;T PhD bridge program for students at
Lincoln University and other surrounding minority-serving institutions,
contributing to increasing Missouriâ€™s diversity in astronomy. The team members
will regularly participate in public lectures at the local library and high
schools to promote the importance of fundamental science among the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will offer student exchange visits,
winter and summer workshops, and summer research internships to train
underrepresented and underserved students, which will allow them to consider a
STEM career or PhD program in astronomy. These activities will train young
researchers at S&amp;T to improve their presentation, mentoring, and management
skills. The proposal team conducts complementary research covering cosmology and
galaxy evolution, gravitational-wave physics, and the physics of the
interstellar medium. Within the project duration, the Hobby-Eberly Telescope
Dark Energy Experiment is expected to release the measurement of dark energy
properties at high redshift. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory will detect more gravitational wave sources in the O4 Observing run
and advance the knowledge of black holes and neutron stars. Machine learning
applications will play significant roles in advancing these data analyses, which
will be leveraged to train students as educational
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.