* 2219678
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: SaTC: Ensemble of Countermeasures for Malicious Thermal Sensors Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Amin Malekmohammadi, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 139,946.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designers of modern Integrated
Circuit (IC) take advantage of pre-designed Intellectual Property (IP)
components produced by third parties to reduce costs and time to market.
Although this approach decreases the IC production costs, a malicious adversary
could tamper with the manufacturing process by inserting Hardware Trojans (HT)
into the final product. For example, according to a well-known report by an
anonymous US defense contractor, hidden kill switches were found in some
commercial processors. This proposal targets a new security threat originating
from hardware-infected thermal sensors. Thermal sensors used for dynamic power
and thermal management can be compromised by HTs, which in turn, seriously
impacts the target IC's security, reliability, and performance. Addressing such
a security vulnerability has positive impacts on a wide range of computing
systems. The large spectrum of potential victim systems, e.g., edge computing
devices, mobile smartphones, wearable systems, data centers, and supercomputers,
indicates the utmost need to address this new threat.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;HT
detection methods working at only one stage of the IC development life-cycle
(e.g., design-, test-, or runtime) have major limitations. Having billions of
gates in an IC makes design-time HT detection methods impractical due to
scalability issues. Test-time methods rely heavily on a statistical analysis of
the IC power and thermal profiles. But, they cannot detect small-size HTs due to
the small footprints. Run-time methods require an always-running monitor to
discriminate sensor readings, which could have large overheads. This project
develops an ensemble of novel countermeasures that address the problem
cooperatively at test-time and run-time to attain the required security and
reliability of ICs. If test-time methods fail in detecting the HT infected
sensor(s) due to a negligible footprint of an HT, then run-time methods can
detect and isolate the compromised sensor(s). Furthermore, the introduced
methods can accurately estimate the temperature of the spot assigned to the
isolated thermal sensor so that the thermal and power management routine scan
continues to function properly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.