* 2219903
* NCS-FO: Uncovering the cognitive and neural fingerprints that make each of us unique
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 982,534.00

Efforts to understand the brain systems that support mental abilities often
assume that all people share a common cognitive and neural “template” that
differs only subtly and randomly from person to person. Yet many classic studies
have shown substantial variation in both mind and brain across different groups.
Language relies on different brain systems for left handers compared to right
handers. Students who struggle with reading show different patterns of neural
connectivity than do fluent readers. Math experts see different kinds of
relationships amongst even simple integers than do college undergraduates. This
project will combine new computational insights, functional brain imaging, and
brain stimulation to characterize variability in the mental and neural
structures that support perception, language, social cognition, and high-order
thought. This work has potential to impact human health and patterns of recovery
from brain damage, approaches to education for typical and atypical populations,
and other fields of science that can benefit from discovery of patterned
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals involve developing new
theory and algorithms for signal discovery in behavioral and neural data, and
using these methods to identify commonalities and differences across individuals
in the structure of their mental representations and the corresponding neural
underpinnings. For both brain and behavior, structure estimation requires a lot
of data, and data generated by a single participant is typically noisy. To
address this, classic approaches treat data from each participant as a sample
drawn from an underlying system common to all members of a population. In
effect, individual differences are treated as noise. Our approach instead
assumes that individuals can differ significantly in the mental and neural
structures that generate data, but that such variation is structured in ways
that can aid in signal-discovery. This project will formalize these ideas in a
computational approach to structure estimation, establish bounds on sample
complexity for the model, and develop practical algorithms for applying the
approach to behavioral and brain imaging data. In parallel with this
computational stream, the investigators will collect behavioral data, functional
brain images, and brain-stimulation data for several tasks tapping different
aspects of cognition. These experiments, combined with the new computational
methods, will experimentally determine how people differ in the structure of
their mental and neural representations—potentially changing our basic
understanding of the different ways brains can give rise to minds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Integrated Strategies for
Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS) program, which is jointly
supported by the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.