* 2219506
* Collaborative Research: Prescribed Burning Decisions and Risk-Risk Tradeoffs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Hannigan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2025
* USD 538,216.00

Wildfires and their environmental and social impacts are growing in the US and
around the world. Prescribed (Rx) burning can be an effective management
technique to reduce vegetation and reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfires.
Despite its potential benefits, the annual extent of Rx burning has stayed the
same or decreased across much of the country in recent years. This is due in
part to the fact that Rx burning entails its own risks, including smoke exposure
and the possibility of a planned fire escaping control. Making Rx burning
decisions requires making informed tradeoffs between these risks and the risks
associated with uncontrolled wildfires. To inform these decisions, this project
assesses two key questions. First, how do decisions by those who implement Rx
burning and by residents in nearby communities shape potential Rx burning
impacts? To answer this question, the research team takes measurements near a
large number of Rx burn sites over time, capturing information such as how much
smoke residents near Rx burns are exposed to and whether experience with Rx
burning influences support for this management approach. Second, how do
perceived risk-risk tradeoffs influence support for expanded Rx burning to
mitigate wildfire risk among wildland-urban interface (WUI) and non-WUI
residents? To answer this question, the researchers survey residents in WUI and
non-WUI areas to understand risk perceptions and policy support. Understanding
these tradeoffs is critical to shaping risk management policy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Prescribed (Rx) burning entails carefully planned fires lit under
controlled conditions to manage fuels that can spur catastrophic fires and WUI
community disasters. The US National Cohesive Wildland Management Strategy
identifies Rx burning as a cost-effective solution, but its use has remained
limited, particularly in the American West. Managing wildfire and other climate-
related hazards involves weighing risk-risk tradeoffs in order to develop
effective, balanced strategies that protect communities and the environment.
This interdisciplinary project uses a mixed-methods approach to advance
knowledge on decision making under risk in the context of natural hazard
management. The researchers develop a novel conceptual model that adapts the
concept of risk-risk tradeoffs to the context of Rx burning decisions. This
conceptual model guides the interdisciplinary research design to address two key
research questions: 1) How do decisions by implementers and residents shape Rx
burning impacts for WUI communities in proximity to Rx burn sites? To answer
this question, the team generates and analyzes a first-of-its-kind dataset
integrating measurements of environmental conditions, smoke emissions, built
environment (housing) characteristics, air quality, exposure, health, and
perceived experience measures near Rx burn sites over multiple years. 2) How do
perceived risk-risk tradeoffs influence support for expanded Rx burning to
mitigate wildfire risk among WUI and non-WUI residents? The team implements a
large survey-based choice experiment to elicit risk-risk tradeoffs and assess Rx
burning support, analyzing data to understand how different risk attributes and
individual characteristics shape risk perceptions and policy support. The
research team is engaging with stakeholders, including policy-makers and
regulators, wildfire managers and Rx burn implementers, and members of the
public, throughout the research process to ensure that the results are relevant
and useful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.