* 2219276
* Collaborative Research: Protein engineering and processing of plant viral templates for controlled nanoparticle synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kevin Solomon, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 614,623.00

Nano-scaled materials have unique properties that are tied to their size. The
properties of these materials are controlled by their architecture. As a result,
their manufacture must be tightly controlled. A uniform template would be
extremely useful in such processes. Barley stripe mosaic virus (BSMV) is a plant
virus with highly uniform structure. Using templates derived from BSMV is
proposed as an economical alternative to current processes. Virus-like particles
(VLPs) derived from BSMV will be designed to act as templates for the production
of metallic nanomaterials. Graduate and undergraduate students in will be
trained to design and produce these templates. High school students from
underrepresented groups and the general public will be engaged through
innovative workshops that teach them about the power of biological engineering
and nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BSMV is an attractive biotemplate for
synthesis of metallic nanomaterials. It can be more densely coated with metal
than other biotemplates. It interacts electrostatically with metal precursor ion
solutions to deposit a wider range of metals. It requires fewer processing steps
to coat fully. The role of key BSMV amino acid residues in mediating metal
mineralization on the VLP surface will be investigated. Protein and RNA
engineering strategies to control biotemplate properties and facilitate
biotemplate robustness will be pursued. Surface residues will be altered to
facilitate metal-template interactions. Thermal processing to create
biotemplated-materials with high electrical conductivities will be optimized. If
successful, the techniques developed will create an economical bacterial
expression and purification pipeline for designer BSMV biotemplates. The range
of metals that ca be deposited on them will be broadened. Key insights into
organic-inorganic interactions involved in metal deposition on biotemplates will
be uncovered. The project results may elucidate structural details about how
BSMV capsid proteins self-assemble, having implications for the infection and
treatment of cereal crops that are susceptible to
BSMV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.