* 2219953
* Large-aperture 160-element coherent hydrophone array system upgrades and operational   readiness testing for real-time continental-shelf scale ocean acoustic monitoring
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Purnima Makris, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,279,032.00

The PI requested funding to upgrade the Passive Ocean Acoustic Waveguide Remote
Sensing (POAWRS) system developed previously with NSF funding. POAWRS is a
transformative approach for ocean sensing, since it is capable of monitoring
sound sources over instantaneous wide areas spanning 100 km or more in diameter.
In addition to marine mammal vocalizations, the other sound sources detected by
POAWRS include biology such as sounds from fish and crustaceans; geophysical
processes such as hurricanes and submarine volcanoes; and man-made activities
such as ships and other ocean vehicles, seismic earthquake plate tectonic
studies and oil exploration, as well as offshore piling. The instantaneous
continental-shelf scale environmental monitoring capability and temporal-spatial
dynamics of sound sources revealed by POAWRS makes it an important technology
that could become an indispensable tool in field operations, such as large-scale
marine ecological studies, fisheries stock assessments and management,
compliance-based marine mammal as well as in studies of the effects of man-made
sound on marine ecosystems. The project provides an opportunity for training and
development work to a diverse team that includes both women and under-
represented minorities. The principal investigator has and will continue to host
and provide opportunities for K-12 students, undergraduates and teachers to
learn and contribute to ocean exploration and discovery through Northeastern
University's STEM Education Center, Research Experience for Teachers (RET),
Young Scholars Program (YSP) and various undergraduate research opportunity
programs. They have and will continue to visit elementary, middle and high
schools to provide demonstrations and hands-on training in ocean discovery and
sensing through ocean sounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would upgrade
the passive ocean acoustic waveguide remote sensing (POAWRS) array based on
issues found in previous sea tests. POAWRS consists of a 160-element coherent
hydrophone array system. This technology was developed for long range
directional sensing, including real-time detection, bearing estimation,
localization, clustering/classification and geographic mapping of ocean sound
producers. The ocean entities mapped by POAWRS include vocalizing marine
mammals, such as cetaceans and pinnipeds from diverse species, various
soniferous fish and crustacean species, shipping and other man-made activities,
as well as oceanographic and geophysical processes, such as submarine volcanoes
and hurricanes. The PI will conduct mechanical upgrade of the 160-element
coherent hydrophone array hardware for robust deployment and enhance and
optimize POAWRS array processing and analysis software for real-time
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.