* 2219736
* IMR: MM-1C: Effective Geolocation of Internet Hosts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michael Rabinovich, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,185.00

This project tackles the problem of determining the geographic location of
Internet hosts from their Internet addresses (the “geolocation problem”).
Geolocation is a fundamental problem in computer networking that affects
numerous aspects of Internet operation, research, and development.
Unfortunately, ample evidence shows that existing geolocation services are prone
to errors and inaccuracies, especially when it comes to mapping content provider
platforms. Beyond the obvious impact on applications relying on geolocation,
these inaccuracies undermine the rigor of any research that utilizes
geolocation. This research will develop novel techniques that improve the
efficiency and accuracy of geolocation and leverage these techniques to
systematically assess the accuracy of influential existing geolocation services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geolocation commonly involves measuring network delays
from a set of “landmarks” (the hosts with known locations) to the geolocation
target. By selecting – differently for different targets -- a small number of
landmarks from a large pool of candidates, this project attempts to break the
dilemma where a large number of landmarks is desired for higher accuracy but
leads to scalability limits due to high measurement volumes. Through developing
a new geolocation methodology, assessing if its new capabilities could make
provably correct geolocation feasible for a substantial fraction of Internet
hosts, and evaluating the accuracy of existing geolocation services, this
activity will advance our knowledge in the area of Internet host geolocation, a
fundamental problem in networking affecting numerous aspects of Internet
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing the state of the art in Internet
host geolocation has broad impact through benefiting any applications and
research that relies on geolocation. To the extent that it will show that
provable geolocation is practical, this project will transform how networking
research relying on geolocation is done, by allowing rigorous reasoning about
host locations. Datasets containing active measurements, as well as software
artifacts, produced in the course of this project will be made publicly
available. The project will significantly enhance undergraduate and graduate
education at CWRU and facilitate its ongoing efforts in broadening participation
of underrepresented sections of the population in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the data (anonymized when needed) and relevant
software artifacts the project produces will be made available through the
project website at http://engr.case.edu/rabinovich_michael/geolocation. The
content itself will be stored at external public repositories such as github
(github.com) and OSF (osf.io), while the project website will provide links to
the content along with its description. This will be kept available for at least
5 years after the project completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.