* 2219327
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and Dynamic Heterogeneity and Nonlinear Viscoelastic Constitutive Behavior of Glasses and Their Nanocomposites as Probed by Nonlinear Spectroscopies
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Gregory McKenna, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 10/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

This research project will answer fundamental questions related to the
performance of glassy polymers and their nanocomposites. These materials are
important for a wide range of defense and commercial applications. Two
mechanical spectroscopy techniques will be used to identify the unique
“fingerprint” of these materials. Although normally used for soft materials,
this research will employ this approach to investigate the nonlinear response of
glassy polymers and their nanocomposites. The study combines experiment and
computation to advance the science and engineering fundamentals of these
advanced materials. The outreach programs at both universities provide
opportunities for K-12 students and teachers to advance in their understanding
and familiarity with STEM through activities exploring engineering, materials,
and recycling. Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to all
activities of the work. The impact will be broadened by publication of results
as well as technical presentation of the work at major conferences and
incorporation of the findings in courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
goals of the research are to use nanoparticle reinforced polymer glasses to
elucidate the impact of different length scales and heterogeneity on the
nonlinear viscoelasticity of polymer glasses and, simultaneously, their
nanocomposites. The richness of the study arises from the facts that, in glass-
forming systems including polymers, there is a consensus that the
heterogeneities are on the scale of a few nanometers whereas in nanocomposites
the size-scale range of interest can vary from that of the heterogeneity-scale
of the polymer to the size of multiple particles, i.e., above 100 nm. There is
significant evidence that properties of the polymer matrix itself are modified
by the interphases and confinement effects, thus leading to a rich range of
heterogeneity in these materials. The work uses the mechanical spectral hole
burning (MSHB) and large amplitude oscillatory shear (LAOS) fingerprinting
framework to elucidate the impact of different scales and heterogeneity on the
nonlinear viscoelasticity of polymer glasses and their nanocomposites, something
that has heretofore not been investigated. The intent is to systematically vary
the scale and nature of the heterogeneity, to fingerprint it experimentally, and
compare the results with computational models of behavior. The outcome will be a
greatly improved understanding of how heterogeneity in glassy polymers and their
nanocomposites impacts nonlinear behavior and, consequently,
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.