* 2219634
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: HCC: Understanding Human Emotions Associated with Attention Activities in Temporal Domain Utilizing Multimodal Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Soo-Yeon Ji, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,910.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emotions impact human behavior and
have considerable effect on cognitive function, as they are closely linked to
learning, decision-making, and memory. Since the importance of recognizing
emotions has been steadily growing, identifying them has been studied in domains
such as robotics, audience understanding, and therapy. In clinical settings,
especially with respect to neurodevelopmental disorders, emotion analysis has
been studied in an effort to help individuals with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Adults with ADHD have difficulty
attending to important details, planning task completion, modulating responses,
and complex learning. Understanding emotions and how they change over time in
young adults with ADHD is not yet fully understood and is the focus of this
research. Project outcomes will include. an interdisciplinary solution for
understanding and adjusting emotional behavior to enhance human performance.
Project outcomes will enable monitoring of emotion changes for various
applications such as attention training, interventions in social-emotional
adjustments, and classroom-based learning, and ultimately will contribute to the
development of real-time emotion monitoring utilizing wearable sensor devices.
Additional broad impact will derive from building research capacity at a
minority serving institute, by preparing student researchers to collaborate with
faculty on cutting edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves
designing a model that can predict emotions in the near future by examining the
emotions associated with attention activities over time and analyzing multimodal
data such as eye-tracking, electroencephalogram (EEG), skin temperature,
galvanic skin response, and oxygen saturation. The project will investigate
stream-based multimodal data acquisition using a scientific workflow system that
leverages both metadata standards and visual programming. Next, it will collect
data from young adults with ADHD to generate multimodal metrics during an
emotionality analysis task and extract emotion-attention features associated
with attention activities. Subsequently, the research will focus on generating a
model to forecast emotions to enhance students' learning in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.