* 2219617
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CNS: RESCUE: Intelligent Public Safety based on Integrated Communications Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Eirini Eleni Tsiropoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 183,618.00

Natural and man-made disasters pose a serious threat to individuals, assets, and
society. As such, public safety organizations and first responders are
increasingly reliant on Information Communication Technology (ICT) to perform
their duties. Disaster management requires a set of capabilities, which includes
resource management, access to relevant data and information, and robust and
resilient communications. In support of these needs, the RESCUE project will
design a three dimensional (3D) networks architecture that exploits the advances
in the field of next generation wireless networks to provide a prototype
solution such that an integrated communications system for disaster relief
operations is realized. Additionally, an innovative massive multiple access
mechanism and a dynamic spectrum sharing model will be introduced to increase
the public safety system’s capacity and improve the spectrum utilization,
respectively, during the relief operations. A new Positioning, Navigation, and
Timing (PNT) solution will be proposed to support scenarios of Global
Positioning System (GPS) denial by utilizing the next generation networks
technology of Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces (RIS). The outcomes will have
long-lasting benefits for the communications, and in turn the well-being, of the
victims and first responders during disaster relief operations. Furthermore, the
project will provide unique training for graduate and undergraduate students at
the crossroads of reinforcement learning and next generation networking
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RESCUE project will introduce a novel 3D
networks architecture that exploits terrestrial and aerial base stations to
provide the necessary redundancy of communications during disaster relief
operations. A novel massive multiple access mechanism will support the victims
and first responders’ connectivity, and a robust dynamic spectrum sharing model
will improve the spectrum utilization during disaster scenarios characterized by
increased traffic demand. Innovative mechanisms to support the extended
communications coverage, the mobility management, and the efficient resource
management of the limited communications resources will be designed via
utilization of the next generation wireless networks’ technologies of
Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces, Intelligent Omni-Surfaces, and the
Integrated Access and Backhaul. A new positioning, navigation, and timing
solution will support the disaster relief operations in cases of GPS-denial
scenarios or indoor environments by exploiting the next generation wireless
networks’ technologies. A thorough testing and evaluation of the proposed 3D
networks architecture and the supporting modules will be performed by following
a simulation, emulation, and in-field iterative testing approach. The novelty of
the RESCUE project lies in the synergistic, integrated, and pragmatic approach
to efficiently utilize the next generation wireless networks’ technologies to
design an operational prototype that will support the connectivity of victims
and first responders in public safety scenarios. The research outcomes of this
project have the potential to support activities of Emergency Control Centers,
such as in the City of Albuquerque.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the CISE MSI program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.