* 2219657
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CNS: Enabling Secured and Artificial Intelligence Assisted Cell-Free Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Imtiaz Ahmed, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 237,298.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although fifth-generation (5G) new
radio (NR) is being extensively implemented for multi-modal use-cases in
cellular communications, including massive internet of things and ultra-reliable
low-latency communications, new use cases have emerged as socio-economic needs
continue to evolve, and 5G NR is unable to accommodate them. The cell-centric
paradigm of wireless networks, constrained by inter-cell interference, is
transitioning toward a ubiquitous cell-free infrastructure that is more user-
centric and interference-resistant while providing users with macro-diversity.
Low-complexity, high-throughput, ultra-reliable, and low-latency applications
make the cell-free architecture an essential element of the next generation of
communication systems. The aerial communication network has emerged as a
promising topology for beyond 5G communications, where aerial communication
nodes, e.g., drones, etc., will be served from the conventional base stations or
terrestrial access points in a cellular or cell-free architecture, respectively,
in conjunction with terrestrial users. This CISE-MSI project will investigate
the potential, feasibility, infrastructure, and security of the cell-free aerial
terrestrial integrated network (CF-ATIN) for the next generation of
communication systems. The project will also develop the educational and
recruiting capacity to train engineers from historically underrepresented
engineering groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a fundamental
study on CF-ATIN, address several challenges in secured communication protocol
design, and explore how to integrate advanced techniques in the network to
enhance system performance while assuring low computational complexity. In
particular, this project will (1) address physical layer signal processing
challenges inherent to CF-ATIN and develop artificial intelligence-driven
solution approaches, (2) explore how cell-free networks have synergic
integration with other emerging applications for the next generation of wireless
communication systems, such as free-space optics, (3) conduct data sanitization
for secured message transmissions and develop trust evaluation algorithm, and
(4) develop a prototype for CF-ATIN to implement the designed innovative
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.