* 2219543
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: FET: Modernizing Numerical Flow Solvers with Heterogeneous Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Byunghyun Jang, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 298,325.00

Today’s computing systems are often heterogeneous, i.e., equipped with both
multi-core central processing units (CPUs) and many-core graphics processing
units (GPUs). Many researchers try to parallelize their in-house numerical
solvers by themselves to simultaneously utilize the computing power of multiple
processors to make large scale simulation possible. However, parallel
programming involves a steep learning curve and often requires the deep
understanding of underlying hardware architecture to achieve optimal
performance. This becomes an even bigger issue when GPU programming gets
involved. This project leverages the expertise of researchers at Jackson State
University (JSU) in CPU-based parallel computing and the expertise of
researchers at the University of Mississippi (UM) in GPU-based parallel
computing. This project creates a general-purpose library that packages
optimized functions and routines used for parallelization. This library is
freely available in public domain. The library greatly eases the burden of
parallelization of mesh-based numerical solvers. Other researchers can call the
library functions to parallelize their mesh-based numerical solvers quickly and
easily on heterogeneous systems with the minimum level of code change and
developers' efforts. This collaborative research generates a synergistic effect
on catalyzing the development of research capabilities and establishing
sustainable education in high performance scientific computing at JSU and
UM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the research side, this project accelerates and
optimizes numerical flow solvers by fully exploiting the parallel computing
power of both CPUs and GPUs on heterogeneous systems. This project incorporates
GPU acceleration using OpenCL (Open Computing Language) into the MPI (Message
Passing Interface) parallel computing paradigm. In this combination, MPI
provides coarse grained parallelism on multiple CPUs and OpenCL provides fine-
grained parallelism on CPUs/GPUs. This blending along with fine-grained data
sharing and synchronization via shared virtual memory allows the numerical
solvers to take full advantage of the computing power of today’s heterogeneous
parallel systems. Targeted systems are clusters equipped with CPU-GPU
heterogeneous computing nodes. Research focuses include efficient communication
and load balancing on the hybrid MPI-OpenCL paradigm. On the education side, the
project attracts and builds future workforce by teaching students must-have
skills on modern parallel computing and programming through hosting a High
Performance Computing (HPC) Summer Institute at JSU and the HPC-day event at
UM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CISE MSI program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.