* 2219236
* GCR: Community-Embedded Robotics: Understanding Sociotechnical Interactions with Long-term Autonomous Deployments
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Elliott Hauser, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,200,001.00

This project combines methods and expertise in the fields of human-robot
interaction, human factors, organizational communication, science and technology
studies, team science, and research informatics to achieve sustained access to
phenomena at the intersection of communities and autonomous robots that is
otherwise impractical or impossible to obtain. The research outcomes will
identify and address ethical, privacy, and safety concerns created when multi-
purpose robots are deployed into communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
plan enables transformative expansions of several scientific fields onto a
shared research object: community-robot encounters. Specifically, the goal is to
expand the fields of human factors for robotics and human-robot interaction
beyond their traditional focus on robots encountering small numbers of humans,
in episodic or incident-based temporalities, and beyond the confines of
laboratory environments. This broadening will enable studying large, changing
groups of humans interacting with autonomous robots longitudinally, in real-
world environments. This work will allow the field of robot perception for long-
term autonomy to expand its scope beyond the navigational challenges in the
built environment and the relatively predictable movement of vehicles to also
include pedestrian behavior. All three robotics subfields will contribute to
important aspects of robotic behavior only testable in real-world conditions,
including social navigation through crowds, safety and trust in community
spaces, and introspective perception of robotic
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.