* 2219978
* MCA: Utilizing high-throughput proteomics to build a conceptual model of the effects of environmental change on early life stages of genetically diverse herring populations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Brooke Love, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2025
* USD 273,464.00

Pacific Herring represent a critical link in marine food webs along the West
Coast of the United States, connecting the plankton they eat with larger
predators (fish, sea birds, and marine mammals). Temperature strongly influences
the development and success of herring. This investigation targets the
underlying pathways that drive their temperature response by examining seasonal
differences in protein expression. The outcome will be a better understanding of
the processes most influenced by temperature, such as specific metabolic
processes or stress responses. The project supports training for the
investigator in new proteomics techniques and for undergraduate students at a
Primarily Undergraduate Institution. Outreach includes engagement with local
stakeholders and coastal indigenous communities. Societal benefits include a
better understanding of population differences to inform conservation and
recovery efforts for a culturally, economically, and ecologically important
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Herring are ecologically
important forage fish; fluctuations in their biomass drive far reaching food web
responses. Climate variability is suspected to be a major driver of population
trends, but the underlying mechanisms driving physiological responses remain
unknown. Protein expression is a sensitive indicator of sub-lethal differences
in stress response and metabolic state; therefore, comparisons across seasons
unveil the cellular processes driving organismal responses to climate factors.
Project goals are 1) a deeper understanding of the mechanisms driving the
response of a key forage fish species to temperature and 2) workforce
development, bringing cutting-edge molecular capabilities to faculty and
students at a primarily undergraduate institution. Through a comparison between
the robust Semiahmoo Bay (SB) population and the genetically and behaviorally
distinct, and much depleted, Cherry Point (CP) herring population, the research
team is detecting biomarker molecules of key physiological differences.
Investigators are profiling SB and CP embryos collected from January through
June using proteomic analyses, then developing targeted assays for peptides of
interest, with total lipids and relevant environmental variables (T, Salinity,
pH) providing meaningful context. Cohorts of embryos are also being reared to
hatch from each collection date for comparison of protein biomarkers associated
with survival or morphometric differences in the hatched larvae. This project
provides the first large-scale survey of proteins present in early life stage
Pacific Herring under different temperature regimes, advancing our understanding
of herring response to environmental conditions associated with global change
and ocean/atmosphere cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.