* 2219079
* GOALI: MCA: Insights to Critical Zone Dynamics During Icehouse Deglaciation: Piloting a Late Paleozoic Climate Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Amy Weislogel, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 365,533.00

As the current climate shifts from a cooler glacial episode into a warmer
deglacial episode, it is important to understand how terrestrial landscapes,
including rivers, soils and forests, may respond to this change. The last time
Earth’s climate shifted out of an Ice Age occurred ~285 million years ago at the
end of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age (LPIA). Some existing research suggests LPIA
forests grew rapidly and expanded mainly under warming climate conditions during
deglaciation. However, other research suggests forests became smaller and
experienced less growth during deglaciation episodes, and instead forest
expansion occurred mainly during the cooler climate conditions of glacial
episodes. In order to determine the influence of LPIA climate on terrestrial and
“critical zone” (e.g., soil horizon) conditions, including temperature,
precipitation and carbon removal from the atmosphere (e.g., peat burial, soil
weathering, soil carbon deposition), this project will analyze deposits in West
Virginia and the Czech Republic using age dating, isotope geochemistry and
cutting-edge automated mineralogy technologies. Additionally, the project will
support an academic-industry collaboration with Bruker Inc. that will accelerate
automated mineralogy applications to the field of sedimentary geology. Finally,
this project will support development of a community-driven Late Paleozoic
Climate Observatory, and provide STEM educational opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate researchers, grade 6-12 students and secondary
educators in West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this work will
resolve 3 major questions inherent in the conflicting models of LPIA coal forest
dynamics: 1) Did eccentricity-driven climatic oscillations form correlatable
terrestrial cyclothems across tropical Pangea?; 2) Were LPIA glaciations
associated with arid or humid climate in tropical uplands?; and 3) How did
terrestrial systems respond to LPIA climate extremes? Answers to these questions
will be achieved through integration of multi-proxy geochronology (U-Pb detrital
apatite, Re-Os), carbonate nodule paleobarometry and paleothermometry, Osi
chemostratigraphy, fluvial paleohydrology and multi-scale mineralogical
characterization of paleopedology, sediment provenance, and carbonate nodule
composition/diagenesis. These results will test the hypothesis that tropical
peat forest development occurred mainly during glacial episodes due to elevated
groundwater tables during ever-wet, climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.