* 2219665
* Characterizing Physicochemical Evolution of Biomass Particles during Fast Pyrolysis Using High-Resolution Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Song-Charng Kong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 333,708.00

Fast pyrolysis is a prominent technology in converting waste biomass to
combustible gases and liquids; pyrolysis also occurs at the early stage of solid
fuel combustion. Fast pyrolysis-derived liquid fuels are regarded as an
economically feasible alternative to fossil fuels and some facilities for heat
and power generation have been brought online in recent years. However, despite
its promising potential, the development of fast pyrolysis has been hindered by
the complexity of reactor conditions in biomass pyrolysis, and to date, methods
capable of predicting the detailed processes are unavailable. The objectives of
this project are to characterize accurately the behaviors of biomass particles
and predict the product yields of a fast pyrolysis reactor by using high-
fidelity numerical simulations. The proposed research activities will lead to
advances in the fundamental science of biomass pyrolysis for energy
applications. The educational activities are to engage K-12 science teachers in
research in order to promote education on renewable energy. In the U.S., a
significant number of K-12 science teachers have not majored in the physical
sciences. The research training of K-12 science teachers can enrich their
critical thinking and enable them to incorporate their new knowledge into their
classroom teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan is to
conduct high-resolution simulations of biomass fast pyrolysis and to derive
submodels for use in engineering CFD codes. A novel simulation approach, one
that combines the lattice Boltzmann method, discrete element method, chemical
kinetics, and particle shrinkage modeling, will be employed to describe the
physicochemical evolution of biomass particles. Computational results will be
validated by experimental data. Based on the simulation results, a drag
coefficient model will be derived and tested. This work will address several
scientific topics of paramount importance to biomass pyrolysis: physicochemical
changes of particles, particle-particle and gas-particle interactions, and
effects of particle properties and operating conditions on the pyrolysis
products. The underlying difficulty of designing and optimizing an efficient
biomass reactor is the lack of fundamental understanding of particle behaviors
under realistic conditions. This research will characterize intra-particle
transport, flow fields smaller than particle size, chemical reactions, and
evolutions of particle size and properties. The resulting open-source code can
be used by the scientific community as a baseline tool for further advanced
numerical study on the pyrolysis of solid particles, e.g., coal, wood chips,
municipal solid waste, or polymer materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.