* 2219832
* Collaborative Research: ERASE-PFAS: Thermal Regeneration of PFAS-laden Granular Activated Carbon presents an Opportunity to Break the Forever PFAS Cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Onur Apul, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 11/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are fluorinated organic chemicals
that have emerged as priority pollutants during the last two decades due to
increasing concerns about their persistence, stability, and toxicity as they
accumulate in the environment. The detection of PFAS in drinking water has
raised significant concerns about their impact on human health. PFAS are
difficult to degrade and destroy using conventional water treatment oxidants
(e.g., chlorine, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide) due to their strong C-F covalent
bonds and C-F bond polarization which causes steric hindrance to chemical
attack. Sorption onto granular activated carbon (GAC) filter beds has emerged as
the most efficient and cost-effective process from removing PFAS from
contaminated drinking water sources. However, spent PFAS-laden GAC filter beds
need to be disposed of or regenerated to enable their reuse. The overarching
goal of this project is to investigate the viability of thermal regeneration as
an efficient and cost-effective process to enable the reuse of PFAS-laden GAC
filter beds while catalyzing the degradation and destruction of the sorbed PFAS
contaminants. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to
test the hypothesis that the abundance of highly mobile electrons on the
graphitic surface of activated carbon will catalyze the thermolysis and
subsequent degradation of sorbed PFAS molecules from spent GAC filter beds. The
successful completion of this research will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the utilization of GAC as an
efficient and cost-effective sorbent for the treatment of PFAS contaminated
drinking water sources. Additional benefits to society will be accomplished
through education and training including the mentoring of one graduate and one
undergraduate student at the University of Maine and one graduate and one
undergraduate student at the University of Nevada,
Reno.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular activated carbon (GAC) has been demonstrated
in the field and at scale to be the most efficient and cost-effective sorbent
from removing PFAS contaminants from drinking water sources including pretreated
surface water and groundwater. Thermal regeneration is an established process
for the regeneration of spent PFAS-laden GAC beds. However, a fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms of PFAS degradation, transformations, and
destruction during the thermal regeneration of spent GAC filter beds has
remained elusive. The goal of this project is to advance the fundamental
understanding of PFAS degradation, transformations, and destruction during the
thermal regeneration of PFAS-laden GAC beds under relevant process and field
conditions. The specific objectives of the research are to: 1) Investigate the
effect of thermal regeneration on the physicochemical properties of commercially
available and well-characterized GAC PFAS sorbent candidates; 2) Evaluate the
impacts of heating rate, regeneration temperature, gaseous atmosphere, and
reactivation agents on PFAS degradation/transformations and GAC regeneration
efficiency; 3) Assess the impact of GAC pore structure and surface chemistry on
the extent and rate of PFAS thermolysis; and 4) Characterize and unravel the
desorption, decomposition, and mineralization pathways of sorbed PFAS during the
thermal regeneration of PFAS-laden GAC beds. The successful completion of this
project has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of
fundamental knowledge and performance data to advance the implementation of GAC
sorption as an efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable process for the
treatment of PFAS contaminated drinking water sources. To implement the
educational and outreach goals of this project, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) plan to integrate the findings from this research into existing
undergraduate/graduate courses at the University of Maine and the University of
Nevada, Reno. In addition, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at
their respective institutions to host a “Girls Scouts” outreach program to teach
basic concepts of environmental engineering and water treatment to K-3 grade
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.