* 2219548
* Collaborative Research: VIDA Seagrass: Viral Infection Dynamics Among Seagrass
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Cliff Ross, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2025
* USD 132,066.00

Seagrasses are marine flowering plants (or angiosperms) that create expansive
underwater meadows that form the basis of highly productive and valuable
ecosystems in coastal oceans. Unlike terrestrial systems where angiosperms
dominate plant diversity, seagrasses are the only flowering plants in marine
environments. Based on the profound impacts of viral infections on terrestrial
plants, viruses are expected to influence seagrass ecology. However, no prior
work has investigated viral infection dynamics in seagrasses or the impact of
viruses on seagrass health. This project provides fundamental knowledge about
seagrass-virus interactions through field and laboratory studies of Thalassia
testudinum (i.e., turtlegrass, a climax species and key ecosystem engineer), and
turtlegrass virus X (TVX), the only seagrass virus currently reported from
experimental research. The lack of a seagrass-virus study system has kept the
scientific community from learning which factors drive viral infection in marine
angiosperms. By establishing the first seagrass-virus study system, a novel
virus-host pathosystem for which virtually nothing is known, this project
contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of seagrass ecology and serves
as a model for investigating the growing number of seagrass viruses discovered
through sequencing efforts. This multifaceted project trains one postdoctoral
researcher, two graduate students, and six undergraduate students. Dissemination
of results and data through open access channels informs the broader community
and provides scientists with data for their own research to propel the field of
seagrass virology. This project also engages educators and students
participating in programs that strive to increase participation from
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Teachers from the Jacksonville Teacher
Residency Program are getting involved through development of lessons that dive
into seagrass biology. Students from Girls Incorporated, Girl Scouts, and the
University of South Florida’s Oceanography Camp for Girls are participating as
citizen scientists by photographing Tampa Bay’s seagrass ecosystems and
contributing their observations to the Seagrass Spotter website. This project
also increases awareness of seagrass ecosystems and challenges the public
perception that all viruses are pathogenic through hands-on activities at the
annual St. Petersburg Science Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seagrass-virus
interactions are being investigated through a two-tiered approach involving
field studies in Tampa Bay, Florida and microcosm experiments. Field surveys
focus on elucidating the nature of turtlegrass-TVX interactions (positive,
neutral or negative) and the relationship between turtlegrass genotypic
diversity and virus distribution in a natural population where TVX has persisted
for at least five years. TVX load is monitored bimonthly over two years to
assess how viral load relates to turtlegrass genotype and performance (growth,
health, reproductive effort), and abiotic parameters. The investigated
turtlegrass meadow contains TVX-positive and negative specimens, thus providing
a perfect natural laboratory with homogenous environmental characteristics that
allow exploration of the drivers of viral infection. Given that environmental
changes may alter host-microbe interactions, complementary microcosm experiments
are evaluating turtlegrass responses to TVX infection at the physiological
(survival, photochemical capacity, cellular responses) and molecular
(transcriptomic) levels in a controlled environment under normal conditions and
in the context of salinity changes, an important seagrass stressor. Microcosm
experiments also provide the first profiles of seagrass gene expression and
measurement of cellular metabolites in response to viral infection. Expected
results have direct implications for understanding seagrass production and
resilience in the face of global climate change and anthropogenic
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.