* 2219979
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Computational Analysis of Synaptic Nanodomains
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Terrence Sejnowski, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 09/30/2025
* USD 732,000.00

Successful learning and long-term memory retention are central to a successful
society, starting with early education in schools and extending throughout life.
For over 100 years research has shown that spaced learning is much more
effective than massed learning for long-term memories. The efficiency of focused
learning falls after an hour, which is paralleled in lab experiments at the
level of single synapse between neurons, whose strength is saturated by focused
stimulation. This project seeks to understand the synaptic mechanisms that
eventually lead to continued synaptic growth on the time scale of many hours.
The project hypothesis is that over this time period, regions inside the synapse
open up to make room for a larger and stronger synapse. This research is the
first step toward helping those with learning disabilities and new ways to
enhance learning in others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
build imaging, analytical, and computational tools to investigate the structure
of nanodomains within the synapse. The nanodomains comprise nascent and active
zones of synapses. The nascent zones have a fully defined postsynaptic region
but lack presynaptic vesicles and hence are silent. New EM tomographic imaging
combined with new computational analyses will refine understanding of nascent
zones as they recruit presynaptic vesicles and are thus converted to active
zones in support of synaptic plasticity that underlies the advantage of spaced
learning. Existing and newly acquired large data sets will be analyzed at scale
with artificial intelligence. This research will be transformative for Data-
Intensive Neuroscience and Cognitive Science. The data sets and AI tools will be
shared broadly with the neuroscience community through the NSF-funded 3Dem
Portal (3dem.org) at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC). The objectives
of this project are: 1) Create computational tools to delineate nascent zones
automatically by mapping presynaptic vesicle docking sites in serial sections of
synapses in the hippocampal CA1 region and dentate gyrus at various times after
induction of LTP or cLTD, compared to control stimulation. 2) Apply a new
computational analysis based on information theory and overall synapse size to
measure the storage capacity of synapses, refining the definition of synaptic
weight as encompassing the enlarged active zones obtained during the conversion
of nascent zones. 3) Perform realistic Monte Carlo reaction-diffusion
simulations of synaptic nanodomain 3D structure and function using MCell to
provide a functional estimate for the boundary between nascent and active zones
and determine how changes in nascent and active zones alter efficacy at synapses
during saturation and recovery of LTP and cLTD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.