* 2219334
* CAS-MNP: Evaluating Patterns and Controls on Microplastic Accumulation in Floodplains
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Edward Beighley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2025
* USD 530,345.00

Plastic accumulation in the environment is a pervasive global problem with
severe consequences for organisms, ecosystems, and human health. Plastics behave
like natural materials in the environment in that they are degraded to form
smaller particles including microplastics (fragments &lt; 5 mm in length). These
plastic particles are transported by conventional geomorphic processes including
wind and water. The degradation and transport of plastics has led to its
accumulation across a range of environments, providing the basis for a global
plastic-carbon cycle. However, a key component of the plastic-carbon cycle —
namely the transport and storage of microplastics through rivers and floodplains
— remains poorly constrained. Understanding where and why plastics accumulate
along rivers and floodplains is critical for mitigating and managing plastic
pollution because rivers connect plastics production and use upstream to coasts
and the open ocean. This project will analyze soil samples to quantify the
amount and types microplastics found in different floodplain environments, and
relate patterns of plastic accumulation to environmental parameters. The team
will co-develop and deliver bilingual educational materials on plastic transport
through watersheds for high school students as part of the Beach Sisters program
in Lynn, Massachusetts, an environmental justice community. The project will
provide mentored research opportunities for an undergraduate and graduate
student and support an early career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floodplains
serve as critical sinks for sediments, carbon, and pollutants, but their role in
the global plastic-carbon cycle is poorly understood owing to the unique
material properties of plastics, and the complex and dynamic processes that
mediate floodplain sedimentation. The same geomorphic processes that control
floodplain sedimentation should mediate microplastic accumulation in these
environments, although the relatively low density of common plastics (~0.05 to
1.5 g/cm3) relative to natural sediments (~1.4 to 2.9 g/cm3) imply that patterns
of plastic erosion and deposition across a floodplain will be unique. This
project integrates field-based surveys and sampling with geochemical analyses
and hydraulic modeling to test a series of hypotheses describing the interaction
of flood inundation, flow velocity, geomorphic setting, and the physical and
chemical properties of plastics on their accumulation in floodplains. The study
will allow the investigators to build a comprehensive model of where and how
plastics accumulate across the geomorphic units of a floodplain, providing a
basis to quantify microplastic storage along other river-floodplain corridors.
More broadly, the project will allow them to test the suitability of settling
velocity models developed for natural sediments on plastic particles with
different material properties in an observational
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.