* 2219394
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Work Allocation in a Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Hannah Mattson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 21,705.00

This project analyzes fingerprint impressions found on corrugated ceramic
vessels to better understand how societies adapt gendered production in response
to cultural change. Previous research on gendered divisions of labor largely
portrays these roles as static rather than as dynamic, adaptive processes where
roles and boundaries are constantly renegotiated. Today gender and the role it
plays in the society occupies a substantial place in public discourse. What
constitutes “appropriate” gender roles are constantly being renegotiated,
debated, and legislated in the United States. Discussions of how past societies
navigated changing gendered divisions of labor contributes greatly to these
current debates by providing much needed nuance and context on topics that defy
simple answers. This work will be shared in a variety of media ranging from
peer-reviewed literature to public talks and workshops. The work will be shared
with cultural resource staff from the Pueblos who trace their ancestry to the
sites explored in this study. Ultimately, the goal of this information sharing
is to foster greater collaboration between local Pueblo communities and the
University of New Mexico as well as incorporating more Indigenous perspectives
into academic archaeology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is being conducted
on a sample of ceramic material from five sites in the Middle Rio Grande of
central New Mexico (MRG). During an extended time period, diverse groups
coalesced into some of the largest communities seen in the region until the
industrial era. New architectural, technological, religious, and trade practices
emerged to help knit these communities together during a dynamic period of
change. Pottery making practices changed alongside these other developments
transforming from manufacture for local consumption to surplus production for
exchange. This research tests the prediction that as demand for ceramics
increased, changes in the gendered division of labor were required to help meet
new production needs. To accomplish this, the project analyzes fingerprint
impressions found on locally produced corrugated ceramics. These frequently
preserve fingerprint impressions, the complex pattern of ridges and furrows on
human palmar skin, which can reliably be used for sex estimation. These
fingerprint data will serve as a proxy for gender and be compared between sites,
time periods, and different ceramic types. New radiometric dates will be used to
build a chronological model of gendered labor divisions. The research will
generate and refine new analytical methods for addressing questions of gendered
labor in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.