* 2219443
* Collaborative Research: CSforAll:RPP: Expanding Inclusive CS Education through the Jumpstarting Philadelphia CSforAll Researcher Practitioner Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Jamie Payton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2025
* USD 322,499.00

Student interest in CS among Pennsylvania students is strong; computer science
and programming careers topped the charts in a student occupational interest
survey. The state is also making strides in developing and supporting a vision
to bring CS learning opportunities to all students in the state; with CS courses
counting as math/science credit for graduation in PA public schools. However,
challenges remain in realizing a vision for equitable and inclusive computer
science education in PA high schools. There is still a large gap in access to CS
courses, with particularly low enrollment for students from historically
underrepresented groups in computing. This partnership between Drexel University
and the School District of Philadelphia is a key step to broadening
participation of PA students from historically excluded groups in computing. The
project team leverages prior work and recent statewide policies to prepare a
larger cohort of teachers for certification to teach computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Researcher
Practitioner Partnership is to bring equitable, inclusive, and high-quality
computer science instruction aligned with educational standards to all
Philadelphia students through a Networked Improvement Community (NIC). The
critical problem the partnership will address is the lack of equitable access to
certified CS educators in Philadelphia high schools. This project partners the
School District of Philadelphia (SDP), high school teachers and administrators,
teacher associations, community and informal education organizations, high
school students, parents, and researchers to address this by: offering multiple
pathways to certification; identifying a diverse pool of potential CS educators;
strengthening support and communities of practice for current and potential CS
educators; and working with public sector stakeholders to develop a more
effective policy framework that encourages a more diverse pool of CS educators.
The investigators represent leadership in CS4Philly, an affiliate of the
national CSforALL consortium, and the Philadelphia STEM Ecosystem CS
Workgroup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.