* 2219623
* CISE-MSI: DP: IIS-III: ACOSUS: An AI-driven COunseling System for Underrepresented Transfer Students
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sherrene Bogle, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 594,390.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistics in 2021 show that only
15% of workers in computing occupations are Black and Hispanic, and 25% are
female, whereas 32.56% of college students are underrepresented minorities.
There is a dire need for a highly diversified workforce in computing-related
fields. A crucial contributor to a diverse workforce is the transfer pathways
between community colleges and 4-year universities. In fact, many of these
institutions have challenges co-advising transfer students due to the
uncertainty surrounding the path from their decision to transfer to post-
transfer graduation, particularly those who are from disadvantaged minority or
underrepresented groups in computing majors. The use of information systems to
assist these students in their upskilling transfer to universities and job
market success is a critical but challenging objective of higher education. The
overarching goal of this project is to (1) investigate the challenges
experienced by students in their transfer decision-making process, school
performance, and job placement, and (2) design an innovative AI-driven student
advising system that provides personalized readiness assessment and suggestions
to underrepresented transfer students in computing majors, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to gain a comprehensive
understanding on how personal, academic, and behavioral factors influence
underrepresented students in their pursuit of education and career decisions. It
also explores environmental factors like social norms and social media that
impact their decision and goal-pursuing endeavors. Using this information, the
project designs and evaluates an AI-driven advising system that integrates
personal, academic, behavioral, and environmental factors specific to
underrepresented students to not only assess their preparedness for upskilling
transfer and the job market, but provide improvement suggestions and resources
as well. The system uses natural language processing algorithms, deep neural
networks, along with other AI approaches in its design. It also employs data
curation techniques to eliminate the racial and gender bias that is prevalent in
current AI-driven systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.