* 2219674
* I-Corps:  Hydrogen Micro Gas Turbines for Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Li Qiao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of hydrogen fuel-based micro gas turbines for small drones. Small
drones (2-25 kg) have been used widely in various applications, such as law
enforcement, digital agriculture, fire monitoring and prevention, and geospatial
surveying/mapping. These drone users often require long flight times to address
tasks that cannot be completed by battery-powered small drones. The proposed
micro gas turbine technology may increase the flight duration of small drones
from 20 minutes to over 2 hours, which may significantly increase the
practicability of using small drones in many applications. In addition, the
proposed micro gas turbines do not require a mobile fuel-based electric
generator, which avoids the fire hazard from liquid fuel storage. Furthermore,
the micro gas turbine is capable of working in harsh environments, such as at
high and low temperatures and in humid areas, where batteries often fail.
Overall, the technology under development may enable commercialization of
applications that will benefit from longer flying duration drones or compact
power generation in remote fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a micro gas turbine technology to allow small drone
users to extend flight endurance by replacing battery power with a compact
turbine-based hybrid energy supply system. The proposed system has been found to
be fuel-efficient, lighter, and save service time/cost. The proposed technology
may increase the flight time of small drones by a factor of four at 1 kg system
weight when compared to the most advanced lithium polymer batteries. The micro
gas engine uses a unique engine architecture, advanced materials, and additive
manufacturing techniques to ensure a reliable onboard power generation system.
In addition, the proposed engine utilizes compressed high-pressure hydrogen as
fuel, which has a high energy density and zero carbon emissions. Hydrogen is
pre-heated after passing through the combustor wall, then mixed with compressed
air and burned in a premixed combustion mode through high-temperature porous
media. The proposed micro gas turbine engine may significantly advance design
and fabrication technologies in small and portable power conversion
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.