* 2219564
* EAR-Climate: Estimating Seawater Boron Isotope Ratios from Halite Evaporites
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Clara Blattler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 408,968.00

This research will improve estimates of ocean pH and atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations ~36 million years ago by resolving how the composition of boron
in seawater has changed over time. The composition of boron in seawater needs to
be known in order use the small amounts of boron in fossil shells to determine
the pH of the water they grew in and the carbon dioxide that would be in
equilibrium with that water. This project will analyze rock salt deposits where
boron is present in small amounts of evaporated seawater that are captured
within the salt crystals, as well as within minerals. By analyzing the boron in
these salt deposits and determining the composition of boron in ancient
seawater, this research will allow the boron in fossil shells to be translated
into more accurate estimates for atmospheric carbon dioxide, which will improve
understanding about the connection between climate and carbon dioxide. The
project will support two early-career women scientists and one under-represented
minority scientist, and the researchers will share their scientific expertise on
these topics with a high-school educational outreach program on the South Side
of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the behavior of
boron in halite evaporite formations to determine the phases that host boron
(e.g. fluid inclusions or trace minerals disseminated in the halite) and
constrain the stable isotopic composition of boron in ancient seawater. By
measuring major element compositions across several halite subsamples bearing
fluid inclusions, mixing relationships between the various mineral and fluid
components that contribute boron to bulk dissolved halite samples will be
established, which will allow for calculation of the endmember composition of
the fluid inclusions and the boron isotopic composition of ancient seawater.
Experimentally precipitated halites, natural salt cores, and ultimately a ~36
million year old marine halite sample from Spain will be studied in this
project. Stable isotope analysis of boron by inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry will be established in the geochemical facilities at the University
of Chicago. In addition to providing an independent constraint on ocean pH and
the carbonate system, this research will also determine the distribution
coefficient of boron in gypsum and resolve the long-term evolution of the boron
geochemical cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.