* 2219866
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1C: Privacy-preserving IoT Analytics and Behavior Prediction on Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anupam Das, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,004.00

As the Internet of Things (IoT) products gain popularity on home networks, they
disproportionately overburden home networks from a resource, security, and
privacy point of view. Despite recent efforts to characterize IoT traffic, there
is a lack of annotated datasets. Moreover, existing annotated traffic typically
covers a handful of devices in a lab setting. Therefore, it is unclear if the
results generalize to a large-scale real-world setting. Similarly, when it comes
to developing privacy-preserving IoT analytics, existing approaches rely on
simulated data or datasets that are not representative of real-world IoT
traffic. To this end, this project explores new Internet measurement
methodologies and privacy-preserving analytics for IoT devices. The project's
broader significance and importance are to help network providers and consumers
better manage their networks in terms of quality of service, security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project first focuses on developing a new
infrastructure to automatically collect and annotate IoT traffic by
programmatically triggering different functionalities on IoT devices via
companion apps and hidden APIs. To complement the annotation process, the
project enables real-world participants to annotate the network traffic
generated by their smart home IoT devices. Next, the project builds privacy-
preserving machine learning models to predict traffic volume, traffic type, and
anomalous device behavior even in the presence of imbalanced training data
across the different tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.