* 2219365
* CSforAll: RPP: Programming the Acceleration of Computing and Equity in Massachusetts 2 (PACE2)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,999.00

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) proposes Pathways for Advancing
Computing Education (PACE2), a researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP)
facilitated by the MIT Teaching Systems Lab (TSL), CSforMA, and consortium of 12
diverse school districts across the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. PACE2
participants share the common goal of broadening participation in computing for
underserved groups in computer science (CS) in Massachusetts: females, Black and
Hispanic/Latinx, low-income students, English learner students and students with
disabilities. The long-term objectives of PACE2 districts are to address the
four dimensions of the CAPE framework for equitable CS education: improving
Capacity for CS education, expanding Access to CS courses, broadening
Participation of underrepresented groups, and ensuring equitable experiences in
CS courses. The ongoing community of practice brings together multi-stakeholder
teams within each district including CS teachers, department heads, guidance
counselors, and school and district leaders to ensure coherent, district-wide
approaches to broadening participation and improving experiences in computer
science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Strengthening CS education across the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts will require creating a diverse set of pathways
for different districts—with different curriculum structures, demographic
compositions, and per pupil expenditures—to make progress towards helping all
students meet and exceed the Massachusetts Digital Literacy and Computer Science
standards and close the many opportunity gaps related to CS education that exist
throughout the state. PACE members will participate in a yearlong sequence of
workshops, including best-in-class programs developed by prior NSF-funded work
like the Strategic CSforALL Research and Implementation Planning Tool (SCRIPT)
and Counselors for Computing (C4C), along with new programming. These newly
developed professional learning experiences focus on improving equity teaching
practices through digital clinical simulations and developing monitoring tools
and programs for tracking progress towards equity of opportunity and outcomes in
CS education across the district. The project will iteratively improve on these
initial learning experiences for a second year and map out pathways for
expanding the number of districts with PACE fellows. The project will set the
stage for a larger RPP that engages other stakeholders engaged in CS education
in Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.