* 2219795
* Collaborative Research: Applying a novel approach to link microbial growth efficiency, function and energy transfer in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jeff Bowman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 586,609.00

This project investigates the factors determining where and why microbes are the
most efficient at turning carbon into biomass within the upper several hundred
meters of the ocean. Microbial growth efficiency is a critical ecological
parameter that describes the energy required by microbes for biomass production
and defines the proportion of carbon lost from marine microbial food webs
through respiration—conversion of organic carbon into carbon dioxide. Despite
its significance, there is a limited understanding of the drivers of microbial
efficiency. Assessing microbial efficiency variation across different marine
microbes is hindered by the difficulty of directly measuring the energy used for
biomass production. This project uses new methods to estimate microbial energy
conversion within cells and compare it to measurements of other metabolic
processes such as respiration and primary production. Additionally, the
researchers measure environmental nutrient concentration, oxygen concentration,
temperature, pH, and microbial community structure from diverse oceanographic
environments in the California Current ecosystem to include within mathematical
models for interpreting and predicting microbial carbon flow. In addition, this
project provides education and at-sea research training opportunities for new
scientists, including graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and a cohort of
undergraduate students from groups historically underrepresented in the marine
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify the ecological
conditions and microbial taxa that account for the variance in microbial growth
efficiency along light and nutrient gradients in the ocean. The project uses
data collected on an oceanographic research expedition in the California Current
ecosystem along the central and southern California coast, a well-characterized
and heterogenous region broadly representative of key ecosystems in the global
ocean. Microbial growth efficiency measurements are being made using an
innovative combination of two new radioisotope tracer-based techniques, flow
cytometry, and microbial community structure analysis. In addition, the
researchers use machine learning techniques to provide predictive analytics and
link microbial community structure, abundance, efficiency, and environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.