* 2219874
* Collaborative Research: The influence of subglacial discharge on the oceanic fate of meltwater from the Greenland ice sheet
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Patricia Medeiros, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 399,105.00

This study concentrates on the influence that melt waters from Greenland fjords
has on the circulation of the Labrador Sea to determine the fate of the melt
water to the North Atlantic Ocean. The premise of the proposal is that fresh
water discharged from glaciers and trapped below the ocean’s surface on East
Greenland has different fate from the fresh water that reaches the surface. The
difference in destination between surface and subsurface fresh waters is because
the wind should drive surface waters distinctly from subsurface waters, which
are more isolated from the wind forcing. The study will be carried out with
computer model simulations and satellite data. Findings from this study should
have implications for global scale models that study water sinking in the North
Atlantic and its impact on climate. The project will support one graduate
student and will organize a workshop on climate processes for math &amp; science
teachers in Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
transport processes in the Labrador Sea, from areas of direct influence of
Greenland ice sheet melt water to areas in the Labrador Sea where deep
convection occurs in winter. The goal of the proposal is to identify and
quantify the effect of subglacial discharge on transport pathways in the
Labrador Sea. The hypothesis is that subsurface melt water from East Greenland’s
fjords will be transported to the Labrador Sea more effectively than surface
melt water. If this hypothesis is proven accurate, then it will show that the
correct depiction of fjord circulation is essential for representation of large-
scale circulation and convection in ocean models. The proposal also hypothesizes
that, with global warming, outflow plumes will either a) be more influenced by
winds off W Greenland and reduce transport of melt water into central Labrador
Sea, or b) increase flow instabilities and spatial variability that will
increase transport into central Labrador Sea. Satellite observations and model
simulations will quantify the relative importance of the two possible outcomes
of the latter hypothesis and the effects of melt water on winter convection. The
work is justified by the need to represent subglacial discharge on eastern
Greenland, in contrast to the surface input of land-terminating glaciers on West
Greenland. As Broader Impacts, the project will support one grad student and one
research scientist, partially. The PIs will organize a 1-day workshop on climate
processes for math &amp; science teachers, as part of Georgia’s Long Term
Ecological Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.