* 2219150
* ENCANTO: Enhancing and Nurturing Careers in Astronomy with New Training Opportunities
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Brett Isham, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 234,419.00

Enhancing and Nurturing Careers in Astronomy with New Training Opportunities
(ENCANTO) is a partnership to increase the number of students from
underrepresented groups from Puerto Rico and Central Florida who succeed in
astronomy and planetary physics. It will involve an intense research and
educational program and provide guidance regarding future graduate programs. The
partners are Arecibo Observatory (AO), and three Minority Serving universities -
the University of Puerto Rico, the University of Central Florida (UCF) and the
Interamerican University of Puerto Rico. Opportunities provided through ENCANTO
will include a wide choice of research and instrumentation projects, and the
opportunity to work year-long on a project with a university professor and an AO
scientist, exposure to another major research facility through a visit to Green
Bank Observatory, and the chance to present at a professional conference in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will participate in cutting-edge research
using the observing facilities and archival data at AO. Selected senior
undergraduates will each choose a research project from a wide range of science
topics using the 12-m telescope and AO archival data. Two of the 12-m telescope
projects represent multi-messenger astrophysics: timing bright millisecond
pulsars to detect and characterize nHz gravitational waves from supermassive
black hole binaries and the primordial stochastic background; and very-long-
baseline interferometry studies to image binary active galactic nuclei and
predict their evolution and gravitational wave detectability via a pulsar timing
array. Other projects include habitability of red-dwarf exoplanets, surveys of
Galactic CH and prebiotic molecules, and studies of solar bursts and coronal
mass ejection propagation. Instrumentation projects include modeling/simulation
of a new solar radar and upgrading the e-Callisto solar spectrograph. The
ENCANTO partners are well-qualified for improving minority access to
astronomical research, given their expertise in mentoring students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.