* 2219464
* CISE-MSI: DP: SaTC: MSI Research Capacity Building for Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled Vulnerability Assessment and Remediation in Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hsinchun Chen, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Federal agencies and public cloud
providers such as Amazon Web Services have invested millions of dollars
developing high-performance computing resources to support high-impact
computational workflows. Users access these advanced resources through
technologies such as virtual machines (VMs) and application containers (e.g.,
Docker) with open-source software that often contains multiple vulnerabilities
at different severity levels. Although vulnerability scanners can help aid in
the discovery of these threats, security practitioners struggle to effectively
assess, prioritize, and remediate them since scanners often return hundreds of
thousands of results across multiple virtual environments. This project will
create a novel artificial intelligence (AI) enabled framework to (1) detect
vulnerabilities and automatically prioritize vulnerable VMs across multiple
dimensions of vulnerability data, and (2) link the discovered vulnerabilities
from scanners with disclosed vulnerabilities to identify suitable remediation
strategies. The two project thrusts will enable automated vulnerability
assessment analytics for cloud infrastructures. Project outcomes will contribute
to developments in cybersecurity, deep learning, and text analytics through the
dissemination of knowledge at academic and industry publication venues as well
as integration into cybersecurity and data analytics curricula. Moreover, this
work will enable a unique combination of cybersecurity and AI analytics
education and research experience for underrepresented demographics across two
Hispanic Serving Institutions, and thereby foster the development of the next
generation of cybersecurity professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
leverages comprehensive open-source software and vulnerability datasets
collected from the teamâ€™s NSF-funded partner organizations to facilitate the
design of a novel AI-enabled Vulnerability Assessment and Remediation (AI-VAR)
framework that consists of two novel and interconnected research thrusts. The
first thrust combines and extends principles from network science, multi-view
representation learning, autoencoders, and attention mechanisms to create groups
of vulnerable VMs in cloud infrastructures for prioritization, while the second
thrust draws upon state-of-the-art methods in self-supervised contrastive
representation learning and transformers to capture textual features from
vulnerability scan descriptions and link discovered vulnerabilities with
disclosed vulnerabilities that contain remediation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.