* 2219946
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: A model-based approach to probe the role of spontaneous movements during decision-making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Anne Churchland, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 447,262.00

Cognitive tasks such as decision-making are performed by different subjects in
different ways. An important manifestation of this subject-to-subject
variability is through spontaneous movements during task performance. For
example, people may tap the floor or move their eyes while learning a cognitive
task; similarly, mice display idiosyncratic whisker, facial, or other movements.
Since both spontaneous movements and cognitive tasks modulate cortical activity,
modeling and interpreting neural activity during decision-making is a major
challenge. Deciphering the function and quantifying the neural origin of
spontaneous movements while explicitly modeling individual neural dynamics is a
crucial first step in understanding the neural basis of cognitive behaviors.
Elucidating the role of spontaneous movements in cognition will also be
important for assessing and developing novel therapies for neurobehavioral
disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has not been possible to fully understand
large-scale neural and behavioral data during cognitive tasks because neural
activity is strongly modulated by movements during the task, and the effect of
spontaneous, uninstructed movements on learning and cognition is not well
understood. A significant challenge in disentangling the neural dynamics related
to movements from those related to cognitive tasks is the presence of subject-
to-subject variability. Traditionally, the variability is resolved by focusing
on the representations that are present across a large number of subjects. In
contrast, this study will explicitly model spontaneous movements and subject-to-
subject variability by decoupling it from the across-subject part of the task.
Specifically, this project will leverage across-subject similarity in neural
activity in mice by learning subject-independent dynamical models, while
separately quantifying subject-specific dynamics. Furthermore, the next
generation of neurostimulation algorithms should not require extensive training
on each subject. For this goal, this project will use a trained across-subject
model as the initial model for new subjects, while refining it further with
individual data. This transfer learning approach will lead to effective model-
based control strategies to design closed-loop neurostimulation. In an
integrative computational and experimental approach, these models will be used
to investigate the contribution of high-dimensional cortical activity to
spontaneous movements and cognitive tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.