* 2219712
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: IIS: Hybrid-Architecture Symbolic Parser with Neural Lexicon
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jose Vega-Riveros, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2024
* USD 394,428.00

An utterance is grammatical if it conforms to the speaker's mental grammar. But
grammatical utterances may be ambiguous. Ambiguity, the assignment of multiple
representations and interpretations for one utterance, is an undesirable
byproduct of language use for efficient communication; nevertheless, ambiguity
is pervasive in language performance, since mental linguistic representations
have a hierarchical structure, yet language externalization is linear due to
sensory-motor constraints. This Hybrid-Architecture Symbolic Parser and Neural
Lexicon system (HASPNeL) judges whether a given utterance is grammatical and
detects whether it is ambiguous at the word or sentence level. HASPNeL is also a
computational cognitive model of human language following current syntactic
theory on Minimalist grammars, which must satisfy conditions of learnability,
evolvability, and universality. Although the advantages of a hybrid symbolic-
probabilistic architecture have been documented in relevant literature, there is
not yet any comparable system based upon this architecture. HASPNeL is expected
to impact the development of applications for education and industry
(particularly applicable to underrepresented languages for which there is not
enough available data), and to further research and advancement of human
language cognitive models and technologies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;HASPNeL's
hybrid architecture comprises a feature-unification parser and structure
generator, which is encoded using a symbolic AI approach, and a machine learning
tagger that is used to construct a feature-enriched lexicon. An annotated
synthetic corpus trains a neural network system that properly identifies and
tags each lexical item and estimates the likelihood of each category within the
corpus. To account for lexical ambiguity, tokens with different categories,
features or meanings are assigned different entries. The system only parses
grammatical utterances, recognizes ambiguous utterances by producing as many
syntactic representations as there were possible interpretations, and calculates
the likelihood for each structural description. HASPNeL is able to account for
syntactic variation by minor parametric adjustments to grammatical and lexical
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by MSI and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.