* 2219811
* NCS-FO: Fully Wireless Flexible Electrical-Acoustic Implant for High-Resolution Neural Stimulation and Recording at Large Scale
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Dynamic mapping of complex brain circuits by monitoring and modulating brain
activity can enhance our understanding of brain functions and provide the
promise of better treatment and prevention of different neurological disorders.
Interfacing with the brain also has the potential to enhance our perceptual,
motor, and cognitive capabilities, as well as to restore sensory and motor
functions lost through injuries or diseases. The development of closed-loop
neural interfaces with high-resolution recording and stimulation capabilities
from the distributed neural circuits within the entire brain is still a grand
challenge of neuroscience research. Current noninvasive neuromodulation
techniques still suffer from poor spatial resolution (&gt; 100-1000’s of mm3),
while implantable methods with finer resolution only provide a limited coverage
of 100-1000’s of neurons through highly invasive parenchymal implantation. This
integrated research and education program enables minimally invasive ultrasound
neuromodulation (and neural recording) of the brain with high spatial resolution
(&lt; 200 µm) at large scale (over the whole brain). This project will yield a
unique building block for a comprehensive set of neural interfaces. It will open
new opportunities in neuroscience with significant improvements in spatial
resolution and coverage of the brain stimulation in animals. It will also have
translational potential for clinical applications in humans, such as the
treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders and brain-machine
interfaces. This project also includes an integrated outreach and educational
component to impact K-12 teachers and students (particularly from
underrepresented groups), minorities, and undergraduate and graduate students,
and to develop an interdisciplinary workforce. This project will educate a broad
audience (particularly women) in the science and applications of the research
components and enhance their research skills through systematic troubleshooting
activities. Graduate curriculums across different disciplines will also be
transformed with related multidisciplinary projects and guest
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes scientific research to
investigate implantable ultrasound stimulation on a flexible platform (placed on
the brain surface with no parenchymal penetration) to simultaneously provide
high spatial resolution (&lt; 200 µm) and broad coverage (over the whole brain)
while dramatically reducing invasiveness. This multidisciplinary project, which
brings together expertise in electrical and biomedical engineering as well as
material, computer, and neuro science, is transformative in that it is
potentially the only method that promises large-scale stimulation across
distributed brain regions at different depths with high resolutions of &lt; 200
µm without parenchymal implantation, opening a new venue for understanding
neural and cognitive systems at large temporal and spatial scales. The
development of this technology builds upon investigators’ strength in circuits,
wireless power, flexible technologies, thin-film ultrasound arrays, machine
learning, and neural interfaces. The project pushes the limits of ultrasound
neuromodulation by investigating a flexible, image-guided (with machine learning
models), hybrid electrical-acoustic implantable system with the form factor of a
thin flexible sheet (on the brain surface) for ultrasound stimulation (and
electrophysiology recording). Three fundamental research gaps will be addressed.
1) For large-scale and high-resolution ultrasound beam focusing and steering,
the optimal approach in scaling up the number of ultrasound elements and
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) channels at high frequencies
(e.g., 5 MHz) will be explored. To reduce the complexity, thin-film transistors
on a flexible substrate will be leveraged to form a large two-dimensional
ultrasound array with selectable one-dimensional arrays (e.g., 256-element)
driven by only one ASIC. 2) Selectable thin-film ultrasound arrays with thin-
film transistor switches on flexible substrate will be optimized to achieve high
efficiency and high pressure output. 3) Imaging and machine learning models
based on image sequence analysis will be developed to guide the ultrasound
focused beam, considering the device flexibility (ultrasound elements’
orientation) and post-implantation effects. A system-level demonstration in
benchtop and in vivo settings will establish the feasibility of this flexible
implantable system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.