* 2219872
* EAGER: Catalysis Fundamentals of Selective Hydrogenation of Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Simon Podkolzin, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalysts speed up chemical reactions while promoting the selective conversion
of feedstocks to desired products. Cyclic olefin compounds are a class of
chemical compounds that are used widely in the chemical, pharmaceutical, and
food industries. Their current manufacture, however, relies on inefficient
catalysts and multistep processes that produce unwanted by-products, including
hazardous and environmentally-unfriendly chemicals. Moreover, current feedstocks
primarily consist of aromatic hydrocarbons derived from fossil sources. The
project addresses the need for better fundamental understanding of the catalytic
chemistry associated with cycloolefin manufacture. The fundamental insights will
support development of models capable of predicting catalyst formulations and
process conditions tuned to produce high yields of targeted products in energy-
efficient single-step reactions. The models will be extended to biomass and
other renewable feedstocks to enhance green chemistry and energy sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental relationships between the structure of
transition-metal catalysts and reactivity of aromatic hydrocarbons will be
established at the molecular level via an integrated experimental-theoretical
study focusing on single-step selective hydrogenation of hydrocarbons
(containing one aromatic ring) to cycloolefins. Selective hydrogenation of
tetralin to octalin will be used as a model reaction. Initial experiments will
focus on previously identified promising catalysts consisting of supported Pd-Pt
and Ni-Sn nanoparticles. Additional catalyst formulations will be selected based
on the initial results. Experimental studies will provide information for the
development of calibrated molecular models, which in turn will provide a better
interpretation of the experimental results, and guide the selection of follow-up
experiments to further improve the models in an iterative cycle. The study will
synergistically and iteratively combine: (1) kinetic reaction measurements at
steady-state and transient conditions, (2) in situ Raman and infrared
vibrational spectroscopic measurements and (3) quantum-chemical calculations for
interpretation of vibrational spectra, and transition state calculations for
identification of reaction mechanisms. Elements of reaction engineering will be
incorporated through kinetic models developed from data obtained over a range of
temperature, reactant partial pressure, and reaction-time data. In addition to
the technical aspects, the project will enable students to master critical
skills needed to compete and contribute successfully in the international
economy of the 21st century, particularly in the vital fields of sustainable
chemical production and nanotechnology. The research team will also support
undergraduate and K-12 educational outreach programs at the investigatorâ€™s
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.