* 2219476
* Collaborative Research: U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership Antiferroelectricity, Ferrielectricity and Ferroelectricity in the Archetypal Antiferroelectric PbZrO3 at Small Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2026
* USD 220,545.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Ceramics
Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, this collaborative effort,
between two US-based institutions and two European counterparts in Northern
Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, attempts to better understand material
functionalities from milli- and centi-meter to nano-meter length scales.
Specifically, this project will address the nanoscale organization of electrical
dipoles in oxides that can collectively lead to presence or absence of
switchable polarization at larger length scales. When successful, this research
will enable the next-generation micro- and nano-scale high-force and high-
displacement actuators and transducers, ultrahigh energy storage devices,
miniaturized voltage regulators, solid-state cooling, electro-optic and
electronic devices. Example application areas include next-generation remote-
controlled robotic devices in healthcare (including micro-surgery),
manufacturing, agriculture, disaster management, health and rescue operations,
and compact lightweight aerospace applications. Additionally, the close
collaboration of team members, with expertise spanning processing, advanced
characterization methods and materials theory, will result in an unsurpassed and
rounded learning experience for the students involved in this research. The
training of the students and young researchers during this program will result
in skilled human capital, suited to either continue advanced research or make a
valuable impact in related industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work, supported by the
Ceramics Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, is to advance the
fundamental understanding of antiferroelectricity in PbZrO3 thin films and
nanostructures, through multipronged theoretical and experimental studies of
nanoscale polarization. Specifically, this work will correlate microscopic
structural changes with macroscopic properties in this archetypal
antiferroelectric, exploring the stability of classical antiferroelectric (AFE),
ferrielectric (FiE), and ferroelectric (FE) behavior in PbZrO3 thin films and
nanostructures as a function of: (1) thickness reduction with distributed
residual stress/strain profiles; (2) size confinement resulting in a range of
surface-to-volume ratios with reduced lateral constraint; and (3)
crystallographic orientation of the films, where a large inherent anisotropy in
the material might result in different stabilization criteria and hence,
different critical parameters (external electric fields, temperature, size) for
transitions between AFE, FiE and FE behaviors. In parallel, theoretical efforts
will evaluate material behavior at increasing size from the nanoscale, offering
insights into transition(s) from the nanoscale-stable ferroelectric phase, to an
(intermediate) ferrielectric phase, to the macroscale and bulk-stable and
archetypal antiferroelectric one. The training of the students and young
researchers during this program will result in skilled human capital, suited to
either continue advanced research or make a valuable impact in related
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.