* 2219289
* EAGER: The Role of Lipids in Modulating the Synaptic Plasticity of Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Maxim Lavrentovich, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,396.00

This project will elucidate the microscopic mechanisms involved in the transport
of ions and other signals across membrane-associated protein channels. The
investigators will focus on the dynamic and structural features of the
biological membranes which are involved in these processes. Eventually, these
studies may bring new insights into the understanding of learning and memory.
Importantly, the study will implement non-invasive scattering techniques to
study the membranes, leveraging the powerful resources at national facilities
such as the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL). The investigators will engage undergraduates and high school
students who do not historically have access to research experience. This
project will create opportunities for these students to perform cutting-edge
research at leading research facilities in the country (e.g., ORNL and BNL),
thereby inspiring a new generation of scientists. This project will combine
experiments with data analysis and computer simulations. Students will advance
their programming and laboratory skills. These skills are imperative for both
science and industry. Students will participate in a paid summer internship
and/or thesis projects. Moreover, these skills will give students an advantage
applying for positions in academia, research organizations, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological membranes are highly complex structures
consisting of a lipid bilayer and associated molecules. In this project the
investigators aim to study the molecular origins of the force from lipids (FFL)
principle and its role in the activity of ion channels. They will harness non-
invasive scattering techniques, in conjunction with droplet interface bilayers
(DIBs) measurements, to study these molecular mechanisms. These conceptually
distant techniques will allow the investigators to get a comprehensive picture
of processes involved in ion channel activity at the molecular scale (via
scattering) and its relation to stimulated learning, memory, and synaptic
plasticity (via DIBs). Synaptic plasticity describes biological processes that
enable learning and memory due to the physicochemical and electromechanical
activities between synapses. By controlling the activity of the pore-forming ion
channels embedded in membranes, one can manipulate the membrane resting
potential, and other signals, simply by controlling the flow of ions across the
cell membrane. Understanding the detailed, multi-scale molecular mechanisms
underlying synaptic plasticity are of fundamental importance in gaining insights
into the molecular basis of learning and memory. This high-risk, potentially
transformative project aims to make a hitherto unknown connection between the
cascade-like relaxation dynamics in the biological membrane (influenced by the
FFL) and synaptic plasticity on a larger scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.