* 2219203
* Collaborative Research: Consistent Treatment of Boundaries and Interfaces in Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ankit Srivastava, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 271,213.00

This project is study metamaterials to achieve desired behaviors and functions
that would be hard, if not impossible, to find in naturally occurring materials.
Metamaterials have broad applications in numerous industries and defense that
can revolutionize use-cases such as noise mitigation, vibration isolation,
energy harvesting, radar and sonar, and sensor development. A fundamental issue
with metamaterials research is that the dynamic response of such systems near
their boundaries is currently poorly understood, especially in contrast to their
response in their interior. This deficiency has slowed the transition of the
technology of metamaterials from research to industry. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the understanding of the
boundary and interface issues in metamaterials research. It involves several
disciplines including acoustic and elastic metamaterials, inverse design and
optimization, and materials science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help
positively impact engineering education of the future. The team will perform
theoretical and computational analysis of transition layers and use inverse
design principles to create devices that control propagation of mechanical
waves. They will also conduct experiments to verify the models and test the
performance of the devices created. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad technical
goal of this grant is to provide a consistent method for the solution of dynamic
boundary value problems on finite domains of acoustic and elastic metamaterials.
Current approaches either involve micromorphic theories (with a very high number
of material parameters) or exact but nonlocal boundary conditions (formulated
with Fredholm integral equations). The former is incompatible with much of the
machinery of metamaterial device design (such as transformation methods) and the
latter is complex enough to make its use at the moment nearly untenable. As a
consequence, ideal metamaterial designs, when realized in practice, demonstrate
significant and poorly understood performance degradations. Through this grant,
the team seeks to solve this issue by 1) utilizing and focusing on local
metamaterials and 2) coupling them with transition layers. It is hypothesized
that these two ideas will make it tractable to solve a wide range of boundary
value problems involving arbitrary finite samples, thus overcoming a critical
obstacle in the field. The technological promise of mechanical metamaterials is
hinged upon accurate modeling of scattering off such designs, which is
significantly affected by the handling of interfaces. This grant seeks to
overcome this major obstacle towards robust designs of micro-structured
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Mechanics of
Materials &amp; Structures (MOMS) Program and Dynamics, Control and Systems
Diagnostics (DCSD) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.