* 2219730
* EAGER: A Novel 3-D Printed PVDF-TrFE Copolymer Wall Shear Stress Measuring Device for Measurement of Wall Shear Stress in Unsteady Flow Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Rodward Hewlin, Jr., University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 219,313.00

Wall shear stress measurements and the influence of shear stresses in
aerodynamic and physiological flow applications are vital. Although there is
widespread literature in aerodynamic and physiological fluid flow research, many
of the basic properties of unsteady flows are poorly understood. A major
limitation in the experimental validation of various unsteady flow models is
insufficient flow measurement instrumentation, specifically a method of direct
non-invasive measurement of wall shear stress. The sensitivity and accuracy
needed to evaluate the wall shear stresses in complex unsteady flows is not
attainable with the existing state-of-the-art measurement technologies. This
research effort aims to investigate a multi-layered 3-D printed piezoelectric
polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene (PVDF-TrFE) copolymer sensor as a wall
shear stress measuring device candidate. The proposed technology has an
advantage in that it contains no moving parts, can potentially perform a direct
measurement of wall shear stress, can be mounted directly to the flow surface
with no modification, and can be manufactured easily as compared to existing
methods. Preliminary results demonstrate that PVDF-TrFE exhibits exceptional
sensitivity to deflection with high accuracy and
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will focus on
implementing this novel sensor technology to perform direct wall shear stress
measurements in unsteady flow applications. This research effort will address
issues related to sensitivity, installation of the sensor, validation of sensor
measurements with particle imaging velocimetry wall shear stress measurements
and with exact analytical solutions for Poiseuille, Womersley and Stokes flows,
and issues of error introduced by the sensor thickness. If the proposed effort
is successful, the proposed methodology will provide ease of fabrication and
implementation for a range of sizes of flush mountable sensors that eliminate
moving parts increasing robustness, provides a reduction of cost in flow
instrumentation tools, and provides a non-intrusive wall shear stress
measurement. PVDF-TrFE sensors have never been tested or used for wall shear
sensing, thus the electromechanical coupling mechanism that provides shear
transduction is not fully understood. This pioneering research effort will
determine the fundamental sensing properties of PVDF-TrFE under wall shear,
improve sensor fabrication and packaging, and will develop a methodology for
high frequency dynamic calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.