* 2219933
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Swarm of Autonomous Subsea Vehicles to Infer Plankton Growth and Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessica Carriere-Garwood, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2025
* USD 317,344.00

Marine plankton are likely the most important components of marine ecosystems:
the phytoplankton produce oxygen as they create organic carbon through
photosynthesis, while the zooplankton transfer this organic carbon to top
predators such as fish, seabirds, marine mammals, and humans. Despite being
relatively weak, plankton swimming behaviors can play an important role in
determining their distribution and survival: swimming allows plankton to find
food, reproduce, and avoid predators in a dynamic and patchy fluid environment.
These behaviors also influence plankton dispersal and survival by modulating the
ocean conditions that the plankton experience. Because it is presently
impossible to track individual plankton for long periods in situ, current
insights into the trade-offs and benefits associated with plankton behaviors
have only been gained from experiments in controlled settings and from numerical
models. Having drifting vehicles that simulate planktonic behaviors would enable
unique and powerful insights into how plankton interact with the currents and
properties of their environment. During this project, investigators will develop
small, next-generation, subsurface, autonomous, buoyancy-controlled vehicles –
plankton mimics – to study how relatively simple behaviors of plankton can alter
their transport and environment. By sampling the ocean like planktonic
organisms, this unique vehicle swarm will give plankton researchers
unprecedented data to validate experimental and model predictions, and,
hopefully, reveal previously unknown mechanisms driving planktonic population
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the above goals, a swarm of 20
quasi-Lagrangian underwater vehicles will be fabricated. The vehicles will mimic
plankton behavior and will be tracked in 3D for 24–72 hours. These goals will be
achieved based on several novel technological advances: 1) improved subsurface
localization using the most recent developments in acoustic modem technology at
reduced cost, 2) subsurface vehicle communication with surface buoys to relay
vehicle information (e.g., data, location) to scientists on a nearby ship to
facilitate additional ship-based sampling, and 3) a near-incompressible housing
and drag skirts to improve the vehicles’ ability to follow fluid velocities and
provide a ‘no behavior’ mode. The swarm will be optimized to investigate
biological-physical interactions at spatial scales up to 10 km, focusing on
internal waves and fronts. Ultimate performance tests will target high-frequency
internal waves, acquiring vehicle trajectories with a spatial resolution of tens
of centimeters vertically, sub-meters horizontally, and a temporal resolution of
minutes. Additional sensors will provide along-track information on ocean
temperature, salinity, irradiance, and chlorophyll-a. These data will provide
unique time series of physical and environmental data along planktonic
trajectories in the ocean. The vehicle swarm will generate multiple tracks
showing the environmental properties in 3D along with the physical transport
associated with different behaviors in the similar environments. Such tracks
will lead to insights regarding the cues and consequences of behaviors in the
plankter’s natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.