* 2219350
* Collaborative Research: Districts Helping Districts: Scaling Inclusive CT Pathways
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Quinn Burke, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,779,377.00

While all 50 U.S. states have adopted computer science education policies and
standards, equity remains a persistently common challenge, with recent state-
based studies reporting that many high school CS courses have enrollments no
more diverse than they were 20 years ago. This partnership between Digital
Promise Global and the Broward County School Board will address ongoing equity
dilemmas by creating a professional learninig community of school districts
working to expand CS education for their students. This approach recognizes the
crucial role of districts in designing and implementing inclusive computing
pathways that coherently connect core computing competencies to the districtâ€™s
adoption of state standards, available resources, and teacher professional
development opportunities. The partnership builds on prior work and will engage
eight school districts across the country that serve a variety of geographies,
district sizes and student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-
practitioner partnership (RPP) between Digital Promise Global and the Broward
County School Board builds upon prior work that designed inclusive K-12
computing pathways. Key to this scale-up is the crucial role of school districts
in addressing ongoing equity dilemmas and student achievement gaps in K-12
computing. The project team includes eight diverse school districts, who
collectively explore practices for sustainably scaling the inclusive CT pathways
model that partnering districts have individually designed and implemented over
the past three years. The RPP will leverage the CT Pathways Toolkit designed
from prior work and implement a teacher-led model of professional learning at
scale for district administrators and instructors. The goal is for district
leaders and teachers to develop skills and support systems to effectively
implement cumulative, consistent, and competency-based learning opportunities in
each grade, K-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.