* 2219546
* Rational Synthesis of Alloy Nanocrystals with Controlled Compositions and Facets for Electrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2025
* USD 614,548.00

Catalysts consisting of nanoscale metal particles deposited on high-surface-area
supports have long been used to promote the rates, product selectivity, and
energy efficiency of chemical reactions. However, a long-standing challenge in
such heterogeneous catalysis has been the design and synthesis of catalysts that
are optimally tuned with respect to particle composition and structure. The
project addresses that challenge by developing a precise and robust method for
the fabrication of alloy-based electrocatalysts with well-controlled surfaces.
The novel synthesis approach will be demonstrated as applied to the direct
electrocatalytic conversion of hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) to hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) â€“ thus offering an alternative to energy-intensive and complex
current technology. Project results will be further adapted to enhance classroom
teaching, including the development of demonstrations (e.g., animations and
experiments) related to key concepts in science and engineering. The multi-
disciplinary and collaborative nature of the project will offer a vehicle to
enrich the education and training experiences of participating students while
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although nanocrystals made of alloys have been extensively
explored for a wide variety of electrocatalytic processes, most of the studies
reported in the literature are based on a trial-and-error approach that involves
labor-intensive screening of numerous alloys in terms of elemental composition
and atomic ratio. It is also a grand challenge to quantitatively control the
surface of an alloy-based nanocrystal in terms of composition, elemental
distribution, and atomic arrangement. With a focus on the electrocatalytic
production of hydrogen peroxide, a compound pivotal to a variety of industrial
applications, first-principles calculations and data science will be used to
identify candidate alloys in terms of composition and surface structure,
followed by their faithful translation into nanocrystal-based catalysts through
the development of a synthetic method. Different from conventional approaches,
solutions of different precursors will be co-titrated dropwise into the reaction
solution so that the instantaneous concentration of each precursor is maintained
in a predefined steady state throughout the synthesis. As a result, atoms will
be produced from the different precursors at stable, pre-specified rates for the
generation of alloy nanocrystals with a uniform composition, with the atomic
ratio being determined by the reduction rates of their precursors in the steady
state. When conformally deposited on nanocrystals with different shapes - as
overlayers of a few atomic layers in thickness - alloy-based electrocatalysts
with well-defined surfaces and enhanced resistance against elemental segregation
will be obtained. The catalytic data from experimental measurements and
theoretical predictions will be compared to refine the computational methods
while establishing a feedback loop for iterative optimization of the catalysts
without involving trial and error. The immediate outcome of this transformative
research will be the creation of a knowledge base for the rational development
of electrocatalysts featuring an optimal combination of activity, selectivity,
and durability toward the electrocatalytic production of hydrogen peroxide. The
methods and techniques to be developed can also be extended to accelerate the
discovery and development of many other types of nanomaterials with enhanced
performance in various applications, including those related to chemical
production, petroleum refining, national security, and public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.