* 2219522
* HBCU-RISE: Improving Research and Educational Infrastructure for 3D Printable Nanocomposites for Biotechnology Application
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paresh Ray, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST) Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Research
Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (RISE) program, Jackson State
University will provide opportunities for underrepresented minority (URM)
participants to become next generation STEM innovators through research and
education on design of materials. The purposes of this project are to (a)
significantly improve and expand the institution's research and educational
capability on the 3D printing of nanocomposites and (b) to increase the number
of URM students that join the next generation of US scientists. The project will
provide minority participants from Jackson State University and other local K-12
schools the opportunity to acquire a comprehensive STEM education with
components ranging from STEM research experiences to formal and informal lessons
and conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State University
interdisciplinary faculty mentors will collaborate on a research project
pertaining to the rational design of 3D printable nanocomposites, which will
provide tremendous benefit for society in terms of deploying next-generation
devices. The research activities will include (i) designing new strategies for
the development of next generation nanocomposite materials using nature-inspired
peptides and (ii) development of 3D printed nature-inspired nanocomposites. The
goals of this project also align well within the ongoing developmental plan of
Jackson State University to become one of the regionâ€™s foremost centers on
nanostructured materials manufacturing. The CREST HBCU-RISE awards support the
development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.