* 2219305
* Lipid-polymer membranes: understanding ion transport through hybrid materials at the nanoscale
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Cecilia Leal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2025
* USD 704,826.00

Ions are small atomic or molecular species that carry a positive or negative
charge. Many processes in nature, from the transmission of signals in brain
cells to conversion of sunlight into energy by plants to the performance of
batteries relies on efficient and controllable transport of ions from one place
to another. In this project the PIs will develop a new class of materials that
will yield improved methods to control and enhance ion transport. As the demands
for efficient ion transport increase, materials with precisely tailored
structures are needed to provide both pathways for charges to move as well as
mechanical robustness. Polymers and phospholipids are two classes of materials
which can self-assemble into structures with nanometer scale features, and in
appropriate ratios their hybrids can generate novel nanostructures for ion
transport. This project will underpin how nanostructures of hybrid materials and
the size of the domains correlates with mechanical and transport properties.
This innovative research project can generate new knowledge, resulting in the
development of cost effective and benign approaches for the processing of
nanostructured soft materials for many useful applications, including
separations, water purification, and energy storage. The PIs will offer several
educational activities. First, they will participate in a program called
Polymers module for Middle-School Girls Learning About Materials (Mid-GLAM)
summer camp. As part of this project, the PIs will prepare a day-long module,
during which a full span of materials will be showcased. This will include demos
in the PIs labs, giving students the opportunity to compare materials with
different flow properties based on the underlying chemistry. The goal will be to
teach, in a hands-on and engaging manner, how to engineer the properties of
polymers which are used in everyday applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the fundamental
understanding of self-assembly in block copolymer-phospholipid hybrid membranes
and the corresponding impact on ion transport. While block copolymer and
phospholipid self-assembly has received much attention individually, their
hybrids can exhibit nanostructures and long-range domains which are not present
in either of the two starting components. A key aim of this work is to
understand how to harness the formation of stable, double gyroid morphologies to
provide continuous pathways for ion transport. The hybrid materials will be
investigated to deconvolute the roles of interfacial effects and intermolecular
interactions. When confined to the nanoscale, ion mobilities can be greatly
enhanced or suppressed which the PIs will probe through control of swelling,
domain size, and interactions with the supporting substrate. The intermolecular
interactions of ions with polymer will also be modulated through the charge
density and species on the polymer backbone. Understanding what gives rise to
large changes in diffusion under nanoconfined conditions is the second major
aim. Finally, triggerable groups which respond to light and temperature will be
incorporated into the block copolymer as a means to disassemble and interconvert
between continuous and layered nanostructures to provide modulated transport.
This research will provide fundamental insights into the self-assembly of
complex soft materials, transport through nanostructured domains, and reversible
structure formation of hybrid soft alloys. This work will be disseminated to
undergraduate and graduate students in coursework including Biomolecular
Materials and Kinetics in the Materials Science Department, where the self-
assembly process and timescales will be discussed. The findings will also be
disseminated both on campus and to the community through outreach projects
including day camps for Girls Learning About Materials. Interest in STEM fields
will be promoted to high school and middle-school girls, by introducing them to
the exciting world of self-assembly and biological-synthetic hybrid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.