* 2219566
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Food Security Under Colonial Rule
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Amanda Logan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,459.00

This project investigate the deep histories of food (in)security, specifically
seeking to understand how colonial impositions affect local food systems and the
strategies that communities develop to mitigate these impacts. These issues are
investigated in a region where Indigenous communities experienced two separate
but linked waves of colonialism which extended control by forcibly displacing
people, imposing religion, and implementing taxes on both labor and goods. Such
impositions could decrease food availability within communities, introduce new
foods, or alter who has access to food. The project will study archaeological
plant remains to document the foods that people produced and ate in the period
immediately preceding and during imperial occupations. Plant remains form an
unwritten archive of ancient food and therefore offer valuable insight to past
peoples’ day-to-day lives, choices, and work. An archaeology of food security is
important because it helps to understand the long-term processes that cause food
insecurity in the present and the strategies past communities developed in
response to food system disruptions. By employing a food security framework,
this project seeks not only to contribute to understandings about the past, but
also to inform current work on food systems. The project will create paid
training opportunities for undergraduate students to gain specialized skills in
archaeological science and by assisting in the collection, processing, and
analysis of botanical samples&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study plant
remains collected from archaeological excavations in ancient households,
communal gathering and eating spaces, and agriculture fields. These data will
allow the assessment of two key pillars of food security: availability and
access. Availability will be documented by tracing stability or change in
ingredients over time at the community scale, while access will be studied by
comparing plant remains recovered in different households within the community.
Findings on availability and access will also inform about the food strategies
community members employed by demonstrating stability or change in agriculture,
food storage, or trade relations. As such, this project will speak to how food
(in)security was created by both imperial impositions and local actions.
Overall, this research will advance understandings of colonialism and offer a
case study about the interplay between local food strategies, colonial
impositions, and food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.