* 2219333
* Building Capacity to Support Elementary CS Pathways Tailored to Rural Needs in Idaho
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Kaitlin Maguire, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,959.00

Elementary computer science education is crucial for initiating and maintaining
students’ interest in and positive attitudes toward computing. Children as young
as five can understand basic computer science and programming concepts, yet only
a quarter of elementary schools across the nation offer computer science
instruction. Rural communities often have specific needs around computing
education related to smaller populations, depressed economies, and a high number
of families living in poverty. This partnership between American Institutes for
Research, Idaho STEM Action Center, and BootUp Professional Development will
support rural districts in Idaho in the design of an inclusive, K-5 computer
science course pathway. The project team will collaborate to deepen their
partnership, while engaging with district- and school-level partners from rural
communities to define future directions for supporting the
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-practitioner partnership between
American Institutes for Research, Idaho STEM Action Center, and BootUp
Professional Development will develop the Idaho Elementary CS Collaborative
(IECC) to support the design of K–5 computer science pathways in Idaho school
districts. The IECC will address challenges to CS pathway development particular
to low-income, rural communities, such as resource scarcity and relatively low
exposure to CS among students. Project activities include facilitated
partnership meetings to build the RPP; a landscape review of elementary computer
science in Idaho; and the development of a set of CS planning and learning
opportunities for administrators, teachers, and
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.