* 2219108
* Astrophysics Partners Reaching Across the State of Colorado
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Julia Comerford, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2025
* USD 237,763.00

A new research and education partnership in astronomy will be developed between
the University of Colorado (CU) at Boulder and Fort Lewis College, a designated
Native American-serving college located in Durango, Colorado. The primary goal
of this partnership is to open pathways to astronomy professions for Native
American students. Over the course of three years, this program will enable a
total of nine Fort Lewis College undergraduates to develop skills in
astrophysics research, by providing 10-week summer research internships at the
CU Boulder astrophysics department and the NSF’s National Solar Observatory,
which is located on CU’s campus. In order to expand the students’ professional
and social community, the new summer program will plug into several well-
established programs on campus. The program will provide workshops, field trips,
near-peer mentoring from graduate students of color, conversations with CU’s
Center for Native American and Indigenous Studies, poster presentation
opportunities at national conferences, and a celestial reunion at an Ancestral
Puebloan archaeological site at Chimney Rock National
Monument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students participating in this program will
learn about spectroscopy, Python coding, and telescopes, as well as science
communication, writing an abstract, and creating a scientific poster. Their
summer research projects will cover a wide range of astrophysics, including the
origin of metals in white dwarfs, the properties of exoplanet atmospheres,
understanding magnetic fibrils on the Sun, and the effect of different
supermassive black hole mass measurements on gravitational wave signals. The
students will present their scientific results in posters at a CU research
symposium, a Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native
Americans in Science meeting, and an American Astronomical Society meeting.
Through these research experiences, as well as workshops on applying to graduate
school and field trips to astronomy-related workplaces, the undergraduates will
be well poised for entry into graduate school or other astronomy career paths.
This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.