* 2219605
* Molecular Evolution of Cellular Condensates
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ofer Rog, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 829,999.00

Living cells are composed of numerous molecular machines called proteins. Many
proteins adopt structures dedicated to the cellular activities they carry out,
and, as expected, these structures tend to persist over long evolutionary times.
Recently, biologists started to appreciate that some proteins adopt much more
flexible conformations that allow them to function by clustering with similar
proteins. This project seeks to understand how this way of organizing the cell
and regulating complex functions affects the rules governing how proteins that
constitute such clusters change through evolution. In conjunction with the
research goals of this project, the investigator will be developing a teaching
curriculum using molecular animation and distributing these materials to cell
biology instructors to help train the next generation of researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been traditionally believed that all cellular
organelles are confined within a membrane. However, in recent years, membrane-
less organelles, or condensates, are a newly appreciated way to organize the
cell. The formation and functions of condensates are regulated by interactions
more dynamic and labile than that of more commonly studied proteins, impacting
how condensate constituents evolve. This project systematically analyzes
condensate constituents in the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans to shed
light on the molecular grammar of condensate members and on the forces shaping
condensate evolution. The evolutionary patterns and rules uncovered by the
phylogenetic analysis are then validated by mutating and swapping conserved
domains and testing the functional impact of these changes. Beyond insight into
the functions and evolution of condensates, this work charts a blueprint for
future refinements of homology search algorithms resulting in improved gene
annotations, sequence alignments and ortholog identification. The experimental
work on this project is complemented by the creation of a teaching curriculum
about condensates, including dedicated animations suited to represent dynamic
interactions underlying the formation and functions and condensates.
Distributing these materials to cell biology instructors will help train the
next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.