* 2219790
* MsRI-Planning Workshop: X-ray and Neutron Instrumentation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Leslie Butler, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

With support from the Divisions of Chemistry (CHE); Materials Research (DMR);
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB); Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI); and Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems (CBET), Professors Gerald Schneider and Les Butler at the Louisiana
State University are organizing a workshop to identify new frontiers of combined
X-ray and neutron instrumentation. Neutron and X-ray methods probe the structure
and dynamics of materials at the atomic scale and can provide insight into a
host of scientific and technological problems. Many of these problems require
high resolution and non-destructive techniques that can study the same sample
over long periods of time, from hours to weeks, and there are currently no
combined X-ray and neutron scattering and imaging facilities capable of
performing these measurements. Establishing such a facility could advance our
understanding of a broad array of problems, many of which are central to
problems facing society, including the chemistry of lithium battery degradation
and how plant roots seek water and chemical nutrients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will engage approximately 100 thought-leaders from academic,
industrial, and governmental sectors with expertise in the chemical sciences and
related areas, such as energy, biological chemistry, materials science, and
cultural artifacts, as well as experts in X-ray and neutron sciences to discuss
a potential facility that could fill this gap. Participants will define the
roadmap and relationships between instrumentation and the demanding and evolving
requirements of the scientific applications. The workshop will explore how to
efficiently align a university-based X-ray and neutron facility with the world-
class instrumentation available at NIST-, NSF- and DOE-supported national
facilities, as well as how to advance existing X-ray and neutron sources to meet
the current and future needs of the research community. Areas for collaborations
will be identified by the participants with a goal of advanced convergent
research, education, and instrumentation objectives. The workshop will also
explore opportunities such a facility would provide in training students in
combined X-ray and neutron instrumentation development, as well as crafting
advanced experimental protocols for studying complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.