* 2219991
* Liquid-Metal-Printed, Modulation-Doped 2D Metal Oxide Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* William Scheideler, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 410,000.00

Liquid Metal Printed Transistors Enhanced with Multilayer 2D Semiconducting
Oxide Heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrathin metal oxide
semiconductors have exceptional optical, mechanical, and electronic properties
that could enable emerging flexible electronics, from resorbable biosensors to
low-power displays. Engineering these devices for specific applications requires
precise nanoscale control of the transport of electrons for large area devices
and systems. However, depositing atomically thin oxides at a large scale while
controlling their electrical properties remains technologically challenging.
This project overcomes those limitations by leveraging a new form of 2D oxide
semiconductors spontaneously formed by native oxidation of liquid gallium and
indium to fabricate highly conductive and ultratransparent nanosheets just 2-3
nm thick. The scientific question driving this study is how to precisely control
electronic transport in transistors utilizing 2D oxide channels. Our approach
involves electrostatic engineering of heterostructures of InOx and GaOx as well
as modeling of the density of electronic defects in these channel layers. This
work also implements finite element simulations to design low-voltage, high-
performance devices that can lead to integration into biomedical sensors,
lightweight displays, and other systems that benefit from low-temperature
fabrication on flexible polymer substrates. The research plan ties in with
planned educational outreach and inclusivity efforts. We build on past efforts,
providing engaging research opportunities for a diverse set of undergraduates
and graduates while regularly assessing the downstream impact. The planned
recorded remote laboratories based on the science of conductivity of liquid
metals will deliver content for powering remote learning opportunities for K-12
and undergraduate engineering education. The impact of these activities will be
to broaden participation in STEM and strengthen the engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is
to develop a new paradigm of two-dimensional (2D) metal oxide transistors
enhanced through quantum modulation doping. Towards this end, this work develops
a fundamental understanding of how heterointerfaces can be engineered to enhance
electronic transport in channels consisting of heterostructures of quantum
confined 2-3 nm thick 2D wide bandgap oxide semiconductors. This strategy can
induce 2D electron gas formation and band-like transport characteristics such as
temperature-independent mobility. However, the fundamental gap limiting
applications of these phenomena is the connection between nanoscale
electrostatic interface engineering and electronic transport in oxide
semiconductors. A fundamental innovation in this program is to utilize liquid
metal printing to fabricate vertically stacked heterostructures channels in
which high-mobility, efficient electron transport is produced by the interfacial
conduction band energy offset (Î”Ec) of 2D InOx and GaOx. Detailed device
characterization measurements probe the hypothesis that this modulation doping
of 2D heterointerfaces can engineer band-like transport by passivating interface
traps and inducing bulk electron accumulation. A complementary goal is to
develop TCAD simulations based on density of states data to design
electrostatically optimal multilayer architectures, identify the impact of
high-k dielectric integration, and design transistors for low-voltage unipolar
logic circuits. This combination of experiments and simulations can provide the
fundamental device engineering knowledge needed to leverage this scalable
fabrication method for various flexible electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.