* 2219807
* Greenway Institute of Elizabethtown College Center for Sustainability and Equity in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sara Atwood, Elizabethtown College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,196,180.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will broaden
participation in engineering by creating the Greenway Center for Equity and
Sustainability (GCES). GCES will be dedicated to recruiting and retaining a
diverse community of students who are all equally included, engaged, and enabled
to develop their professional skills and engineering identities regardless of
socioeconomic status or race. Most traditional engineering programs embody
biases and practices that perpetuate inequity: grading schemes that immediately
rank students, competitive and isolating work cultures, emphasis on passive
lectures, and isolation from the impact of real-world engineering. This
disadvantages students whose opinions and talents are underrepresented in the
engineering profession, including underrepresented racial minorities, women,
students from rural locations, Pell-eligible students, and/or first-generation
students. GCES will target programs (including teacher professional development)
and outreach in communities with larger numbers of underrepresented students to
ensure that the students, teachers, and faculty we serve, and employ are
diverse. We will also recruit diverse mentors to sponsor students into
engineering. GCES will combine Elizabethtown College’s ABET-accredited
engineering program and longstanding experience working with these student
groups with the Greenway Institute’s project-based learning curriculum and focus
on sustainability. GCES will be a supportive, inclusive community where every
student can develop the competence, confidence, and connections they need to
thrive in engineering by learning engineering through hands-on, teamwork-based
projects that address real-world problems. Because this innovation will occur in
a resource constrained environment, its potential replicability across other
such settings is enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year program will pilot
a fully problem-based curriculum that includes (1) design and implementation of
engineering education for equity and sustainability and (2) training of faculty
to design and deliver equity-focused engineering instruction that strengthens
the engineering identity and success of students from underrepresented groups.
In Year 1, learning outcomes will be specified and a one-year, 100% hands-on
pilot program in sustainable engineering developed, Sustainable Engineering for
Equity (SEE). SEE will be organized around eight learning modules, each focused
on a different engineering challenge. Modules will be structured to
progressively develop the engineering skills that first-year students should
master and will be specifically based on mastery proficiency milestones and
outcomes specified by ABET. Hands-on, supportive project work will be paired
with contextualized, just-in-time instruction to make sure students have strong
mastery of math and science fundamentals and plenty of opportunities to
practice, revise, and improve their work. In Year 2, faculty will pilot the one-
year SEE program with a sample of students that includes strong representation
from our target groups. SEE will enable the GCES to hone its practices, train
its faculty, and set up infrastructure to support a fully inclusive, equitable
engineering program. The impact of redesigning engineering education around
equitable practices on underrepresented students’ sense of engineering identity
will be rigorously evaluated. Data and feedback from SEE will help Elizabethton
College and GCES faculty redesign their courses to incorporate field-tested best
practices. SEE students in the Phase I pilot will receive free tuition and
credit for a full year of engineering education; after successfully completing
the year, students can continue at Elizabethtown College in Pennsylvania or
another institution of higher education. Project evaluation by a contracted
third-party expert will (1) provide information on accountability of the GCES
with respect to both fidelity of GCES implementation of grant activities and our
stated commitment to equitable impacts, (2) support continuous improvement of
work developed in the SEE pilot, and (3) support generation of knowledge about
how engineering education can be redesigned for equity, in ways that can be
transferred to other campuses. In Phase II, the GCES will begin extension of the
model program into a full, four-year engineering
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.