* 2219957
* PFI (MCA):  Developing Data-Assimilation Capability in Engineering Simulation Software Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xinfeng Gao, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Mid-Career Advancement (PFI (MCA)) project seeks to reduce discrepancies between
results from computer simulations and those from physical experimentation. Data
assimilation (DA) technology will be developed to simulating complex engineering
systems that may uncover the root causes for such discrepancies and place an
industry back on track in their product design workflow. By partnering with
commercial industry, this PFI (MCA) project will make the DA technology
accessible to practicing engineers working in areas of computational fluid
dynamics (CFD), accelerating advances for innovative designs. This project may
also enhance the academic curricula at both undergraduate and graduate levels by
enabling discussion of engineering design and analysis use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed PFI (MCA) project aims to transfer and
scale up the CFD+DA technology from a research setting to commercial industry.
This project proposes rigorous methods for uncovering the causes of
discrepancies between computer simulation and physical experimentation and
quantifying the uncertainty in a prediction. For analysis of engineering fluid
flows, correct use of DA requires significant expertise in both DA and CFD
algorithms, presenting technical barriers for engineers. This project will make
CFD+DA a design and analysis tool, accessible to non-experts. Industrial
engineers will assess the technology in current product-design
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.