* 2219323
* HNDS-R: Brain network mechanisms of task-general cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ravi Mill, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

Abstract for "Brain network mechanisms of task-general cognition"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the special properties of the human brain that
make us intelligent? What is the brain circuitry underlying the intelligence of
geniuses such as Leonardo da Vinci, Marie Curie, Albert Einstein and the neural
basis for normal human intelligence, which surpasses machine and artificial
intelligence in a broad spectrum of cognitive and social tasks? Understanding
the neural basis of different varieties of human intelligence is one of the
great challenges in neuroscience. In addition to the scientific quest to
understand the nature of human cognition and intelligence, knowing what makes
the human brain intelligent would have many useful applications. For example,
this knowledge could potentially be used to guide brain stimulation to help
those with learning disabilities. This knowledge could also help develop brain-
computer interfaces and enhance artificial intelligence, with many applications
in science, engineering, and business. This project will use brain imaging and
brain stimulation to learn about some of the key brain network processes that
make human intelligence possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converging evidence
indicates that general human intelligence is primarily implemented by activity
and connectivity in subnetworks of the brain termed cognitive control networks
(CCNs). However, there is a critical need to determine how CCN activity and
connectivity together generate intelligent goal-directed behavior. The overall
objective of this project is to determine how CCNs implement intelligent
behavior across a wide variety of different tasks. Researchers will use brain
activity flow models – a novel method for determining how activity and
connectivity together generate brain function –to investigate how CCNs implement
task-general cognition underlying intelligent behavior. The project will utilize
brain imaging and brain stimulation to build and test activity flow models of
intelligent human behavior. This combined experimental and computational
approach will allow testing of the hypothesis that CCNs dynamically re-route
activity flows between sensory inputs and motor outputs, implementing
intelligent behavior via conjunctive activations as well as dynamic connectivity
changes. In addition to scientific research, this project will enhance Outreach
and increase participation of underrepresented groups in STEM via supporting
continuation and expansion of participation in the NSF-funded nationwide LSAMP
(Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.