* 2219257
* Further Studies of Dynamics for El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diversity and Complexity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fei-Fei Jin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 834,774.00

The El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon exhibits complex behaviors
with two main groups of patterns known as the Central Pacific and Eastern
Pacific El Niño events that evolve very differently in time. Such spatio-
temporal complexity (STC) of ENSO has great implications on various aspects on
the global climate. To date, the fundamental dynamics and essential multiscale
interactions resulting in this ENSO complexity remains unclear. This proposal
aims to advance current understanding of the fundamental dynamics associated
with ENSO STC. The results from this work can lead to an improved prediction
skills and increased confidence in climate change projections of ENSO and its
global impacts. The work will train a graduate student and a young research
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will conduct a systematic
investigation of ENSO STC by developing and applying new theoretical approaches
and using a set of models (of differing complexity) together with existing
observations and climate model outputs. The investigator will assess how linear
and nonlinear sensitivity of the leading coupled ENSO mode gives rise to a
unique regime of ENSO STC, how ENSO interacts with the annual cycle, transient
tropical phenomena (e.g., the Madden-Julian Oscillation), and other tropical
modes of variability, and how ENSO STC responds to various climate mean state
biases and scenarios of climate changes. In addition to training the next
generation of scientists, this work can lead to (i) new ENSO conceptual models
extending the simple canonical ENSO recharge oscillator paradigm to better
capture the essential mechanism of ENSO complexity, (ii) better understandings
of key physical and dynamical processes for ENSO complexity, and (iii) new
insights into causes of deficiency in climate model simulation of ENSO
complexity and potentials for improving ENSO’s forecasting skill and assessed
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.