* 2219065
* OPP-PRF: Millimeter-wave Blazar Monitoring With Cosmic Microwave Background Experiments: A New Tool for Probing Blazar Physics
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* John Hood, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 302,195.00

This project will investigate the change in brightness of objects known as
Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) using microwave telescopes. AGN are powered by
matter falling onto supermassive black holes. The primary objective of this
research is to undertake a study of AGN brightness fluctuations using light in
multiple wavelengths. By studying the connections between the fluctuations at
different wavelengths, we can learn what causes these fluctuations. The data
produced under this project will be publicly released to enable other scientific
investigations. The broader impacts of this project include the training of
graduate students in the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge program. In
addition, the researcher will continue to work with the NAACP (ACT-SO) and First
Discoveries programs as a science mentor, advisor and teacher for local pre-K
and high school students and classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
has introduced a new process that uses repurposed Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB) data from the South Pole Telescope to produce millimeter-wavelength light
curves of AGN with the goal of conducting a multi-wavelength correlation study.
This study will be use the measured correlations between different wavelength
emissions from AGN to better understand the origin and production of observed
gamma-ray emissions. This project will fund the first large-scale effort to use
CMB data for AGN monitoring and will provide a foundational observing
program/strategy that will be implemented in future CMB
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.