* 2219609
* Assessing Bias and Idiosyncrasies in Elite Scientific Peer Review
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Aaron Clauset, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 501,890.00

Peer review is a core process by which the scientific community formally
evaluates new research contributions. The outcomes of peer review for scientific
articles, particularly at elite scientific journals, have broad influence on the
publicâ€™s understanding of scientific knowledge, as well as on scientific careers
and the directions of scientific discovery. At the same time, peer review can
exhibit biases and idiosyncrasies that can produce non-meritocratic outcomes,
which can, in turn, limit scientific advancement and broad participation, and
can even undermine or impede evidence-based policy. This project will (i)
quantify, model, and understand the magnitude, sources, and effects of biases
and idiosyncrasies within elite scientific peer review across multiple
scientific fields, (ii) facilitate broader community efforts in studying peer
review using scientific methods, and (iii) inform new policies intended to
ensure the reliability of peer review and its
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (i) produce multiple
comprehensive, anonymized datasets of peer review at two elite general science
journals, spanning multiple years and fields, and make them publicly available
for reuse by the research community; and (ii) use these anonymized datasets to
quantitatively assess the magnitude, source, and effects of both social biases
and editorial idiosyncrasies within elite peer review. These analyses will use
statistical methods from causal inference, statistical modeling, machine
learning, and natural language processing to produce state-of-the-art estimates
of effect sizes and sources. The anonymized datasets will adhere to the NIST IR
8053 standard for de-identification, and the anonymization scheme will be
robustly evaluated prior to any data release. These data sets will enable
quantitative, longitudinal analyses of submitted manuscripts, and the dependence
of different editorial and reviewer recommendations on social demographic and
professional attribute variables, to statistically assess, quantify, and compare
social biases and editorial idiosyncrasies across manuscripts, editors, and
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.