* 2219587
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: SCH: Privacy Preserving Tutoring System for Health Education of Low Literacy Hispanic Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Renu Balyan, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 140,215.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a
computer tutor for low literacy Hispanic breast cancer survivors. Breast cancer
is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in Hispanics, and although
research has shown that education can greatly mitigate stress and improve
quality of life, few educational interventions for this population exist. The
computer tutor resulting from this project will mimic a human tutor that teaches
about breast cancer survivorship skills and about breast cancer in general.
Because tutoring involves conversation with the survivor, it is possible that
they reveal sensitive personal information; therefore, it is important to
encrypt the information in the tutoring session to prevent any privacy breaches.
And for the tutoring component to be effective, special attention must be paid
to the utilization of natural language processing models as well as models of
behavior that are observed in the target population when tutoring and/or
interacting with technology. For the privacy component to be effective,
techniques that can encrypt and decrypt data at high speeds will be explored to
make the interaction fluid. To date, computer tutors that converse with their
students have been tried mainly with a highly literate population in college
settings, so their impact on low literacy Hispanics is unknown. Therefore, this
project will advance our understanding of the impact of designing artificial
intelligence powered tutors to address diversity and disparities in the access
to information by a subset of low literacy individuals, as well as our
understanding of privacy preserving algorithms that work in real-time with
complex natural language processing models. More broadly, project outcomes will
facilitate access to information for minority populations and will serve to
build research capacity and train minority students in the participating
teaching-oriented institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried
out with two objectives in mind. First, development of a novel intelligent
computer tutoring system that is customized so that it can effectively query and
interact with Hispanic breast cancer survivors by adapting existing content that
was created for this population in prior research. Because it has been shown
that both the language of many adult Hispanics, and target population
interactions with technology, are more nuanced than previously thought, our
first objective also involves training natural language algorithms and designing
interactions that model those of Hispanic breast cancer survivors. The second
objective is to develop privacy-preserving algorithms that utilize robust end-
to-end encrypted communication and can encrypt and decrypt distributed data in
real time at a speed that does not hinder the interactions with the computer
tutor. The contributions of this development process will be threefold: (1) to
understand the role of culture and education in the interaction between low
literacy Hispanic breast cancer survivors and intelligent tutoring systems; (2)
to develop a framework that facilitates the implementation of intelligent
tutoring systems for minority populations; and (3) to develop accurate and low
latency privacy preserving mechanisms for NLP model training and dialogue
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.