* 2219446
* A Foundational Step Towards the Development of a Predictive Framework for Particle Deposition in Wall-Bounded Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Amirfarhang Mehdizadeh, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 333,728.00

Deposition of small particles, also denoted as particulate fouling, is a
fundamental challenge in many traditional and emerging industries such as
petrochemical industries and modern geothermal systems. More specifically,
particulate fouling significantly reduces the efficiency and prevents
optimization and full utilization of such systems. Several studies have shown
that particulate fouling significantly contributes to global CO2 anthropogenic
emissions. To date, there is a lack of fundamental understanding of this
phenomenon. Therefore, the overriding aim of this project is to identify and
understand major underlying mechanisms of the deposition process using high-
fidelity numerical simulations using state-of-the-art techniques for turbulent
wall-bounded dispersed flows at moderate/high Reynolds numbers, as detailed
experimental measurements are not currently possible. The project also includes
relevant educational activities that help increase the readiness of K-12
students for college education by addressing the shortage of adequately trained
high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to take a
foundational step to address the existing lack of fundamental knowledge on
characteristics of turbulent dispersed flows of small particles at high Reynolds
numbers. The proposed research leverages an advanced and accurate Euler-
Lagrangian approach, i.e., Point-Particle Direct Numerical Simulation (PP-DNS)
via one-way coupling, to gain fundamental insights into the complex dynamics of
small particles dispersion and deposition inside highly turbulent wall-bounded
flows and to use this knowledge to guide the development and validation of first
generation of reliable and computationally affordable modelling framework.
Particular focus will be on a Point-Particle based Euler-Lagrangian framework
that uses an advanced turbulence modeling strategy i.e., hybrid Unsteady
Reynolds-averaged-Navier-Stokes/Large Eddy Simulation methodology to capture
complex dynamics of the fluid phase. The resulting framework provides a unique
tool to study and understand small particle transport and deposition dynamics in
high Reynolds number turbulent flows that otherwise would not be possible and
yet, essential for an optimized design of Thermo-Fluid systems. Further, the
current study will cover particles in a size range that encompasses typical size
range most responsible for particulate fouling in majority of emerging
technologies. Finally, the knowledge on dispersion and deposition of small
particles is expected to serve as a bridge to combine fluid dynamics and
virology to help understand transmission of deadly viruses such as
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.