* 2219885
* Initial development of a compact in-situ sensor for measuring the 13C isotope ratio of DIC in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Jason Kapit, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2024
* USD 329,025.00

The ability to measure the carbon-13 isotope ratio of dissolved inorganic carbon
in the ocean could contribute to studies on carbon dioxide uptake by
phytoplankton, the ocean’s uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide, the
biogeochemistry of hydrothermal systems on the seafloor, and climate research.
Applications of such a sensor exist in the laboratory and field, and in
locations ranging from coastal waters to the deep ocean. This sensor will enable
an improved understanding of the global carbon cycle and biogeochemical
processes. This sensor will lay the foundation for developing in situ isotope
sensors that can target other gases and will have impact on sensors for other
fields (for example, planetary ocean exploration, biomedical applications and
industrial applications). To further broaden participation in ocean science,
technology, and engineering fields, high school and undergraduate students will
be mentored through research opportunities in the laboratory. Through
established programs undergraduate students will be brought into the lab for
summer research experiences. Through established connections with local schools,
high school students will be mentored on research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop a hollow core fiber-based
sensing approach for the in situ analysis of dissolved inorganic carbon. This
sensing approach will rely on absorption spectroscopy in hollow core optical
fibers and will have application to dissolved-phase gas sensing. Utilizing the
core design of a recently developed sensor for in situ methane detection, that
was demonstrated at depths of up to 2000 m, hollow core fibers will be used for
isotope analysis in the laboratory, a key first step towards developing an in
situ system. Utilization of the hollow core fiber approach, will enable sensors
to be made smaller, due to the inherent minute nature of the fibers. The
development of smaller sensors will enable additional platforms to be used for
deployments in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.