* 2219247
* ECO-CBET: GOALI: Autothermal Direct Air Capture (aDAC) for a Circular Carbon Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Clark Miller, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2026
* USD 834,210.00

Limiting the catastrophic effects of global warming from human-generated
greenhouse gas emissions requires solutions that eliminate new emissions and
remove those that cannot be avoided or were emitted in the past. This project
focuses on Direct Air Capture (DAC) materials and processes that separate and
concentrate carbon dioxide (CO2) from the air. The goal is to convert this major
greenhouse gas into carbon neutral fuels/chemicals or permanently store it.
Important early demonstration of DAC systems reveals the need for less energy
intensive processes and less costly materials. This project explores a solid
sorption-based separation using low-cost polymer-based hybrid sorbents that can
release and concentrate captured CO2 using moisture and heat produced during
water sorption. Further, these materials will integrate within a system designed
to utilize low-grade water sources and renewable power. The process and material
research will be co-designed with Indigenous communities in which the technology
may be adopted to optimize net benefits such as purified water and renewable
fuels or chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to design novel CO2
capture sorbents which regenerate via an autothermal vacuum moisture swing
(aVMS) integrated with downstream CO2 utilization. The heterogeneous sorption
sites will balance heats of water adsorption with heats of CO2 desorption. The
PIs hypothesize that heat of water sorption can be balanced to meet both the
hydration and thermal loads of CO2 desorption, reducing external heat inputs to
the overall DAC operation. To test this hypothesis, the team will combine
approaches of sorbent material synthesis, material characterization, new unit
operation and process models, and feed these into life cycle and technoeconomic
analyses of revenue generating systems. The outcome of the proposed activities
will be fundamental understanding of multi-component adsorption and how to tune
the different strengths of water vapor and CO2 heat of sorption necessary for
autothermal based separations. Integrating material and process design with
community engagement that explores risks and benefits of different carbon
removal and utilization configurations will enable socially responsible and
impactful innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.