* 2219931
* On-the-Fly Dual Reduction for Optimal Design of  Transient Responses  in Thermal Energy Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xiaoping Qian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2025
* USD 490,224.00

The objective of this project is to develop a computational design method that
enables efficient topology optimization (TO) for tailored transient physical
responses. Many physical phenomena are transient in nature, such as unsteady
flow, transient heat transfer, and elastodynamic and time-dependent viscoelastic
creep responses. TO is a computational design method that can automatically
determine material distribution for tailored physical responses. Although TO for
time-dependent problems has been conducted in the past, lack of computer methods
for effectively handling computational and storage obstacles in transient
problems has restricted the design optimization to mostly two-dimensional space,
thus limiting its practical use. This research aims to fill the knowledge gap by
developing a novel reduced-order, model-based efficient TO method for three-
dimensional time-dependent problems, with targeted applications in topological
design of latent heat-based thermal energy storage devices. The resulting
designs from this new model reduction-based TO method will be synergistically
complemented with data-driven designs that will be undertaken by groups of
undergraduate researchers from diverse disciplines. Successful completion of
this project will lead to technological advances in a host of products where
transient physical responses are critical, such as energy storage applications.
This project will result in optimized designs for latent heat-based thermal
energy storage with increased power density and improved charging/discharging
efficiency. This project will also broaden research opportunities for
undergraduates from diverse disciplines. It will enhance their interest in STEM
careers and increase the likelihood for them to pursue advanced degrees in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fills an intellectual gap in
computer methods that can enable efficient time-dependent TO in three-
dimensional settings. It will lead to a novel reduced-order model (ROM) based
approach for time-dependent TO through on-the-fly dual reduction with moving
local basis. In this approach, snapshots and basis required for constructing
ROMs are dynamically updated during the optimization without any extraneous
computing of full-order solutions. Instead of constructing linear ROMs with
global basis vectors, the PI plans to construct moving local basis based on
backward and forward snapshot strategies. Instead of developing adjoint
sensitivity to approximated ROMs for primal equilibrium equations, the PI will
develop a dual reduction method where reduction of primal and adjoint equations
are conducted independently. In order to overcome potential reduction challenges
due to strong non-linearity in time-dependent partial different equations, it is
also planned to apply a deep learning approach through deep neural networks for
model reduction. Completion of this research will lead to a new ROM-based
optimization methodology that overcomes both computational and storage obstacles
in time-dependent TO. Further, this project will develop a team-based
experiential learning approach to broadening research opportunities for
undergraduates. Teams of undergraduates from diverse disciplines will be
conducting data-driven design research and applying it in energy storage device
design. The designs from the new TO method and the data-driven design method
will be compared to improve the efficacy of both methods in energy storage
device design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.