* 2219375
* Understanding and Mitigating Triboelectric Artifacts in Wearable Electronics by Synergic Approaches
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Ye (Sarah) Sun, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 10/31/2022
* USD 75,070.00

Electrophysiological measurement is a well-accepted tool and standard for health
monitoring and well-being management. A great number of electrophysiological
measurement devices have been developed including clinical equipment, research
products, and consumer electronics. However, until now, it is still challenging
to secure long-term stable and accurate signal acquisition, especially in
wearable condition, not only for medical application in hospital settings, but
also for daily well-being management. Motion-induced artifacts widely exist in
electrophysiological recording regardless of electrodes (wet, dry, or
noncontact). These artifacts are one of the major impediments against the
acceptance of wearable devices and capacitive electrodes in clinical diagnosis.
This project is to provide new strategies to mitigate motion-induced artifacts
in wearable electronics and design accurate wearable electronics for daily
monitoring and disease diagnosis. The PIs will disseminate the research products
to both students and the research community. New course materials will be
developed for undergraduate and graduate education. Undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the research program will obtain diverse knowledge in
hardware design and data analytics. For K-12 students, the PIs will provide an
integrated research and educational experience through the programs of
Engineering Exploration Day for Girls and the Summer Youth Program at Michigan
Technological University. A research demo and hands-on experience for
triboelectric generation in textile materials will be developed and provided to
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is to
understand the fundamental mechanism of triboelectric artifacts in wearable
devices and provide synergistic solutions to mitigating the artifacts. Three
approaches are proposed to achieve the goal: 1) understanding the mechanism of
triboelectric charge generation in wearable condition by physical modeling and
experimental validation; 2) guided by the understanding, developing
tribomaterial-based sensors to manipulate triboelectric charges for artifact
removal; 3) leveraging the proposed new tribomaterial-based sensors and
statistical data analytics for true electrophysiological signal estimation. If
successful, the synergic knowledge produced by the project will not only help
improve the traditional bioinstrumentation in the medical society, but also
benefit industrial community of consumer wearable electronics.