* 2219330
* Reanalysis of Paleomagnetic Secular Variation and Excursions During Early Brunhes Time (380-780 ka) at ODP Sites 1060, 1061, 1062, and 1063
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Steven Lund, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 163,559.00

This project will develop high-resolution paleomagnetic secular variation (PSV)
records of the Earth’s magnetic field in the region of the western North
Atlantic Ocean for the time interval 380,00-780,000 years ago. These composite
PSV records will contain records of directional variability, including evidence
for 6 magnetic field excursions, and intensity variability. A similar analysis
is now complete for the last 380,000 years containing 12 excursions. In
combination, these PSV records will provide evidence for the behavior of the
Earth’s dynamo for the last 780,000 years (Brunhes Normal Polarity Chron) that
is unique in the World. These records should provide the evidence needed to
determine what happens when the Earth’s magnetic field reverses. There are many
records of field reversals, but none of them have a detailed record of field
variability surrounding the actual reversal. This work should provide a unique
set of PSV records for evaluating the magnetic field reversal dynamo process.
These records will provide, as well, the pattern of PSV variability throughout
the Brunhes Chron that can help to characterize the normal chaotic pattern of
the Earth’s dynamo active in the outer core. The project will support
undergraduate student research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean Drilling Program
(ODP) Leg 172 (western North Atlantic Ocean) collected shipboard paleomagnetic
records (2-3 holes per site) from Sites 1060, 1061 1062, and 1063 for the entire
Brunhes Normal Polarity. The sampling interval at these sites was 5 cm with an
average sediment accumulation rate of ~25 cm/ky (200-yr average sampling
interval). These composite data sets contain, perhaps, the highest-resolution
record of paleomagnetic field variability (directions, relative paleointensity,
excursions) for the entire Brunhes Normal Polarity Chron anywhere in the World.
This project will carry out a reanalysis of excursions and surrounding normal
secular variation (both directions and relative paleointensity) recorded in
these deep-sea sediments between 380-780 ka. Lund (2018) and Lund et al. (2020a,
2020b, 2021, 2022) have already carried out such a reanalysis and constructed a
composite paleomagnetic record for each of these sites from 0-380 ka. This
reanalysis will build detailed replicate PSV records for each of the sites and
reevaluate the chronologies for them. Time series analysis will be used to
assess the pattern of variability over time and its relationship to the
intervening 18 excursions. For the first time, the relationship between normal
PSV surrounding the excursions will be evaluated as a model for reversal
process. This project will also provide a basis for estimating the detailed
space/time pattern of excursions/secular variation in one region that can be
compared with other, similar studies from other parts of the Earth. These
analyses are are key concepts for building more realistic models of dynamo
sources for excursions and normal secular variation in the outer
core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Marine Geology and
Geophysics program in the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Geophysics program
in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.