* 2219940
* I-Corps: A Life-Prolonging Management System for Lithium-Sulfur Battery Packs
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Hosam Fathy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an electronic management system for lithium-sulfur (Li-S) battery
packs. This proposed battery management system has the potential to enable the
prognostics, health management, and life-prolonging control of Li-S batteries,
thereby accelerating the safe commercial deployment of this chemistry. From a
commercial perspective, Li-S batteries are appealing because they can store a
significant amount of energy per unit weight, which is important for cost-
effective electrification in the aerospace, drone, robotics, transportation, and
grid industries. The abundance of sulfur in the earth’s crust is also attractive
from a sustainability, cost, supply chain perspective, and societal perspective.
A battery management system optimized for emerging chemistries, such as the
proposed Li-S chemistry, also has the potential to maximize overall system
performance, safety, and longevity, leading to both societal benefits from safer
energy storage and potential commercial benefits, including improved
insurability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a reconfigurable model-based battery management system for the
prognostics, health management, and health-conscious control of lithium-sulfur
(Li-S) batteries. Li-S batteries have a theoretical energy density of around
2600 Wh/kg, substantially higher than typical Li-ion batteries. Instead of
requiring expensive, rare raw materials such as cobalt, Li-S batteries use
sulfur, the most abundant material in the earth’s crust, as their main cathode
material. Therefore, from the perspectives of energy density, environmental
friendliness, and economics, Li-S technology may offer advantages over lithium-
ion (Li-ion) batteries. The project builds on earlier research exploring the
development of computer simulation models of Li-S batteries, the fitting and
validation of these models versus laboratory test data, and the development of
algorithms for estimating the current state of charge in Li-S batteries.
Together, these innovations open the door to the potential development of a
cohesive battery management system that provides monitoring and control
functionalities, including the ability to balance the states of charge of
different Li-S cells to prevent over-charge and over-
discharge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.