* 2219757
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Formally Verified Numerical Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Andrew Appel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2025
* USD 559,494.00

When computer algorithms calculate the behavior of physical systems -- planets,
self-driving cars, rockets, wi-fi antennas, medicines â€“ some of the mathematical
equations can't be solved exactly. Thus, the algorithms approximate the answers
as precisely as needed. Numerical analysis is the science of calculating how
accurate these algorithms are. The more precision is needed in a certain type of
computation, the more time it takes to compute the answer. When one absolutely
needs to know in advance how accurate the answers will be, traditional numerical
methods are hard to combine into a complete and trustworthy solution. This
project's novelties are (1) to integrate all the reasoning about numerical
software into a single system, (2) to connect all the levels of reasoning, from
mathematics down to software code, producing an end-to-end guarantee of
correctness and accuracy, and (3) to produce that guarantee in the form of a
mathematical theorem whose proof can be checked fully automatically. The
project's broader significance and importance are both scientific and economic:
the novel methods and tools developed can (1) prevent software bugs that can be
extremely expensive to diagnose by conventional means; (2) allow faster
algorithms to be used (when one can now prove that they are accurate); and (3)
assure the safety of control software in safety-critical applications such as
aircraft and vehicle control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a layered
approach to foundational verification of correctness and accuracy of numerical
software---that is, formal machine-checked proofs about programs (not just
algorithms), with no assumptions except specifications of instruction-set
architectures. The researchers build, improve, and use appropriate tools at each
layer: proving in the real numbers about discrete algorithms; proving how
floating-point algorithms approximate real-number algorithms; reasoning about C
program implementation of floating-point algorithms; and connecting all proofs
end-to-end in the Coq proof assistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.