* 2219431
* Collaborative Research: What lies beneath: An investigation of subglacial silicic magma systems (Vatnajokull, Iceland)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tenley Banik, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2025
* USD 211,689.00

Iceland is positioned where a mid-ocean ridge and a mantle plume intersect at
high latitude, resulting in dynamic and dangerous volcano-ice interactions. Two
of Iceland’s four most historically active volcanoes (Grímsvötn and Bárðarbunga)
occur near the intersection of the ridge and plume, but they are largely
obscured from view by Vatnajökull, an ice cap that covers ~10% of Iceland’s
surface area. There are indications that glacial retreat can lead to increased
eruption rates by destabilizing existing magma bodies and even prompting new
magma generation. As climate continues to change and Iceland’s ice caps continue
to thin, there is increasing concern about the impacts on subglacial volcanic
systems and their associated hazards. It is important to better understand past
and present behavior of subglacial volcanic systems to better prepare for future
volcanic threats. The primary objective of this study is to explore the origin,
evolution, age, and longevity of magmas under Vatnajökull in order to better
understand Iceland’s glacio-volcanic hazard potential, while simultaneously
learning about a geologically unique part of the world. This work will
strengthen existing, and facilitate new, collaborations with domestic and
international scientists in the field and in analytical labs. It will also
create opportunity for community engagement and public education, and provide
rigorous research experiences for 6+ undergraduate students, a majority of whom
are from traditionally under-represented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Iceland, silicic material accounts for ~10% of the exposed crust; at central
volcanoes, this amount increases to ~30%. Volcanic systems beneath Vatnajökull
appear to have a paucity of silicic material relative to their subaerial
counterparts. This may be a consequence of the proximity to the ridge-plume
intersection, or (more likely) a consequence of poor exposure leading to sample
bias. Since silicic magmas have the potential to erupt more explosively and with
greater associated hazards than basaltic magmas, it is important to understand
the role they may play at the productive, active, systems obscured from view by
Vatnajökull. The research questions to be investigated are: To what extent are
silicic materials associated with Bárðarbunga, Grímsvötn, and neighboring
Kverkfjöll? Are collected silicic materials from active magmatic systems, older
bedrock, or a combination? How do the geochemical characteristics of these
systems’ silicic materials compare to those in the known rock record elsewhere
in Iceland? What hazards do silicic magmas present in this dynamic rift-mantle
plume-ice environment? Data generated in this study will facilitate mapping the
regional distribution of subglacial silicic materials (both those associated
with active volcanic systems and those from older bedrock). Evidence from
nunatak and moraine rocks (major and trace elements; Hf, Nd, and Pb isotopes;
petrography) and their accessory minerals (zircon: U-Th and U-Pb dates, O and Hf
isotopes, trace elements; apatite: trace elements, volatiles) will make it
possible to decipher the petrogenetic origins and evolution of silicic systems
at Iceland’s most plume-affected, and most active, central
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.