* 2219317
* Supporting computational thinking across grade levels and content areas in K-5 education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Maggie Vanderberg, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,806.00

Computational thinking (CT) refers to a set of thought processes typically
employed in computer science to solve large complex problems. Computational
thinking itself does not require a computer and can be applied across a broad
array of contexts, making it ideal for implementation in elementary classrooms.
This CSforAll research practitioner partnership (RPP) examines how 20 K-5
teachers integrate CT into lessons across content areas. Understanding how the
application of CT differs across grade levels and content areas makes it
possible to identify best practices for preparing elementary teachers to
implement CT. Additionally, the RPP investigates how CT can be used as a
resource for teachers to teach language across content areas in such a way that
both content and language are foregrounded and integrated. This use of CT is
novel and enables researchers to explore how CT can be used to teach in
multilingual contexts. The project seeks to understand how CT teacher novices
can transition into CT leaders that can support new teachers. A major
contribution of the project is development of a network of teacher leaders, as
well as resources, that can sustain the dissemination of these innovative
teaching practices to enhance the learning experience of all students in K-5
classrooms. All lessons and instructional resources are widely available in both
English and Spanish to teachers across the nation. The project impacts what
multiple audiences know about CT, including pre-service and in-service teachers,
district administrators, and researchers. By supporting teachers as they make
decisions regarding their own and their students’ roles in learning CT, the RPP
advances a conceptualization of teacher learning of CT as a self-sustainable
process by combining what teachers know with how they can support disseminating
this knowledge to other teachers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research study is
centered around three conjectures: (1) CT concepts become more intertwined as
grade-level and complexity of content increase; (2) CT can be used as an
instructional practice that facilitates the learning of language; (3) CT novices
can become teacher leaders that support new teachers in their districts. The
plan to investigate these three conjectures is split across three years. During
Year 1 the established RPP is revising the CT professional development series
developed through a previous award and is onboarding a new cohort of teachers.
During Year 2, the RPP teachers lead the new teachers through the process of
integrating CT into existing core-content lessons. In Year 3, a new set of
teacher leaders support others as they continue designing, developing,
delivering, reflecting on, and revising CT lessons. Lesson plans, feedback,
revisions and reflections are analyzed to determine how CT changes across grades
and content areas. These artifacts, along with video recordings and observations
of lesson delivery, are used to study where CT is evolving as an effective
content-neutral instructional practice that supports language development.
Through a sequential design quantitative survey, data inform the questions asked
in qualitive follow-up reflections, observations and interviews. Using a mixed
methods approach, data are analyzed to identify trends in both monolingual and
bilingual classrooms to ensure a comprehensive perspective for understanding the
learning, use, and incorporation of CT and how these practices can be
disseminated widely. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.