* 2219162
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Convergent Electrolysis-Electrodialysis System (CEES) to Curb Urban Chloride Pollution by Eco-friendly Road Deicing and Waste Salt Upcycling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Wenzhen Li, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 340,474.00

Chloride pollution has brought increasing concerns over environmental
protection, drinking water safety, and the resilience of transportation
infrastructure. Meanwhile, the emission of carbon dioxide has been broadly
recognized as a dominant greenhouse gas causing a series of negative climate
changes. The vision of this convergent project is to initiate and establish
“Convergent Electrolysis-Electrodialysis System” as a viable engineering
solution that can effectively mitigate the complex environmental-ecological-
economic issues associated with the ever-growing chloride pollution in urban
waterbodies, while reducing the emission of carbon dioxide. The system is
designed to directly cut down the chloride discharge by upcycling waste salt in
the regeneration stream of urban water softeners, and to stop the continuous
chloride pollution by switching the deicing agent from polluting road salt to
the eco-friendly sodium formate. Powered by renewable energy, the system
synergistically combines the conversion of carbon dioxide and the reduction of
chloride pollution, magnifying the environmental and ecological benefits. This
fundamental research of addressing growing urban chloride pollution directly
helps maintain and recover the dwindling health of national
ecological/environmental systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
objective of this project is to acquire the scientific understanding as well as
the technological insights into the technical achievability, ecological
suitability, and economic viability of the system with measurable impacts on
curbing the real-world chloride pollution in urban areas. The study will advance
knowledge that can be broadly applied to environmental engineering,
electrochemistry, process engineering, polymer materials, technoeconomic
analysis, life-cycle assessment, and policy learning. The convergent research
team aims to: 1) achieve the seamless integration between electrolysis and
electrodialysis; 2) acquire understanding of inexpensive electrocatalytic
materials; 3) understand the complex ion transport required in both electrolysis
and electrodialysis; 4) examine the comprehensive impacts of sodium formate as
the new-generation deicer; 5) gain the insights into the life-cycle assessment
and the techno-economic analysis; and 6) promote societal outcomes through
policy learning and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.