* 2219880
* I-Corps:  A New Delivery Technology for Treating Chronic Eustachian Tube Dysfunction and Otitis Media with Effusion
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Khaled Sallam, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of minimal-invasive, cost effective, and reliable way of treating
eustachian tube dysfunction (ETD) and otitis media with effusion (OME). OME is
one of the leading causes of medical consultations and the most frequent reason
for antibiotic prescription and surgery in children resulting in over $5 billion
annual expenditures in the United States. In the US, each year nearly 700,000
children have tympanostomy tubes inserted because of chronic middle ear fluid
and frequent ear infections. Treatment-resistant children with ETD/OME are
affected by conductive hearing loss, language development issues, poor school
performance, and are much more likely to have chronic middle ear problems in
adulthood. The problem is equally concerning for many adults who continue to
suffer from ETD despite available surgical treatments. ETD/OME is one of the
main reasons for office visits in the USA and is estimated to affect 11 million
US adults. Patients with chronic ETD (which occurs in ~11% of all ETD cases in
the US) get frustrated and anxious about recurring visits for ETD/OME issues,
while clinicians cannot provide effective care for these patients and insurance
companies incur losses by reimbursing surgical procedures with limited
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a technology for the treatment of the underlying causes of chronic eustachian
tube dysfunction (ETD) and persistent effusions. Recognizing existing treatment
limitations, the proposed technology is a non-invasive device for targeted
delivery of medications into the eustachian tube (ET) pharyngeal opening. The
proposed approach has the potential to enhance outcomes for chronic ETD/otitis
media with effusion (OME) patients from combining therapeutic action of
formulations delivered into the ET (e.g., in reducing mucosal inflammation,
hypersecretion, adhesion), and airflow and air pressure-assisted opening and
insufflation of the ET. The hypothesis is that the approach may enhance particle
deposition in the posterior region of the nasal cavity and enable formulation
delivery to the ET orifice and lumen. Local delivery into the ET potentially may
be an efficient approach for treating underlying causes (e.g., mucosal
inflammation) that contribute to chronic ETD and persistent effusions while
minimizing systemic side effects. The proposed technology has the potential to
become a new treatment for chronic ETD/OME.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.