* 2219575
* Forging Consensus: A Data-Driven Framework for Studying Scientific Consensus and Debate
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 575,000.00

Healthy debate between scientists drives scientific progress, as competition
between ideas and hypotheses encourages the search for new evidence and
motivates scientists to reckon with their different, often diverging theories
and worldview. Understanding science, therefore, requires understanding where
and why scientific debates occur. However, the study of scientific debate has
historically been challenged by a lack of accepted data and methodological
approaches. This project will overcome this challenge using a data-driven
approach that leverages increasingly-available data on scholarly activity to
identify debates across millions of published scientific documents, and to
provide a quantitative scoring of the level of debate surrounding a research
topic. The data and techniques developed for this project and publicly released
will provide a foundation for a new science of scientific debate, and their
potential demonstrated by applying them towards studying the evolution of
scientific debate within COVID-19 research. A strong understanding of scientific
debates, including where they occur and why, is needed to inform theoretical
models of science, new tools for improving the accessibility of the scientific
literature, and better decisions in science policy and governance that will
accelerate the pace of scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses three primary objectives. First, using a variety of heuristic and
machine learning based techniques, a corpus of exemplar debates will be
automatically identified from among millions of scientific publications indexed
in major bibliographic and full-text databases. Second, we will then use this
corpus to develop and rigorously validate a suite of topic-level quantitative
indicators of debate that leverage state-of-the-art techniques applied to
publication metadata, citation linkages, and full-text information. The most
successful of these indicators will be combined into a mathematical model and
used to infer a singular debate score for topics. These indicators will for the
first time facilitate the empirical study of the incidence of debate and
evolution of consensus across all of science. Finally, we will demonstrate the
potential of these indicators by using them to address policy-relevant research
questions relating to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on science;
specifically, we investigate the role of consensus in the societal usage of
knowledge and the incidence of fake news, and whether practices that accelerated
science during the pandemic also accelerated consensus formation. The research
will contribute to several fields, including the science of science, science
communication, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.