* 2219510
* Student Support: 18th IEEE International Conference on eScience
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Bao Wang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The eScience 2022 Conference is a premier international conference for
presenting research results, problem solutions, and insights on new challenges
in data analytics and large-scale simulation and scientific discovery in general
and distributed infrastructures more specifically. The conference brings
together researchers, developers and users from academia, industry,
laboratories, and commerce to discuss recent advances and trends in many areas
related to data analytics and distributed infrastructures. The conference will
be held in Salt Lake City, Utah, from October 11-14, 2022. The project will fund
students to participate in the conference, to engage deeply with the eScience
research community. The eScience student participation program provides a
comprehensive means for students to improve their overall research skills and
career planning efforts, beyond presenting posters and papers. The project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the
progress of science as it provides a forum to disseminate research efforts,
connect researchers, and train the next generation of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student program committee for the conference
is recruiting students with an emphasis on diversity and inclusion of
underrepresented groups and from a diverse set of institutions, with special
emphasis on students from the southwestern mountain states of the U.S. that have
computer science and engineering programs. The conference will run specific
student-centric sessions during the conference, including sessions on research
presentation training, research career guidance, industry interaction, and a
discussion with the authors of the best paper candidates from the conference.
While the project will enable funding a significant fraction of the students
attending the conference, some students are presenting papers and posters at the
conference and will be given priority for funding. The funding provided by NSF
will have a significant impact on the careers of the future generation of
researchers in data analytics and distributed infrastructures, while encouraging
diversity in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.