* 2219463
* Collaborative Research: GLOW Tracing Earths Accretion using Siderophile Element Genetics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Simone Marchi, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2025
* USD 153,733.00

Our planet formed from bodies that were sourced from various parts of the
emerging Solar System. To understand the origin and initial composition of the
only known habitable planet, knowledge of when and from where Earth’s building
blocks formed in the Solar System is required. This Division of Earth Sciences -
Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds (GLOW) award supports a project
which aims to broaden and deepen the understanding of what materials made Earth
and how they evolved into a habitable planet. The project combines well-
established cosmochemical isotopic tracers in meteorites, the debris of planet
formation, with terrestrial geochemical tracers to identify the composition of
Earth’s building blocks that were added towards the end of the planet’s
formation. This period in Earth’s history may have witnessed delivery of a
portion of life-seeding materials, making it a prime target for study. The
project serves to support and educate graduate and undergraduate students to
help meet a growing demand for cross-disciplinary planetary science research
projects at the university level. It also coordinates early and mid-career
scientists to facilitate integration of methods and interpretations of sample
data and numerical impact models to make them relevant and accessible to the
broader planetary science community and student body.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origin and initial composition of the only known
habitable planet requires knowledge of when and from where in the Solar System
Earth’s building blocks accreted. This project combines the well-established
genetic tracer capabilities of siderophile (iron-loving) elements in meteorites
with terrestrial geochemical data to constrain the composition of Earth’s
building blocks towards the end of its formation. This period in Earth’s history
may have witnessed delivery of a portion of the volatile budget (e.g., H, N, C,
O, S compounds), making it a prime target for study. To investigate the nature
of material added during this stage of accretion, the project will assess how
late accretion modified mantle siderophile isotopic compositions. The project
will generate a unique and self-consistent siderophile isotopic dataset of
mantle-derived materials to constrain the composition of several unstudied
terrestrial mantle domains. The genetics of building blocks accreted late in
Earth’s history will be advanced by contrasting these and other terrestrial
isotopic data with published genetic isotope data in meteorites. Sample-derived
isotopic data will be integrated into mixing calculations informed by smoothed
particle hydrodynamic impact simulations that predict resultant mantle
compositions following late accretion of impactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.