* 2219604
* SBP: Inequity and Mistrust of Scientific Information - Understanding Science Misinformation in Black Communities and Developing Community-Driven Science Communication Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Xenos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 576,061.00

Black American experiences can pose particular challenges for effective
communication on issues related to science and medicine, and recent
misinformation campaigns have increasingly sought to capitalize on beliefs
underlying mistrust within Black communities to spread misinformation. While
phenomena related to the COVID-19 pandemic are most timely, there is a need to
develop community-driven, effective strategies for public communications
targeted toward Black Americans on a range of science-related issues, based on
detailed findings about specific beliefs and attitudes relevant to the unique
experiences Black Americans have with science. Developing a clearer
understanding of how Black American experiences shape thinking about science-
related topics, and the group-level dynamics that may lead to the uptake (or
rejection) of misinformation and the formation (or avoidance) of misperceptions
within these communities, holds great promise for advancing research on science
communication in emerging fields such as artificial intelligence, genetics and
genomics, and more. Such an approach would help guide more effective and
inclusive public engagement efforts, and provide practitioners with new insights
into how to responsibly address past and present inequities in messaging across
a variety of scientific issues and policy areas, and to the development of
appropriately targeted and tailored efforts to mitigate the negative effects of
widespread misinformation about scientific topics, both in the short and long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, our project takes an
iterative approach to better understand the specific ways that underlying
beliefs and worldviews about science and scientific institutions are related to
scientific misperceptions among Black Americans, and then, in conjunction with
Black American communities, develop and test communication strategies for more
effective efforts to combat science-related misinformation and misperceptions.
In the earlier phases of the project, we will use Black American focus groups
and national surveys with oversamples of Black Americans to identify key topics
and issues in which Black Americans encounter science-related misinformation, as
well as to better understand specific beliefs and worldviews related to science
within Black American communities. Based on these findings, as well as in-depth
interviews with seasoned communication practitioners with a history of
combatting misinformation in Black American communities, we will then develop a
communications toolkit to guide other science communicators engaged in similar
efforts across a range of science-related issues. Key strategies and messages
from the toolkit will be evaluated in three national survey experiments
administered to Black American samples. Throughout the project, a series of
community conversations will support a rich dialogue between researchers and
community members, ensuring that our insights and recommended communications
strategies position Black Americans' lived experiences as integral to their
engagement with scientific information, institutions, and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.