* 2219558
* HBCU-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Education Infrastructure in the Chemistry and Engineering of Multifunctional Materials
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shyam Kattel, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Research
Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (RISE) program supports the
development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering disciplines.
This project from Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU) aims to integrate research
and education in the chemistry and engineering of multifunctional materials to
educate the next generation of STEM scientists in multifunctional materials, and
to prepare students for careers in this emerging field. The project will produce
novel devices and structures for a number of industries and federal agencies and
at the same time increase student engagement at both the undergraduate and
graduate level. The project is expected to play a key role in a new Materials
Science and Engineering (MATSci) PhD program. The MATSci PhD program will bring
together faculty from several departments to work collaboratively on materials-
related issues. An institutional goal is to have Florida A&amp;M University
(FAMU) achieve Carnegie Research 1 status by 2030.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to synthesize novel materials, characterize them, develop design
rules for processing, and assemble them into devices using additive
manufacturing. The project leverages previous investments, as well as existing
collaborations with Dow Chemical Company and Air Force Research Labs, to bring
together scientists from multiple departments to enhance FAMU’s ability to
perform world-class research while increasing minority participation in STEM. In
addition to the recruitment of students nationally, students will be recruited
from Tallahassee and Hillsborough Community Colleges, providing a model for
community college-university collaborations for the early engagement of
community college students in cutting-edge research at universities and their
successful and timely graduation. It is expected that the proposed work will
increase research productivity of FAMU faculty, provide a more sustainable
research infrastructure, and provide a model for student engagement, success,
and graduation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.