* 2219163
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the materiality of past human responses to climate change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Erendira Quintana Morales, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 69,827.00

As climate change intensifies, the study of human adaptation and response to
climate disturbances has become critical. Sea level rise, warming oceans, and
other climate-driven changes place millions of people in coastal communities on
the front lines of the climate crisis. These communities must adapt to
increasing food, energy, infrastructure, and water insecurity. Knowledge of past
change and how to respond effectively to disturbance is a form of social memory
passed down through generations. The loss of this social memory may severely
limit people’s capacity to adapt to changing conditions. This project
investigates the influence of social memory on human responses to climate change
at decadal to millennial time scales. This research clarifies the impacts of
knowledge loss on human adaptive capacity. The results can inform policies that
prioritize the preservation of intergenerational knowledge to mitigate the
negative effects of climate change on human societies. This project supports the
training of multiple graduate students and early career scholars from
underserved communities and advances the careers of two principal investigators
from underrepresented groups in science. The project is conducted in
collaboration with stakeholder coastal communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project hypothesizes that social memory helps communities adapt to climate
change by increasing community knowledge about diverse livelihood strategies,
thus enabling people to experiment and identify the strategies that work best.
Archaeological, ethnohistorical, and paleoclimate data collected and analyzed
during three seasons of collaborative research with stakeholder communities
provide a record of past climate events and human responses. The combination of
these records allows researchers to identify the impact of social memory on past
responses to climate change and model how the loss of intergenerational
knowledge will impact communities’ capacity to adapt to future change. This work
clarifies the role of information flows in human
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.