* 2219266
* OPP-PRF: The predictive capacity of ocean heat gain and autumn freeze up dates on seasonal sea ice extent from three reanalyses and the CESM2 Large Ensemble
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Meghan Helmberger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 01/31/2025
* USD 280,026.00

This project focuses on improving sea ice extent predictability in the Arctic.
Using freely available data from a number of simulations, this research will use
ocean heat patterns to assess how the timing of autumn sea ice freeze up relates
to seasonal predictability. The researcher expects this project to contribute
significantly to the understanding of environmental influences on sea ice change
across the Arctic Ocean, by applying statistics to evaluate which environmental
variables are the most significant for sea ice loss. Over the last 40 years, sea
ice has declined in all months, leaving thinner and smaller sea ice floes, and
such changes are expected to continue due to climate warming. These changes
produce not only climate impacts, but also economic impacts, which is why
accurately forecasting sea ice extent on seasonal scales is important. As the
Arctic loses sea ice cover, it becomes more accessible to shipping and resource
extraction but also less reliable for Indigenous communities and threatened
species that depend on the ice. Sea ice can grow to be multiple meters thick
causing regions of the Arctic to be impassible, unless the entity has access to
an icebreaker ship. Better knowing the factors contributing to sea ice change
will improve models and inform the public so they can plan more efficiently.
This project aims to engage minority groups and encourage the development of
greater scientific understanding of the Arctic climate for people at many
educational levels. This will be done by creating a short course for high school
and middle school students called a Data Puzzle (https://datapuzzles.org/) and
employing an undergraduate intern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While basic physical
processes impacting sea ice loss in the Arctic are well recognized, little
quantitative information exists on the magnitudes, variability, and trends in
seasonal Arctic Ocean heat uptake and release. This project will make novel use
of ocean heat gain data from three retrospective models in conjunction with
output from the newly available Community Earth System Model version 2 Large
Ensemble (CESM2-LE). Using sea ice concentration (SIC) data from the combined
Passive Microwave sea ice record, the total days with open water at each grid
cell will be calculated to assess how open water days and the date of autumn
freeze up have varied and changed. Lastly, a seasonal autoregressive integrated
moving average model (SARIMA) will be used to predict seasonal SIC at lead times
of one, two and three months. Total ocean heat gain, average cloud cover, total
column water, and number of open water days will be used as predictors in the
multivariate model. The researcher will use statistical models to estimate the
influence of various Arctic climate characteristics on sea ice extent and future
seasonal predictions. This project will significantly contribute to the
understanding of the Arctic climate and aid in model
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.