* 2219489
* Collaborative Research: Microscopic Mechanism of Surface Oxide Formation in Multi-Principal Element Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs) are
compositionally complex alloys consisting of five or more elements in relatively
equal proportions. Certain MPEAs have demonstrated superior mechanical
properties (e.g., hardness, strength) unattainable from traditional alloys,
making them ideal for high temperature applications (e.g., gas turbine blades
and surface coatings for reentry vehicles). Incidentally, degradation by
oxidation is a critical material challenge that must still be overcome to
improve performance in such applications. Due to the complex compositional
combinations, making oxidation resistant MPEAs is nontrivial. In this project,
composition-processing-structure-property relationships for oxidation-resistant
MPEAs are established through state-of-the-art experimental characterizations
and computer simulations, guided by an artificial intelligence (AI) assisted
innovative data-adaptive discovery strategy. Fundamentally, the oxidation
mechanism¬ from the atomic to micro-meter scale is studied through both
experimental discovery and machine learning embedded within a materials design
and surface engineering framework. The results of this project enable an
advanced materials paradigm for the discovery and creation of oxidation
resistant MPEAs applicable for high temperature operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Multi-principal element alloys
(MPEAs) are concentrated random solid-solutions typically consisting of five or
more elements in significant proportions. While the remarkable mechanical
properties (e.g., hardness, or strength) of certain MPEAs have encouraged their
potential use for components operating at high temperatures such as those found
in gas turbine blades or surface coatings for reentry vehicles. At the operation
conditions for such components, degradation by oxidation remains a critical
materials challenge. Consequently, during synthesis of oxidation resistant
MPEAs, the versatility in elemental compositions for these complex alloys
translates to an extensive range of possible oxidation products, many with poor
resistance to the penetration of oxygen into the bulk alloy. To address this
challenge and explore the associated enormous composition-processing-structure-
property landscape, the oxidation mechanism¬ from atomic scale oxygen
chemisorption to micro-meter oxide scale formation are studied by an innovative
and experimentally validated data-guided adaptive approach. A surface
engineering paradigm for the synthesis and processing of MPEAs with improved
oxidation resistance are being developed. Central to the proposed framework are
four research developments: (1) MPEA Concept Exploration; (2) Surface
Engineering &amp; Atomic Characterization; (3) Density Functional Theory
Calculations; and (4) Adaptive Discovery. The results of this research are
expected to have significant economic impact on society through innovations in
surface-engineered MPEAs across a wide range of industries such as energy,
hypersonic applications, defense and healthcare. This timely research lies
within the domains of fundamental materials physics, predictive synthesis, and
data science and offers unique collaborative and interdisciplinary research and
training experiences for researchers across the fields of surface physics,
material science, data analytics, and computational materials. Research is
integrated with education through cross-university teaching and assessment,
exchange-visits and co-advised student training coupled with technology
innovation and entrepreneurial experiences. In this project, PIs also actively
engage with programs for pre-college women and underrepresented minority
students to encourage them to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.