* 2219107
* OPP-PRF: Linking the Physical and Chemical Drivers of Carbon Cycling in Arctic Source-to-sink Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Marisa Repasch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 12/31/2024
* USD 328,590.00

The global carbon cycle regulates the climate and habitability of our planet.
The Arctic landscape, particularly permafrost (frozen ground), stores a massive
amount of carbon – nearly twice as much as the atmosphere. As air temperatures
in the Arctic increase, the permafrost thaws and carbon-rich organic matter can
be released. Once released, this carbon can be transformed into carbon dioxide
and methane – greenhouse gases. The carbon released from permafrost may also be
transported to the ocean where it can be buried for many years, keeping it out
of the atmosphere. The primary goals of this research are to find hotspots of
permafrost thaw in the Arctic landscape and to understand what happens to carbon
after it is released from the permafrost. This project supports one postdoctoral
scholar and provides funding to analyze samples collected from a river in Arctic
Alaska. This work will result in a mathematical model that simulates the flow of
carbon across the Arctic landscape. The PI will also create an educational tool
to teach students about carbon-climate feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a mechanistic understanding of the feedbacks between
physical erosion, oxidative weathering, and organic carbon (OC) transformation
in Arctic landscapes. This project uses a “source-to-sink” approach to study the
physical and chemical effects of permafrost thaw at the landscape-scale and
assess the transformation of OC upon mobilization and downstream transport.
Focusing on the Canning River in northern Alaska, the PI will compare modern
river OC fluxes with long-term catchment-average OC export derived from
cosmogenic radionuclide geochemistry. To determine whether permafrost-derived OC
is oxidized to CO2 during transport across the Arctic landscape, this project
applies novel geochemical methods, including ramped pyrolysis oxidation-14C and
dissolved rhenium analyses. The results will constrain decomposition rates of OC
mobilized from thawing permafrost, which are largely unknown but needed to
predict future CO2 emissions from the Arctic. Using data generated from this
project, the PI will construct a model of coupled erosion, weathering, and
carbon cycling in Arctic river catchments. Further application of this coupled
model will reveal the feedbacks among climate, erosion, sediment routing, and OC
cycling that will advance our understanding of Arctic landscape response to
future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.