* 2219239
* MCA: Ecological Constraints on Hominin Population Dynamics: Small Mammal Dental Shape Analyses as Novel Paleoecological Proxies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Miriam Belmaker, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 246,665.00

In this Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project, the principal investigator
develops new methods to reconstruct past climates and environments, thus
contributing to ongoing research and debates about the links between climate,
environmental change, and human population dynamics. The project develops high
resolution paleoenvironmental proxies using dental shape analysis or ecometrics,
which measures the number, size, and shape of teeth cusps and has been shown to
reflect diet and environment in many groups of animals. Research outcomes from
this project can then be integrated into research to reconstruct
paleoenvironments in critical areas of hominin occupation across three time
periods dating from 2 million years ago to 15,000 years ago. This project
fosters creative synergies between researchers in anthropology, biological
sciences, and geosciences, and develops a publicly available interactive model
which will help critically address questions in human evolution with direct
implications for the climate crisis. The project also advances the training and
research program of the PI as well as undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator partners with other paleoanthropological
experts to acquire foundational skills to study the tooth shape-diet-ecology of
small mammals in focal areas for studying human evolution across a wide range of
climates, including: 1) micro-CT and laser 3-dimensional (3D) scanning, 2) image
and tooth shape analysis; 3) Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and spatial
analyses; and 4) computational statistical analyses and coding. The investigator
measures dental ecometric variables (dental occlusal topology, topometry, and
topography) on 3D digital scans of small mammal teeth of modern species. Using
Geographic Information Systems, ecometric values are correlated with climatic
and ecological parameters building a novel, quantitative and robust technique to
reconstruct past environments. Dental ecometric variables measured on fossil
teeth allow the investigator to produce a high-quality map of habitats and
climate distributions across different prehistoric time frames. Applying spatial
statistical analyses enables quantitatively testing the link between climate
change and human evolution at three specific time junctures: 1. The dispersal of
early Homo from Africa into Eurasia (2.5 – 0.7 million years ago); 2. The
extinction of Neanderthal (160,000 – 40,000 years ago); and 3. The adaptation of
modern humans to the last ice age (26,000- 15,000 years ago).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Biological Anthropology
(SBE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.