* 2219400
* ENDURE: Inequalities, Community Resilience and New Governance Modalities in a Post-Pandemic World
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Eric Jones, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,548.00

This research combines methodologies from history, communications, and social
and behavioral sciences to study how restrictive COVID-19 policies affected
economic, political, and social inequalities, and how people responded to these
policies. Specifically the research project will study (i) how state-led
pandemic responses generated inequalities; (ii) how these pandemic responses led
to the rise of “populist” movements, and (iii) how inequality led to resistance
to policies to deal with the pandemic. The general demobilizing approach to the
pandemic had differential impacts on different groups and likely deepened
existing social inequalities. This research project will uses a comparative
approach to conduct research in Brazil, Germany, Colombia, United Kingdom,
Canada, Finland, United States, Croatia, Poland, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Turkey
to study how different degrees of restrictions affected inequality and how
different groups responded to various pandemic policies. These countries provide
a broad set of policy responses to provide a better understanding of how
difference restrictive policies imposed by countries affected policy compliance
as well as inequality. The results of this research project will provide inputs
into developing pandemic and other emergency policies that will be acceptable to
all and thus make them effective. The results could also help establish the US a
global leader in pandemic response policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates how restrictive state-led Covid-19 pandemic response---
demobilization and lock-downs---impacted the drivers of inequality in Europe,
North America, and South America. The project employs a transatlantic
comparative analysis of the consequences of capacity of governments and
international organizations on inequality and democratic governance. It examines
how the pandemic impacted populist, anti-establishment narratives in politics
and the media to understand how emergencies impact trust and legitimacy of
institutions. This part of the study will be based on both quantitative and
qualitative analysis of social media. The project will also study how
marginalized people survived and resisted restrictive policies during the
pandemic as well as influence policy discussions. This part of the project will
employ several social and behavioral science methods. The project will organize
seminars, digital galleries, webinars, academic conferences, and other public
events in order to influence policy debates. The results of this research could
provide inputs into efficient pandemic and other emergency policies that will be
acceptable to the majority of people. The results could also help establish the
US a global leader in pandemic response policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.