* 2219180
* CNS Core: Small: Expedient Computing: A Framework for Energy-Efficient and Timely Computing at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Omur Ozel, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2025
* USD 584,714.00

Emerging and future cyber-physical system applications demand timely processing
at the network edge of large volumes of fresh data from sensor nodes, which may
have limited processing ability and energy budgets. The sheer variety of
envisioned applications and their requirements call for new performance metrics
and strategies for balancing freshness of information, timeliness and accuracy
of results, and the energy consumed in producing those results. This project
proposes and develops a new holistic framework called Expedient Computing, in
which results are produced as quickly as needed, with as much precision/accuracy
as needed, using information that is as fresh as needed. The specific research
objectives of the project include: (i) characterizing fundamental tradeoffs in
expedient computing, (ii) exploration of emerging hardware designs in edge
servers for expedient computing, (iii) developing an integrated optimization
framework for expedient computing, and (iv) demonstrating expedient computing
principles. This cross-disciplinary project will draw upon expertise in hardware
architecture, network optimization and performance analysis, algorithms, and
fundamental limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the inexorable desire to make
the world smarter, millions upon millions of sensors are being deployed
worldwide. The successful realization of envisioned applications such as
connected autonomous vehicles and remote robotic surgery will critically depend
on the timely extraction of actionable intelligence from sensor data. This
project lays the groundwork for doing so while balancing the limitations in
energy and processing capabilities and exploring the tradeoffs between them. The
outcomes of this research project can offer significant performance improvements
by maximizing precision, timeliness, energy efficiency and their tradeoffs in
broad application domains such as edge computing, mobile sensing, and Internet
of Things, and catalyze the industry toward seeking energy-efficient and timely
computing technologies at the edge. Project results will be disseminated via
research publications, organizing workshops and tutorials in top conferences,
and through training students in this crucial cross-cutting
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.