* 2219792
* TRTech-PGR: Engineering Agrobacterium to Express a Type III Secretion System to Improve Plant Transformation and Genome Editing
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Stanton Gelvin, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 544,448.00

Plant genetic engineering is one of the most rapidly developing fields of
biotechnology. There is a great need for engineered plants that are resistant to
heat, drought, pathogens, herbicides, or that produce a desirable trait. Recent
developments in molecular biology and plant transformation have made it possible
to produce transgenic plants from a number of crop species. Agrobacterium-
mediated plant transformation (AMT) is the most commonly used method to produce
transgenic plants. It is preferred over other means of transformation because it
is relatively inexpensive, easy to use, and results in low copy number gene
insertions. The main drawback of AMT is that it cannot currently be used for
many plant species/varieties, especially monocots. The two main reasons for
recalcitrance to AMT are a strong plant defense response against Agrobacterium
tumefaciens and the inability of the plant tissue to regenerate. This project
seeks to remedy these deficiencies by engineering Agrobacterium that can deliver
proteins that can dampen plant defense responses and/or promote plant
transformation and regeneration. In doing so, the project may overcome some of
the drawbacks of gene editing by delivering gene editing reagents through an
engineered Agrobacterium strain. Information and materials generated from this
project will be made freely available to the scientific community. This project
will also offer outstanding opportunities for training and outreach activities
in plant genomics and transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
transform plants has revolutionized the plant biotechnology industry.
Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation (AMT) is the preferred form of plant
transformation. However, efficient AMT of only certain plant species/varieties
is currently available. This project seeks to overcome this limitation by
engineering Agrobacterium with the Pseudomonas type III secretion system (T3SS)
that can deliver bacterial effector proteins to dampen plant defense responses,
and/or plant growth regulating factors or other plant proteins that can enhance
plant regeneration and transformation. In addition, this project aims to
overcome some of the current limitations of genome editing. CRISPR-Cas9 based
plant genome editing/engineering is becoming popular as a method to improve crop
performance in the field. One of the main challenges of CRISPR-Cas9 based genome
editing is the need to express Cas9 as a transgene. Constitutive expression of
Cas9 can cause off-target mutations in plants and create a hurdle for de-
regulation. This drawback may be overcome by directly delivering Cas9 protein
into plants through an engineered Agrobacterium strain expressing a T3SS.
Enhancement of wheat transformation and genome editing with the engineered
Agrobacterium strains will be used as a proof of concept. Scientists of all
levels from research institutes and universities within the United States will
be trained in plant transformation through a hands-on workshop. Data and
knowledge generated in this study will be published in peer reviewed journals,
disseminated via Oklahoma State University and Purdue University websites, and
presented at scientific meetings. Biological resources will be accessible upon
request and through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
(ABRC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.