* 2219865
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: End-usser Programming for CAD Systems via Language Design and Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Maneesh Agrawala, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) plays an essential role in modern engineering. While
CAD tools enable rapid creation of models, it is extremely laborious to reuse
these models when creating new designs. The key reason is that changes to a
design might require coordinated changes to several elements of a model to
preserve relationships between parts. The project's novelties include next-
generation interfaces for manipulating CAD models, and advances in automated
reasoning done by the CAD system. The project's impacts range from increasing
the productivity of design professionals making changes to complex models, to
reducing the barrier to entry for casual designers who wish to perform 3D
modeling by re-using existing models. The software developed in this work will
allow designers to quickly iterate and optimize designs, leading to increased
designer productivity and design quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
results in program synthesis and domain-specific language design, the
investigators are developing techniques for end-user programming of CAD
programs. The techniques are enabled by the observation that modern CAD tools
represent a design as a program that generates the 3D geometry by executing a
sequence of geometric operations; reasoning about programs is thus used to
reason about designs. This is achieved by first developing a language for
describing CAD models that maintains design integrity through model parameter
changes, even when elements and topology may vary. To this end, the language
includes novel constructs for precisely selecting, or referring to, elements of
geometry. Second, the team is developing algorithms for reasoning about CAD
programs by transforming program edits into queries that leverage a combination
of off-the-shelf symbolic and numerical solvers. Finally, the team is developing
novel end-user programming environments enabled by the CAD language and the
resultant automated reasoning. These applications include bidirectional editing
of CAD programs as well as synthesis of template models for optimizing CAD
designs. Further, the team is continuing their outreach activities to inspire
young students and underrepresented minorities to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.