* 2219625
* Kokes Awards for the 27th North American Catalysis Society Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* George Tsilomelekis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The project provides travel assistance for approximately 40 graduate students
from U.S. universities to attend the 27th North American Catalysis Society
Meeting (NAM27) in New York City, NY, May 22-27, 2022. Catalysis has long served
as a critical industrial and environmental technology for facilitating the
efficient and targeted conversion of raw materials to fuels and chemical
products, while also remediating waste products and pollutants. The NAM meetings
are the premier U.S. conference in the areas of catalysis, surface science and
catalytic reaction engineering. The meetings bring together academic,
industrial, and government laboratory researchers to share the latest technical
advances through oral and poster presentations, as well as plenary talks, panel
discussions, and topical workshops addressing key challenges in the field of
catalysis. Specifically for NAM27, students will benefit from a series of
workshops on key aspects of catalysis science prior to the first day of
technical content, to be presented by a panel of prominent researchers on best
practices in catalysis. For the first time, the meeting will have a separate
session on Catalyst Manufacturing that aims to bring together efforts from both
academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Financial assistance to graduate
students will be through the Kokes Travel Award program. NSF funding covers the
(early) registration fee ($495) and hotel costs for five days ($650, double
occupancy) for about 43 students from US institutions from a total of 120
awardees based on expected funding from ARO, DOE, and the North American
Catalysis Society (in addition to NSF) for a total budget of over $150,000. The
awardees are selected based on a rigorous review process from an estimated 230
student applications based primarily on merit, but with consideration of need-
based criteria that will enable the Kokes Awards committee to ensure appropriate
representation from underrepresented groups, including minorities and women,
first-time attendees to the NAM meeting, students of junior faculty, and
geographical distribution. Merit-based criteria include 1) peer-reviewed
evaluation of the student's submitted presentation abstract, 2) a letter of
recommendation from the student's adviser, and 3) the student's CV. The awardees
attend the entire conference and provide service to the conference by helping to
organize and conduct the meeting. In addition to scientific learning, NAM27 will
provide student attendees opportunities for networking, social interaction and
informal discussions. The meeting is particularly beneficial as a career
development tool for graduate students from U.S. institutions, who will form the
backbone of the future U.S. chemicals, fuels, and environmental sustainability
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.