* 2219532
* HBCU-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Educational Infrastructure in Climate Change Impact Analysis for Critical Infrastructure Systems Protection Using Game Theory
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pradeep Behera, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST) Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Research
Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (RISE) program, this project aims to
establish a Center of Climate Change Analytics at the University of the District
of Columbia (UDC). The center aims to create an important educational and
research platform that will train undergraduate and graduate students to become
diverse next-generation leaders that will address emerging contemporary issues
of climate change. The research of this center aims to advance our basic
understanding of the impacts of climate change on coastal communities and urban
infrastructure through the use of game theory. The central idea of the research
is to advance predictive capabilities of the effects of climate-driven sea level
rise and extreme storm events by mapping potential future climate scenarios and
identifying robust decision strategies that best protect the critical
infrastructure systems that support everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
establishment of a center of climate change analytics at UDC will enable
multidisciplinary research by creating a unifying hub for faculty, industry, and
agency partners to focus on addressing the growing concerns surrounding our
changing climate. The key goals of the center are to integrate climate change
issues into the curriculum, enhance UDC faculty research capabilities, and to
develop cross-industry connections. The research objectives of the center
include (a) mapping of potential future climate scenarios and associated
probabilities, (b) identifying critical thresholds for critical infrastructure
protection, (c) developing robust decision strategies, and (d) establishing an
interdisciplinary research infrastructure to train faculty researchers and a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students. The CREST HBCU-RISE awards
support the development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.