* 2219900
* Salmonella sRNAs drive the decision between active stress resistance and persister cell dormancy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Glen Borchert, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 636,072.00

Bacterial persister cells are relatively inactive metabolically, able to cope
with long-term environmental stress and are relatively tolerant of antibiotics.
This project aims to study the processes that lead to persister cell formation,
as a better understanding of these processes could significantly improve our
ability to address societal challenges such as antibiotic resistance, foodborne
illness outbreaks, and agricultural diseases. In addition, this project provides
interdisciplinary student training opportunities in microbiology, molecular
biology, and computational genetics/bioinformatics. Local high school students
will directly benefit from this project through two separate initiatives.
Notably, these efforts are intended to increase underrepresented minority
student interest and enrollment in biology and other STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sRNA profile of Salmonella subjected to short term
carbon starvation is highly distinct from that seen during prolonged starvation.
Similarly, highly distinct sRNA profiles are associated with initial and
prolonged cellular desiccation. In contrast, significant overlaps between the
sRNAs expressed in cells subjected to short durations of carbon starvation and
desiccation, as well as significant overlaps between the sRNAs expressed during
prolonged desiccation and long-term carbon starvation have been observed.
Furthermore, several of the sRNAs commonly induced during short duration stress
exposures are expressed from promoters transcribed via the RNA polymerase (RNAP)
sigma subunit RpoS. Conversely, many of the sRNAs commonly induced during long
term exposures are expressed from promoters targeted by the alternative sigma
subunit RpoE. Together, these findings suggest the following: alternative RNAP
sigma subunit selection and consequent expression of distinct sets of sRNAs
drive the decision between active stress resistance and persister formation in
Salmonella. Against this background, the work outlined for this project is
significant, as it will employ an array of genetic manipulations and
transcriptomic assays to characterize new, essential roles for alternative sigma
subunits and specific sRNAs in driving the decision between active stress
resistance and persister formation. Beyond characterizing the molecular switch
driving the decision between active stress resistance and persister formation,
the central model tested by this work-alternative sigma factors compete with one
another through directing the transcription of distinct sets of sRNAs that
inhibit opposing sigma factors-may well constitute a general mechanism of
prokaryotic sigma molecular switch regulation with implications for an array of
additional processes. As such, the work performed in this study will explore a
novel, systems-level regulatory mechanism for global prokaryotic transcriptome
reprogramming, which might advance our basic knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms driving microbial stress responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.