* 2219196
* SBP:MCA: Understanding School Professionals Disciplinary Decisions and Black Children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Scott Graves, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2025
* USD 294,608.00

Children who are suspended from school are more likely to have low academic
achievement and increased contact with the criminal justice system.
Unfortunately, rates of suspension in preschool have increased dramatically.
Additionally, this rise in preschool suspensions has had a disproportionate
impact on Black children. To decrease suspensions, scientists need a better
understanding of how perceptions of Black children and adult decision-making
combine to impact the number of students subject to these disciplinary
practices. The candidate’s Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) training will have
immediate impact on multidisciplinary research in the fields of developmental
psychology, social psychology, and school psychology as well as advancing
scientific theory and understanding of the connections between human behavior
and law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite policy statements developed by the
Department of Justice and the U.S. Department of Education on school discipline,
the use of suspensions in preschools continues to be used. Research indicates
that a majority of these suspensions are incurred by Black children. A majority
of research in this area has been conducted with school-aged children; however,
a significant gap exists in the preschool domain. As such, this project, which
is grounded in attribution and social cognitive theories will include: 1)
conducting a systematic review and bibliometric analysis of research in this
area; 2) developing videos and vignettes of preschool children’s’ behavior; 3)
examining the degree and intensity of preschool teachers’ racialized perceptions
of students; and 4) implementation of field research with preschool teachers,
pre-service teachers, and pre-service school psychologists to understand if they
consider the immediate behavior of the child and the long-term outcomes of
children when they recommend suspension from preschool. This work with school-
based professionals will have a significant impact on communities given that it
has the potential to lessen preschool suspension frequencies and reduce the
school-to-prison pipeline. Additionally, knowledge gained through this MCA
project will be used to develop interventions to help school professionals to
alleviate suspensions and expulsions in preschool-aged
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.