* 2219521
* SBE-UKRI: Contextually and probabilistically weighted auditory selective attention: from neurons to networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lori Holt, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,034,150.00

Eavesdropping on gossip in a bustling cafe, tracking the quality of a sick
child’s breathing through a nursery monitor, and listening for the high-pitched
squeak of a mouse amongst rustling leaves all rely upon auditory selective
attention. Humans and animals must prioritize, select, and sustain attention to
relevant sounds – and potentially suppress irrelevant sounds – to guide
decisions and actions. This selective attention guides our ability to listen,
and is crucial to everyday behavior, especially in noisy environments, and its
breakdown greatly impacts quality of life for many listeners, particularly as we
age. Yet, despite being a fundamental human ability, we know relatively little
about the cognitive and neurobiological basis of auditory selective attention. A
better understanding of selective attention will have broad societal impact by
guiding improvements to machine listening and next-generation hearing aids. This
transatlantic partnership will also develop multiple educational outreach
programs that include the creation of videos about cognitive neuroscience and
the importance of auditory attention in hearing. These videos will be widely
disseminated and linked to NSF’s Classroom Resources and the UK’s BBSRC Schools
and Young People sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This binational, collaborative
project links five laboratories from the United States and the United Kingdom to
undertake cross-cutting behavioral and neurobiological research on auditory
selective attention. The project capitalizes on interactions between learning
and attention: when sounds occur frequently, listeners detect them more readily
in noise and respond to them more quickly in decision making. This suggests that
the rich patterns of sensory signals structuring the natural world may help to
direct attention. The project will include studies of auditory attention in
humans and also in an animal model (the ferret - whose audiogram and hearing is
very similar to humans). The project unifies cross-species approaches with a
pair of simple auditory tasks (duration detection and interval detection across
a range of spectral frequencies), each of which provides unique opportunities to
understand how input regularities in acoustic stimulus statistics direct
attention to specific sounds or qualities of sounds. A novel aspect of this
research is that parallel studies, using an array of complementary
neurobiological techniques, will provide measurements over multiple levels of
analysis from single neurons to whole brain activity, that will be integrated
into a comprehensive picture of selective auditory attention. The project will
use electroencephalography (EEG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), functional
MRI (fMRI), high-density electrophysiology, and intracranial recordings from
neurosurgical patients, to test competing hypotheses about how the brain’s
cortical response to sound is shaped by acoustic context and experience. This
research is likely to lead to new insights and advances in our understanding of
the neural basis of auditory selective attention, which is crucial for
hearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is awarded under the SBE-UKRI Lead
Agency Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.