* 2219119
* OPP-PRF: A Well-Constrained Hosing Experiment for Interrogating Arctic Precipitation Changes in the Younger Dryas
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michaela Fendrock, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 307,499.00

In the next century, changes to precipitation will be among the most significant
impacts of anthropogenic climate change. An important tool for predicting future
climate change is understanding how climate has changed in the past. About
12,000 years ago, a significant volume of cold, fresh water was added to the
North Atlantic. This fresh water is believed to have slowed the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation, an ocean current that is important to the
stability of the planet’s climate. Using the results of high-resolution computer
simulations of iceberg paths through the ocean, this research will test the
hypothesis that icebergs were the primary contributor of fresh water to the
Atlantic during the Younger Dryas. This hypothesis will be tested against the
idea that the fresh water was sourced from a catastrophic outburst flood on
land, as well as against a more traditional, low-resolution model of fresh water
forcing. These simulations will be compared to each other and to records of
Arctic precipitation change during the Younger Dryas, advancing understanding of
both past and present climate change in the Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates the Younger Dryas, an interval of abrupt global climate
change that occurred about 12,000 years ago. The Younger Dryas is believed to
have been caused by the addition of cold, fresh water to the North Atlantic,
which slowed Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, though the exact
nature of this forcing is not well understood. This work involves sensitivity
experiments using an isotope-enabled global climate model, iCESM, with new
constraints on the location of fresh water. The PI hypothesizes these more
realistic constraints will produce a climate response more comparable to the
geologic record than past works. These experiments will investigate the
initiation and duration of these events in order to generate a more complete
narrative of abrupt climate change in the Younger Dryas. The results of this
modeling will then be compared to proxy records from Arctic lakes, interpreted
through forward-modeling of the systems recording the proxies, or proxy system
modeling. This approach, involving global climate modeling, proxy records, and
proxy system modeling of the same event will produce a narrative of Younger
Dryas climate dynamics and link those events to sediments from Arctic
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.