* 2219175
* MCA: Mid-Career Advancement - Using STEM Interest Profiling to Build a STEM ecosystems for underrepresented students.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2023
* John Fife, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2023
* USD 295,004.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program through
cross-directorate Mid-Career Advancement solicitation NSF 21-516 supports
scientists and engineers at the Associate Professor rank (or equivalent) to
substantively enhance and advance their research program through synergistic and
mutually beneficial partnerships, typically at an institution other than their
home institution. The overall goal of this project is to enhance and advance the
research agenda of the principal investigator (PI) through a mutually beneficial
mentoring partnership that seeks to address the decrease in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) interest and attitudes of youth in the Tri-
City area of Virginia (Petersburg, Hopewell, and Colonial Heights) by building a
STEM ecosystem. By (re)-investing in mid-career investigators, NSF aims to
enable and grow a more diverse scientific workforce at high academic ranks, who
remain engaged and active in cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the project are to: 1) apply cutting edge profiling analyses
(Latent Profile Analysis) and Social Network Analysis, to investigate middle
school age STEM efforts; 2) use asset mapping to identify potential STEM
collaborators and stakeholders in the Tri City area, interested in, and
committed to creating a comprehensive and robust learning ecosystem, and 3)
assess the ecosystemâ€™s health and effectiveness based on three variables:
Productivity, Durability, and Resilience. These groundbreaking methodologies
will enable the PI and collaborators to consider variability among groups of
underserved middle school-aged youth; and will allow the investigator to examine
the qualities in, and relationships between STEM collaborators and stakeholders
in an ecosystem, and to fine-tune these in order to improve its efficacy and
sustainability. This project will expand the notion of ecosystem approaches by
advancing knowledge about national concerns regarding STEM literacy, equity,
inclusion, and access, and will serve as a model to other researchers seeking to
understand the role that STEM profiling can play in informing the creation,
implementation, and sustainability of equitable STEM
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.