* 2219086
* ECO-CBET: GOALI: CAS-Climate: Expediting Decarbonization of Cement Industry through Integration of CO2 Capture and Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Chengquing Qi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2026
* USD 819,030.00

The overall goal of this project is to deliver an innovative, integrated, and
adaptable CO2 capture-conversion system to enable decarbonization of the cement
industry while producing valuable cement supplements from waste CO2. In
transitioning to a net-zero emission and circular economy, waste CO2 in
industrial flue gases is considered as a valuable resource for production of a
wide range of value-added products. Cutting America’s CO2 emissions in half by
2030 requires investment in industry sectors like cement that cannot shift
entirely to carbon-free energy sources just yet. The U.S. is currently producing
~90 million tons of cement every year, emitting nearly the same amount of CO2.
If no eco-efficient alternative cements can be invented to completely replace
Portland cement, a promising strategy to decarbonize the cement industry in the
foreseeable future is to transform Portland cement into blended cement. In this
project, the approach is to capture CO2 from cement flue gas and use it as a
renewable feedstock to produce blended cement using carbon-negatively processed
industrial wastes. The proposed capture-conversion technology will be integrated
into a cement production unit, where the CO2 comes from the flue gas of the
cooler end of the kiln, and the waste materials and waste heat from the cement
plant can be used to run the CO2 conversion process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project team will explore the fundamental chemistry needed to develop
economically viable technology to convert the captured CO2 to blended cement.
The fundamental findings at the molecular level (reaction chemistry and sorbent
development) will be merged with extensive process modeling, simulation, and
design optimization, along with techno-economic analysis (TEA) and rigorous life
cycle assessment (LCA) of representative cement manufacturing facilities with
and without the integration of the CO2 capture-conversion process. The team will
leverage convergence science principles to advance the scientific,
technological, and socio-economic knowledge needed to overcome challenges
associated with: 1) CO2 capture, 2) CO2 conversion, 3) process systems
engineering and integration, and 4) environmental sustainability assessment for
expediting the decarbonization of the cement industry. The project has the
potential to open new opportunities for achieving net-zero CO2 emissions from
the cement industry while producing a valuable cement supplement from waste
resources (e.g., alkali industrial wastes such as off-specification coal ashes).
Assuming broad technology adoption and replication, potential profitable CO2
emission reductions of &gt;50 Mt/year are projected for U.S., the possibility of
which is enhanced by collaboration with the Ash Grove Cement Company. Components
of the collaboration with the Ash Grove partner include graduate student summer
internships and seminars on CO2 capture-conversion by both University
researchers and Ash Grove engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.