* 2219077
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Accelerated Discovery of Synthetic Biological Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Mark Mba Wright, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2027
* USD 42,000.00

This project aims to develop a pathway to transform the economy from petroleum
derived plastics to bioplastics made of synthetic biological materials (SBM)
manufactured by bacteria and derived from sustainable sources. A convergent team
comprised of experts from synthetic biology, biotechnology, machine learning,
social sciences, materials science, and mechanics will work on developing
commercially viable, high-performance plastic fibers made of SBMs with the goal
of building a pipeline that will both produce sustainable high-performance SBMs
of the future and help train a diverse workforce for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities focus on addressing key
challenges by developing: (1) machine-learning tools to explore potential DNA
sequences that can be programmed into bacteria for SBM biosynthesis, reducing
the size the design and search space; (2) a transformative discovery pipeline
for rapid identification of high-performance SBMs by integrating machine
learning tools with first-principle simulations and experimentation that have
varying cost and fidelity; and (3) an original economics and sociological
framework linked to techno-economic, life-cycle, and supply-chain models to
formulate strategies to steer SBMs to market adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.