* 2219892
* SBIR Phase I:  Safety Syringe Needle for Prevention of Unintended/Accidental Puncture (Needlestick Injury)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Steven Opolski, GNU COMPANY, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 249,369.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel medical device for intramuscular
injections that will reduce needlestick injury. Unintended or accidental
puncture is the second most common occupational hazard for healthcare staff. An
estimated 385,000 needlestick injuries occur in the United States each year
impacting 5.6 million healthcare workers. Needlestick injury represents one of
the largest risks, both financially ($258 million annually) and medically (e.g.,
bloodborne pathogen exposure), to healthcare providers. This project aims to
develop a novel, flexible hypodermic needle with a safety syringe that enables
rapid injections while replacing sharp needles and significantly reducing risks
of unintended health care provider injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides a novel, flexible, polymer
needle-based safety syringe for health care providers to perform intramuscular
injections in patients. A novel and variable stiffness shaft is integrated with
an external safety lumen mechanism to create an integrated delivery system with
the same delivery reliability and repeatability as standard needlesticks. The
design will be prototyped and evaluated under a variety of human factors
considerations. The device will be required to pass several mechanical tests for
puncture, insertion, and lumen integrity in a consistent manner, as anticipated
during routine clinical use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.