* 2219027
* MCA: Improving understanding of controls over spatial heterogeneity in dryland soil carbon pools in the age of big data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Heather Throop, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 393,969.00

Soils may alter the trajectory of climate change because of their potential to
store or release large amounts of carbon, thus altering the concentration of
atmospheric carbon dioxide. However, understanding and predicting current and
future soil carbon dynamics requires the capability to accurately describe
spatial patterns of soil carbon and forecast changes via reliable models. At
present, patterns and controls over soil carbon cycle processes are poorly
resolved in dryland (arid and semi-arid) ecosystems, which cover nearly half of
Earth's terrestrial surface and store one third of global soil carbon. The ‘big
data’ revolution has dramatically increased data available to address ecological
problems such soil carbon dynamics. However, effective use of big data requires
sophisticated data handling skills and use of emerging analytical tools such as
machine learning and application of these tools to process modeling. This
project will advance the investigator’s research skills in big data handling and
will enhance their ability to mentor students in modern approaches to data-
intensive ecological problems. Machine learning and process modeling will be
used to increase understanding of patterns and controls over spatial
heterogeneity in dryland soil carbon. This information is critical for
scientifically based evaluation of dryland management strategies of soil carbon
storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore patterns and
mechanistic controls over spatial heterogeneity in dryland soil organic carbon
pools. Exploring patterns in two contrasting dryland settings, a semi-arid
grassland with well-documented long-term management and vegetation change and a
poorly characterized hyper-arid system, will provide deeper understanding of the
relationships between environmental variables and soil organic carbon across
drylands. Coupling this exploration of soil organic carbon spatial patterns with
process modeling will enhance understanding of the mechanistic drivers of soil
organic carbon heterogeneity. Spatial downscaling of a deep learning enhanced
earth system modeling approach will provide insight into the fine scale
mechanisms that drive soil organic carbon heterogeneity and how they respond to
environmental change. This mid-career advancement grant will enable the primary
investigator to: develop skills for handling and analyzing large and complex
data sets; use machine learning approaches to describe spatial patterns of
heterogeneity in soil organic carbon pools in two contrasting dryland field
sites where the primary investigator has extensive prior experience and data,
and; apply a deep learning enhanced earth system model to a dryland site and use
this model to explore mechanistic drivers of carbon cycling. This project will
build mutually beneficial partnerships between the primary investigator and two
research partners, and an engineer with expertise in machine learning and remote
sensing and an expert in ecological process models and deep learning enhanced
earth system modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.