* 2219980
* Collaborative Research:  Coupled Ocean Mixed Layer Processes Driving Sea Surface Temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Leah Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 247,784.00

This project would investigate the effects of upper ocean mixed layer depth
variability on sea surface temperature (SST). The hypothesis is that fast
timescale air-sea interactions such as diurnal solar warming, wind gusts and
rain showers rectify onto longer timescale seasonal to sub-seasonal SST
variability. The project would first develop a conceptual framework to identify
these contributions, then metrics from this framework would be analyzed from
data collected throughout the tropical and subtropical oceans. These statistics
will identify specific ocean-atmosphere coupled processes essential for SST
prediction in regional and global circulation models. If successful, this work
would improve weather predictions that save lives and property. This proposal
will support a female early-career researcher. Johnson will continue her
involvement with Mentoring Physical Oceanography Woman to Increase Retention
(MPOWIR) as a mentor and contributor, and with workshops to promote field safety
for ocean sciences lead by the Consortium for Ocean Leadership
(COL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A new method is presented that evaluates the role
of high frequency ocean mixed layer variability on seasonal to subseasonal SST
anomalies. Using statistics from observations, the project will develop and test
a stochastic model that integrates the high frequency co-variability between
atmospheric forcing and mixed layer depth to predict SST evolution. Existing
observations from moored platforms and profiling instruments that measure
coincident air-sea interaction and upper ocean processes will be utilized.
Single column mixing models forced by the observational metrics would also be
utilized to provide more information about processes that contribute to upper
ocean variability. This work will open the possibility for very simple coupled
ocean mixed layer models that simulate SST anomalies and their coupling to the
atmosphere more accurately than constant-depth ocean mixed layer models. Results
will provide a framework for understanding how well coupled models need to
resolve ocean mixed layer variability to accurately predict SST
anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.