* 2219849
* MCA: Validating Patterns of Bone Functional Adaptation in Living Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Libby Cowgill, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2026
* USD 295,671.00

Bone is a living tissue that can adapt and change in response to an individualâ€™s
behavior and environment. Skeletal data therefore are used in bioarchaeology,
paleoanthropology, and forensic anthropology to infer habitual activities such
as mobility, locomotor type, weapon use, and subsistence strategy. In this Mid-
Career Advancement project, the principal investigator aims to improve such
inferences through additional examination and validation of relationships among
bone, muscle, and activity patterns using imaging and behavioral data from
living individuals. This research requires advanced professional development in
analysis of CT scans, cutting-edge statistical methods, and enhanced scientific
communication, obtained through a new research partnership, quantitative
coursework, and outreach training workshops. The project supports training in
new research methods and science communication for a female Associate Professor
in a field where women are still under-represented at senior levels, as well as
curriculum development and associated opportunities for student research and
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances foundational research in
bone skeletal biology about the relationships between hard tissue, soft tissue,
and mechanical loading in living humans. Three aims are explored using CT data
from living individuals. First, the relationship between muscle size and bone
strength in different regions of the body is investigated to establish if human
bone strength covaries more with localized muscle forces or is systemically
dictated by other factors. Second, the covariation between bone strength and
self-reported and documented activity patterns is evaluated. Third, path
analysis is used to explore possible causal models between loading, muscular
size, and bone strength. Through partnership with an expert in functional
anatomy and image analysis, the principal investigator gains advanced research
skills and expand collaborations. The project specifically meets several goals
of the Mid-Career Advancement program, including enabling convergent research,
enhancing strategic workforce development, and fostering risk
taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.