* 2219800
* Using single-neuron recordings in the human brain to inform cognitive models of error monitoring
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ueli Rutishauser, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 934,850.00

How do we monitor our actions? We notice quickly when we dial a wrong number,
get off the elevator at the wrong floor, blurt out something inappropriate, or
send an email that we really didnâ€™t mean to send, even when no one tells us that
we made a mistake. These behaviors are everyday examples of monitoring our own
performance, which is critical for us to learn from our mistakes. Although
external feedback can also play an important role in monitoring our actions,
remarkably, noticing that we made an error often occurs from self-monitoring
alone. This research project utilizes rare opportunities to record individual
human brain cells to decipher how the brain achieves this extraordinary feat.
Determining how the brain enables us to detect our own errors is of broad
significance because it may enable us to develop new training and teaching
strategies to help those who fail to detect their own errors or, conversely, are
overly sensitive to their own mistakes. Also, it will provide fundamental
knowledge about the brain mechanisms underlying error-monitoring that may
facilitate the development of a non-invasive biomarker that might allow us to
assess the success or failure of training strategies and also enable the
creation of artificial intelligence systems with better abilities at performance
monitoring. The research team is involved in several outreach educational
activities to under-represented groups aimed at providing enrichment classes at
the middle and high school level, to teach students about exciting recent
advances in cognitive neuroscience, and also bringing opportunities for STEM
research experiences in neuroscience for high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how the brain enables us to detect
our own errors, this proposal aims to test the predictions of three prominent
theories of error monitoring. While these theories are at the core of a large
number of studies in psychology and cognitive neuroscience, we do not know at
present which (if any) of these theories actually reflects how our brain enables
this critical ability of performance monitoring. Motivated by their recent
discovery of single neurons which signal error in the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) of the human brain, the research team will examine the response of
individual mPFC neurons (in patients being monitored for epilepsy prior to
neurosurgery to remove epileptic brain tissue, who have volunteered to
participate in this study). Participants will perform cognitive tasks to test
the differing predictions of the three extant theories which may resolve which
theory is correct. Along with the single neuron recordings from the mPFC,
researchers will also simultaneously record scalp and intercranial EEG. These
tandem recording techniques will be especially useful for understanding the
neural basis of the error related negativity (ERN), which is a frequently
studied scalp EEG component. Combined with novel quantitative methods, the
researchers expect to gain a mechanistic understanding of how the human brain
monitors errors. The researchers also plan to begin development of an accurate
computational model of how the human mPFC monitors errors incorporating insights
gained from the research in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.