* 2219997
* FMitF: Track 1: Foundational Approaches for End-to-end Formal Verification of Computational Physics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Karthikeyan Duraisamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Numerical solutions of differential equations are widely used in analysis and
design tasks in science and engineering. Examples include modeling climate
change, discovering new materials, designing aircraft, and understanding the
early universe. This simulation process, however, involves errors arising from a
number of sources such as the finiteness of the numerical discretization,
potential lack of convergence of algorithms, floating-point arithmetic, and
sampling required to quantify uncertainties. The project's novelties are a new
formalism to ensure a rigorous handle over errors and uncertainties in numerical
methods, and computer-checked proofs of the formalization and applications. The
project's impact is a better understanding and quantification of the errors
involved in scientific computations, leading to a higher confidence in
simulation-informed analysis and design of natural and engineered
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current state of the art in numerical analysis
relies on paper proofs. In practical implementations, the impact of rounding
error is seldom quantified, and even when quantified, not formalized. The
interplay with the implementation (C code level and below) is also not clearly
assessed. Practitioners use intuitive techniques such as convergence tests and
the method of manufactured solutions to manually check the viability of a
numerical algorithm. Since these techniques yield necessary yet not sufficient
checks, scientists rely on their expertise to guide applications. This work
offers the possibility of the user setting a tolerable error threshold, and
being assured of achieving it via their implementation in several computational
physics tasks. The idea of bounding errors asymptotically is uncommon in formal
methods, and will inevitably lead to the development of tools and techniques to
better handle asymptotic guarantees in interactive theorem proving. As a side
effect, this will expand and consolidate formal-methods libraries handling real
arithmetic and limits. This work is expected to be transformational for
computational physics, and spur the development of a sub-field at the
intersection of formal methods and computational science. The proofs are
mechanically checked in an interactive theorem prover using a variety of
mathematical results ranging from convergence of functions to floating-point
arithmetic and C semantics, thereby using various theories in one proof of
correctness. The project creates a new space of physical applications to formal
methods researchers, and for computational physicists to derive value from
formalizing their programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.