* 2219243
* OPP-PRF: Reconstructing Baleen Whale Movement and Foraging Ecology Using Archived Natural History Collections
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Kerri Smith, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 325,773.00

Baleen whales play vital roles in polar marine ecosystems. Their annual
migrations between their polar and tropical feeding grounds connect organisms,
nutrients, cultures, and economies globally. Despite playing such important
socio-environmental roles, baleen whales are challenging to locate and study in
the wild due to the distances they travel and their elusive nature. Effective
management and conservation plans are hindered by lack of knowledge about their
migration and foraging patterns. To address these critical knowledge gaps, this
project measures molecular chemical signatures, called stable isotopes, recorded
in baleen preserved in museums and from whales that have stranded on beaches. As
baleen whales migrate and feed, their baleen records yearsâ€™ worth of stable
isotope data about marine ecosystems. The inferences derived from this study
will advance understanding of baleen whale life history, assist wildlife
managers with conservation plans, and inform scientists about past, current, and
future impacts from climate change. The project engages local, national, and
international stakeholders, K-12 students, and science communication
organizations to make research findings accessible to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Atlantic Ocean basin is a dynamic
ecosystem susceptible to global climate change. This project reconstructs baleen
whale migration patterns by integrating bulk stable isotope values from baleen
time series with agent-based movement models and global geospatial isoscape
maps. Compound-specific isotopes of individual amino acids will be used to
validate the underlying drivers of geospatial variation in whale isotope
dynamics to reconstruct whale foraging behavior. These data will shed light on
the effects of anthropogenic activities on ecosystem biogeochemical cycling and
productivity, which in turn reflect ecosystem-level changes in community
structure, biodiversity, and trophic relationships. This research generates
novel and critical data on baleen whale movement and foraging ecology, provides
insight on ecosystem-level changes in biogeochemical processes, and integrates
archived natural history samples with advanced modelling approaches and stable
isotope analysis, advancing both fundamental and applied marine mammal
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.