* 2219059
* CHS: Small: The Farm as Lab: Information Technology Innovation in Computational Agriculture
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Bardzell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 470,637.00

This research integrates two goals: to survey, document, and disseminate
knowledge about innovation in alternative agriculture to the human-centered
computing community, and to support alternative-agricultural innovation
practices using system design approaches to develop novel technologies that
build on and extend what is already happening on a diversity of experimental
farms. In response to population increases, growing food demand, changing diets,
and climate change, recent years have seen a surge in the use of information
communication technologies in agriculture. Experimental farms carry forward many
of the same underlying sociotechnical structures that helped to define the maker
movement, but as yet they are not yet understood or supported. These structures
include increasingly powerful end-user technologies, networks of knowledgeable
and passionate practitioners, inquiry objectives relevant to computer science,
and high benefit for their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major phase of
the project will conduct ethnographic fieldwork that relies on a combination of
participant observation, analysis of cultural and technological artifacts, and
semi-structured interviews conducted within each of two research sites. One will
examine alternative, IT-enabled farming practices in Taiwan to reveal how
farmers experimentally innovate on a day-to-day basis. The other will focus on
agricultural experiments in Indiana to understand and document how farmers,
policymakers, and technologists use technology to address critical challenges in
food production and sustainability and how agriculture-technology-oriented
initiatives cultivate high-tech, high-skilled farmers of the future. Another
phase of the research will combine documentary, discourse, and oral history
analysis of policy materials from governments of both field sites to identify
alignments and misalignments that either facilitate or undercut efforts intended
to support agricultural innovation. The ethnographic work, oral histories and
discourse analyses will be inputs into co-design workshops that will be informed
by principles of participatory design. They will test promising agriculture
technology breakthroughs, challenges, and tactics identified in the ethnographic
engagements, and will take the form of "design sprints," a highly structured
process widely used in the US tech industry for answering crucial questions with
stakeholders, characterized by mapping the problem terrain, identifying risks
and opportunities, concept generation, prototyping, evaluation and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.