* 2219081
* MCA: Developing molecular tools to explore mating system diversity in salamanders
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Rebecca Hale, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2025
* USD 218,472.00

The purpose of this research is for the investigator to learn a molecular
technique for parentage analysis, while asking questions about mating behavior
in a group of closely related mole salamanders. Working with her research
partner, the PI will apply modern gene sequencing methods to develop tools for
assigning parentage. The goal is to use the newly developed molecular tools to
compare mating behavior across three salamander species, among which mating
behavior is thought to vary considerably. This work is part of a broader
research program to better understand the evolution of reproductive and social
behavior in animals. Mole salamanders are an ideal group for this work. First,
the mating and parenting behavior are relatively simple and easy to quantify.
Second, although some work on the control of these behaviors has been conducted
in frogs, there is no such work in salamanders, so studying another large group
of amphibians will provide a more representative picture of the evolution and
control of these behavior in amphibians, generally. Finally, the control of
these behaviors appears to be highly conserved across vertebrate groups – from
amphibians to mammals. Therefore, what we learn about the evolution and control
of these behaviors in amphibians can shed light on the same behaviors in birds
and mammals, who often have much more complex social interactions associated
with mating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the investigator's research is to
understand how social behaviors, including mating and parenting, promote and
constrain the evolution of complex life histories. To accomplish this, she
focuses on the ecological factors associated with recent evolutionary origins of
parental care as well as the cascading effects of parental care on mating
behavior and embryonic development. Recently, the PI’s research has expanded to
examine how mating and parenting behaviors are intertwined and to ask whether
the extent of female multiple mating differs between species with and without
parental care. Her experimental work focuses on the mole salamanders (Ambystoma
spp.), a group with variable mating patterns and parental care. In order to
advance this work, she needs a reliable tool for quantifying polyandry. The PI
will learn and implement the RADcap method for quantifying single nucleotide
polymorphisms and apply it to parentage analysis in three Ambystoma salamanders
that include one caring and two non-caring species. In addition to validating
these methods for parentage analysis in this group of organisms, this research
will test hypotheses for the maintenance of polyandry and lay the groundwork for
future comparative studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.