* 2219271
* An AI-Augmented Phenomenographic Approach to Conceptualizing Undergraduate Students Experiences of Intercultural Team Cognition in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alejandra Magana-de-Leon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 349,999.00

As society becomes increasingly globalized, STEM graduates are increasingly
called upon to work with individuals from different cultures and backgrounds.
Thus, organizations and governments expect STEM graduates to contribute as
productive members and leaders of intercultural teams. This project is designed
to conduct fundamental research on team cognition, an important component of
teamwork training. Team cognition refers to the knowledge, interactions, and
processes essential to effective team functioning. This project aims to examine
intercultural team cognition specifically within computationally-intensive
fields and, in the process, further develop the principal investigator’s STEM
education research expertise. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed-method project will be
based on data gathered through student reflections, video recordings of
teamwork, a series of validated survey items, and semi-structured interviews
from students enrolled in computationally-intensive courses that entail
semester-long team projects. Three specific objectives guide this project. First
is to develop the principal investigator’s STEM education research skills and
expertise relating to artificial intelligence enabled methods of analysis.
Second is to carry out a fundamental STEM education research project that will
examine the ways undergraduate students experience intercultural team cognition
in the context of solving computational challenges. Third, and finally, is to
engage in phenomenographic research that employs both traditional coding methods
and artificial intelligence-augmented techniques to analyze qualitative data.
The project will enable comparisons of findings and has the potential to provide
methodological insights. The PI will work with a mentor and advisory board from
her institution that have extensive expertise in machine learning, natural
language processing, deep learning algorithms, and building trustworthy systems
that facilitate explainability, fairness, and accountability. An external
advisory board will also include individuals with expertise in intelligent
design tutors as well as individual and team cognition. The research, associated
presentations, and interaction with the advisory boards aim to contribute to the
fundamental knowledge about team cognition in an educational
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.