* 2219109
* The CSUF-led partnership for inclusion of underrepresented groups in gravitational-wave astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2027
* USD 833,701.00

A research and education pathway program is awarded with the core mission to
significantly increase the number of students from underrepresented groups, in
particular Hispanic and Latino/a students, with post-baccalaureate degrees in
gravitational-wave astrophysics. This program will substantially strengthen an
existing collaboration between California State University Fullerton (CSUF), a
primarily undergraduate Hispanic-Serving Institution, and three Ph.D.-granting
partners: Syracuse University, Northwestern University, and Washington State
University (WSU). This program will develop a clear pathway for CSUF students to
enter the Ph.D. program at one of the partner universities, including financial
and academic support as they transition, thereby providing students with a long-
term road map for their STEM careers. It will further ensure that admitted
students complete the Ph.D. degree and facilitate their becoming leaders in
gravitational-wave astrophysics by providing sustained mentoring and actively
fostering partnership opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost a century after
Einstein first predicted their existence, scientists discovered gravitational
waves— ripples of curved spacetime—passing through Earth, igniting the era of
gravitational-wave astronomy. Gravitational waves are a radically new tool for
exploring the universe and probing the physics driving some of the most extreme
astrophysical events in ways inaccessible to other forms of astronomy. The U.S.
Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) will soon
take its next science data, and future observatories (such as Cosmic Explorer,
LIGO Voyager, and the Einstein Telescope) have the promise to extend our
gravitational-wave astronomical reach to the edge of the universe and to new
frequency bands, bringing an even greater potential for transformative
astronomical discoveries. Student researchers at CSUF, Syracuse, Northwestern,
and WSU will contribute to these discoveries through experimental work to help
maximize gravitational-wave observatories’ astronomical reach and theoretical
and computational work to model and interpret gravitational-wave sources. This
award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.