* 2219314
* Researching the Impact of a Planning Tool for Guiding the School-Wide Integration of Computational Thinking Readiness for All at the Elementary School Level
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Cheri Fancsali, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 499,954.00

There are increasing resources for elementary students to learn early concepts
for computer science and a need for students to be ready to learn about computer
science in later grades. Computational thinking (CT) includes preparation for
computer science practices like pattern recognition, abstraction, and testing to
solve problems and can be applied to other disciplines. However, elementary
schools need support to infuse computational thinking throughout the curriculum
and make sure learning experiences for students are coherent, high-quality, and
equitable. This project will create tools to support schools and districts in
examining their current computational thinking teaching and learning experiences
and develop plans for creating new experiences. The research process includes
school leaders, teachers, and students to investigate the planning process at
different sites and in schools with different levels of experience with
computational thinking as part of their curriculum. This project is funded
through the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Strand project will build
on prior-work by field testing the CT Integration Framework and self-assessment
tool and develop additional resources to support school-wide, coherent
integration of computer science with other disciplines in elementary schools.
The project will study the planning process and professional development
required to support elementary schools in their efforts to integrate CT across
subjects and grade levels, making computer science education accessible to all
students. The research questions investigate how elementary schools plan for
computational thinking integration, as well as teachers and school leaders
understanding of computational thinking. The questions also explore studentsâ€™
access to high-quality computational thinking instruction with attention to
groups historically underrepresented in computer science. The project will study
the outcomes of the planning process by gathering data about professional
development opportunities, student learning, teacher and school leader surveys,
and other artifacts of teaching computational thinking. The schools in the
project will represent different student populations and different levels of
experience implementing computational thinking across multiple grade levels. The
long-term goal of this work is to improve the sustainability of computational
thinking teaching and to increase student readiness and interest in
computational thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.