* 2219846
* Collaborative Research: Swash zone dynamics driven by obliquely incident waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jack Puleo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 654,897.00

Beaches are coastline features that offer economic benefits, ecosystems
services, and a natural barrier against flooding. Thus, sustainable management
of beaches requires a firm understanding of coastal processes and beach sediment
budgets. Such knowledge is particularly underdeveloped in the swash zone, where
waves wet and dry the sand with each wave and shift enormous amounts of
sediment. This project will investigate these processes as they occur by waves
that arrive at an angle, a common scenario on beach beaches. Previous research
efforts that have developed new tools, measurement techniques, and knowledge to
understand swash zone processes have focused solely on cross-shore dynamics
since these studies are easier to perform in small-scale wave flumes and two-
dimensional simulations. In this project, an intensive campaign of laboratory
experiments, theoretical analysis, and numerical simulations will be used to
expand swash zone knowledge to all three spatial dimensions and time. The
alongshore dynamics and sediment transport are particularly important in the
field where waves approach at an angle, but they are also the least understood.
The laboratory experiments will include a range of wave forcing conditions and
wave incidence angles and be complemented by numerical modeling using open-
source models as well as development of new predictive formulations based on
theoretical considerations. The project will aim to develop a new knowledge
framework based on studying fundamental aspects of swash dynamics to transform
our understanding of the flow and sediment transport patterns on beaches. These
will have far reaching implications for researchers and stakeholders since
almost half of all beaches in the US (and globally) face management challenges
related to sediment transport trends that change unpredictably due to wave
action. The project will train two PhD students at UW-Madison and U Delaware,
respectively, and numerous undergraduate students across four institutions. The
project will also provide partial support to a postdoctoral researcher, who will
gain valuable experience and mentoring for a future career as a professor.
Additionally, four high-school teachers from different regions will receive a
meaningful research laboratory experience and help in developing a new learning
module for their classrooms. The project will also start a new collaboration
between University of Wisconsin-Madison, the Caribbean Coastal Ocean Observing
System, the Center for Applied Coastal Research at University of Delaware, and
the Coastal Engineering Laboratory at Queenâ€™s University. Finally, project
results will be widely disseminated via journal publications and conferences,
including the Young Coastal Scientists and Engineers Conference - Americas,
which will be held in the Midwest (Madison, WI) for the first time during the
project. All experimental data will be hosted on NSF-funded data repositories
and open-source numerical models will be used to promote further development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using state-of-the-art experimental measurement techniques
and numerical modeling tools, the project will discover the physical basis for
flow and sediment transport in the alongshore direction under forcing from
incident-band waves. The alongshore flow and transport is poorly described in
the swash zone, despite its importance in overall beach sediment budgets.
Detailed measurements coupled with numerical modeling and theoretical analysis
will reveal how bore collapse and flow turbulence drive alongshore currents
under different wave conditions and across a range of wave incidence angles.
Similarly, detailed sediment concentration profiles and fluxes will reveal
fundamentally new insights into three-dimensional sediment transport patterns in
the swash zone, including how sheet flow transport in the alongshore may enhance
cross-shore erosion/accretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.