* 2219495
* CS4NorthCal: Scaling an Evidence-based Model for Teacher Preparation and Support to Provide Equitable and Inclusive CS Education in California High Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Hao Yue, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,994,917.00

San Francisco State University, WestEd, and 20+ school districts will
collaborate and launch CS4NorthCal to address 2 major challenges in high school
computer science (CS) education: (1) a lack of student access to rigorous CS
instruction and (2) a lack of gender, ethnic, disability, and racial diversity
in high school CS courses. By scaling an effective model for preparation,
professional development (PD), and ongoing support for high school CS teachers
to improve their CS content knowledge and pedagogical skills, this project will
increase rigorous and engaging CS course offerings to all high school students.
The percentage of female and URG students in high school CS courses will grow,
and these students will gain in-demand skills that allow them to enter the CS
workforce. The strategies identified and tested in this project for improving
teacher preparation and support will be of broad interest, as school districts
throughout the country are facing, or will face, the same problems, as they ramp
up their own CS offerings. Over the course of this project, the RPP will serve
200 teachers and support 25,000+ high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of CS4NorthCal is to scale up an effective, evidence-based model for
preparation, PD, and ongoing support of high school CS teachers. CS4NorthCal
will institute a 3-pronged strategy to prepare and support high school teachers
committed to CS education excellence throughout Northern California: (1) Scaling
a teacher certification program for CS teacher preparation and PD to increase
the number of authorized high school CS teachers. (2) Expanding Professional
Learning Communities (PLCs) for newly certified high school CS teachers to
provide continuous professional learning on CS curricula and inclusive
pedagogical strategies. (3) Establishing and scaling a high school CS teacher
mentorship program to offer ongoing, rigorous support to newly certified
teachers to improve their retention and skills. The RPP has jointly developed 4
research questions to investigate how best to design certification courses,
PLCs, and teacher mentorship programs to prepare teachers of varying
disciplinary and geographic backgrounds to teach high school CS equitably: (1)
How can online certification courses be designed to effectively prepare teachers
with CS content knowledge and skills? (2) How can online certification courses
be designed to support teachers in developing culturally responsive and
inclusive teaching strategies for CS? (3) How can certification courses and
ongoing support be designed to address the needs and readiness levels of
teachers with different disciplinary backgrounds? (4) How do teachers engage in
ongoing support (e.g., PLCs, mentoring) focused on the continuing development of
their content knowledge and culturally responsive teaching skills? This project
will contribute critical data to the evidence base for high school CS teacher
preparation and support, and the knowledge generated can be used by states
across the nation to ramp up their CS offerings and support learning for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.