* 2219497
* Collaborative Research: Growing Computer Science Teachers in Iowa through AEA Partnerships
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* J. Ben Schafer, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/28/2026
* USD 898,819.00

Since 2020, the state of Iowa has required all school districts to create and
implement a plan for "high quality" computer science access at all levels of the
K-12 curriculum. Because of this, an increasing number of school districts are
asking one or more of their high school teachers to transition, at least part
time, to teaching computer science. This research-practitioner partnership
between the University of Northern Iowa and Iowa's nine Area Education Agencies
(AEAs) builds on prior work to provide professional development pathways for
teachers interested in pursuing full endorsement-level training. The project
will promote the progress of computer science education by increasing access to
participation in the partnership to teachers from across the state of Iowa,
regardless of their geographic location. The combination of resources from the
university and the AEAs will benefit teachers by providing academically rigorous
instruction in both computer science and educational pedagogy, as well as a
much-needed, peer based, localized, support network. The results of the
partnership will include an increased number of highly-qualified and state-
endorsed computer science teachers and a new professional development model that
could be adapted for use by educational organizations around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the scale-up of previous work
conducted by the University of Northern Iowa Partnership for CS Teacher
Preparation. In order to meet the goals of this award, the partnership will work
with approximately 18 AEA personnel and 150 classroom teachers participating in
two phases over a roughly three-year period. Each of these participants will
complete the coursework necessary to earn Iowa's CS endorsement and, in the
process, become well-prepared to teach a high-quality introductory programming
or CS Principles course. Participants will become familiar with engagement
practices and culturally-responsive computing through modeling and explicit
instruction. Partner district support personnel will attend a Broadening
Participation workshop to learn about biases and to formulate district goals for
building a more positive school environment. By the end of the project, six of
the nine state AEAs will have hosted a cadre of participants, and the RPP will
be well-positioned to launch a truly statewide network for CS Teacher
Preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.