* 2219221
* PFI (MCA): Rapid Ultrasensitive Biomarker Detection Chip for Early Lung Cancer Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Donglei Emma Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2025
* USD 516,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Mid-Career Advancement (PFI (MCA)) project is in the diagnosis of early stage
cancers. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancerous death, resulting in
numerous lives lost every day due to the challenges in its early stage diagnosis
and a five-year survival rate of only ~18%. To address these challenges, the
project seeks to develop a robust and portable cancer biomarker detection
platform for early stage cancer detection. This research may improve the
intervention and prognosis for lung cancer patients and impact the diagnosis of
various diseases at early stages. The project will also foster a training ground
for the next generation innovators and entrepreneurs by providing the knowledge
and training in entrepreneurship, technological transfer, and commercialization
to students. This project could expand the biotechnology industry and cement US
global leadership in cancer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
prototype an innovative on-chip sensing platform to overcome challenges in
biosensing, i.e., the difficulty in detecting biomolecules with both high speed
and ultrasensitivity in aqueous samples. Progress in nanotechnologies has
advanced nanosensors with single-molecule sensitivity. Nevertheless, the
nanoscale features that endow ultrahigh sensitivity in biodetection inevitably
result in a long detection times due to the low probabilities of capturing
biomolecules on their small sensing surfaces. This challenge has hindered the
real world nanosensing applications, such as in early stage diagnosis and
intervention of cancers. If diagnosed early, the survival rate of lung cancer
patients can be significantly improved. Here, the team will leverage a recently
discovered detection mechanism, whereby biomolecules aggregate only at the point
of laser illuminated optoelectric nanostructures, overcoming the aforementioned
biosensing barriers. The project includes the design, fabrication, and
prototyping of an integrated on-chip platform. AIf successful, this project may
improve the detection limit of cancerous biomarkers by several orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.