* 2219731
* CISE-MSI: DP: III: Training and Partnership in Data Science for Advancing Research in Biomolecular Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Cathy Wu, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 584,970.00

Detecting and identifying biomolecules such as proteins, viruses, carbohydrates,
and DNAs are critical to diverse disciplines such as medical diagnosis, forensic
analysis, water quality monitoring, food safety, drug delivery, and materials
design. Data measured from diverse spectroscopic techniques provide valuable
insights into these biomolecules. Molecular compounds -designed or natural- are
made of multiple and diverse biomolecules, and are challenging to investigate,
including analysis of their convoluted data. For this purpose, data science,
which combine statistical and computational methods, can be integrated to not
only analyze large complex data but also generate new insights from the data.
This project demonstrates the integration of data science and machine learning
approaches with spectroscopic measurements on selected biomolecules. The
overarching goal is to develop an automatic data-driven model for efficient
detection and accurate identification of biomolecules, which can be used for
accelerating discovery and designing novel technologies. The project opens a
range of opportunities to train students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM fields in interdisciplinary research at the interface
between data science, biochemistry, and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on building initially-spectral databases starting with
carbohydrate biomolecules and on designing machine learning models to be trained
and tested with multimodal and heterogeneous spectral data of these
biomolecules. It has dual objectives: 1) to demonstrate interpretable and
trustworthy physics-informed machine-learning models that can improve efficiency
and accuracy of biomolecular detection; and 2) to contribute to the foundational
questions in knowledge-based machine learning when handling mixed or sparse
data, augmenting one-dimensional data in limited databases, and understanding
the relational intricacies between noisy data and accuracies of training and
testing. This project is built on collaborative efforts between two HBCUs
(Delaware State University and the University of Virgin Islands) and the
University of Delaware, a research institution. Under a domain-guided data life
science framework, the participating students are exposed to a full cycle of
data science approaches including collecting data, preprocessing and analyzing
the data, designing machine learning models, training and testing the models,
validating the models, and providing informed feedbacks about the data and the
models. Once demonstrated, the scope of the approach will be extended to cover
other biomolecules such as proteins and complex systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by MSI and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.