* 2219695
* The multidimensionality of forest carbon cycling and structure in response to disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Christopher Gough, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 129,841.00

Forests provide food, fuel, timber, recreation and wildlife habitat, and store
large amounts of carbon. However, the sustainability of these valuable goods and
services is threatened by insects that defoliate and often kill trees. This
project uses field experiments and computer models to investigate how forest
growth and carbon uptake are affected by variable levels of tree mortality
caused by wood boring insects. Specifically, the research studies whether
initial changes in forest growth and carbon sequestration following disturbance
can be used to predict longer-term responses at timescales meaningful to forest
and land managers; what biological and physical characteristics enable forests
to recover from disturbance; and what information needs to be included in
computer models to predict how forests will respond to insect pests. The project
engages a diverse team of undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, and graduate
students, providing training that is applicable to careers in forest and
conservation management, environmental science and policy, data management, and
computer coding and model simulation. The project also produces freely available
educational resources for upper-level college instructors, professional
ecologists, land managers, and commercial foresters. Moreover, project data and
the field experiment itself- located at a field station in Michigan- serve as
openly shared resources for onsite education and research training for hundreds
of students, researchers, educators, and community members annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the Forest Resilience
Threshold Experiment (FoRTE), which was established in 2018 at the University of
Michigan Biological Station to examine how and why forest carbon cycling
processes will respond to a range of disturbance severities caused by insect
pests and pathogens. The replicated, 8-hectare experiment includes zero
(control), 45%, 65%, and 85 % levels of gross defoliation and incorporates two
disturbance types. Leveraging FoRTE’s expansive axes of disturbance severity,
site productivity, and vegetation composition, the project uses observations to
ask: (1) Do trade-offs exist between dimensions of carbon cycling stability, (2)
To what extent are forest composition, structure, and net primary production
linked during disturbance response, and (3) What degree of model complexity is
required to simulate observed carbon cycling stability across the full
disturbance-response cycle? This study experimentally and computationally
simulates the carbon cycling consequences of newly emerging disturbance
patterns. The experiment adopts a novel stability theoretical framework,
previously applied almost exclusively to populations and communities, to assess
carbon cycling responses to disturbance severity and
type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.