* 2219043
* USA Sky Partners: Expanding Access to Authentic Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lisa Storrie-Lombardi, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 234,639.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). An important mission for professional astronomers is to provide an
authentic astronomy research experience for US undergraduates, where they
complete the program feeling that the ability to do science is part of their
identity. To achieve this, Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO) will create a new USA
Sky Partners program where LCO provides access to their global robotic telescope
network and partners with US colleges and universities that reach students from
groups that are underrepresented in astronomy. The goals of this pilot project
are three-fold: (1) Fully develop partnerships between LCO, Occidental College,
and the University of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras that provide real astronomy
research experiences for undergraduates at a Hispanic-serving university and a
small liberal arts college in Los Angeles with a diverse student population. (2)
Develop the online video and written materials required to implement the pilot
student research program, in English and Spanish, and run the program at both
university partner institutions. (3) Recruit additional institutional partners
that reach underserved communities to join the partnership for a future proposal
for a long-term full partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student research
program is an eight-week workshop that can be done separately or in conjunction
with an introductory astronomy course. The observing experience utilizes the ten
0.4m telescopes in the LCO network. All that is required to observe with LCO
telescopes is a computer with access to the internet and an allocation of
telescope time. Observations are requested from a web browser and pipeline
processed data are returned via the web-based archive when the observations are
complete. The observatory scheduling is automated. With ten 0.4m telescopes
dedicated almost entirely to education, students have a high success rate in
obtaining observations, regardless of where they are physically located.
Students will select targets to study, learn how to use LCO telescopes, write a
brief proposal for their target, make observations, and learn how to write a
paper as part of their research process. This Seminar has been developed and
successfully used in high school environments as part of LCO’s Global Sky
Partners program. The seminar adapted for undergraduates will give students
success doing science even if they have no previous experience or access to
telescope facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.