* 2219008
* PFI (MCA):  Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Remote Sensing of the Arctic
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christopher Richards, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Mid-Career Advancement (PFI (MCA)) project is to increase the capabilities of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for remote sensing in the Arctic so that
vegetation data, which can provide valuable insights into Arctic warming and
global climate change, can be collected more readily. The proposed research may
result in the development of a flight control method for autonomously flying
UAVs over a heterogeneous, vegetation-populated terrain in search of select
plant species, and a control method that enables flight in the challenging wind
conditions often found in the Arctic. Outcomes from the research seek to benefit
the study of the Arctic by increasing opportunities for UAV remote sensor
campaigns and their efficient execution. Integrated research, teaching, and
outreach activities will be carried out through affiliations with university
institutes that foster multidisciplinary collaboration among engineering and
other STEM departments, and through collaborations with scholarly organizations
that serve currently underrepresented populations. Engagement with industry and
federal research agencies will allow technology commercialization for UAV-based
Arctic research, agricultural monitoring, and wildfire fighting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to advance UAV capabilities by
providing solutions to practical problems that limit their use for remote
sensing of the Arctic. Propellers used to control UAV flight are limited in the
forces they can produce. If the vehicleâ€™s flight control system requests forces
that exceed such limits, undesirable flight performance that jeopardizes the
mission may occur. Therefore, deployment of UAVs in the Arctic is currently
restricted to infrequent periods when mild winds exist. Likewise, remote sensing
by UAV is limited by finite battery life and the need for consistent
illumination periods. The goals of the project are to increase periods for
remote sensing by providing stable UAV flight during stronger wind conditions
and to enable UAVs to collect plant species data autonomously and efficiently.
Research objectives include: (a) design of a novel anti-windup compensator that
mitigates the effects of propeller saturation enabling UAV operation in
challenging wind conditions, (b) development of a reinforcement learning-based
autonomous guidance method that searches for specific plant species located in
heterogeneous vegetation terrains, and (c) experimental validation of the flight
control system with an UAV operating in an Arctic analogous
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.