* 2219533
* Testing Strategies and Impacts of Communicating the Value of Museum Biological Collections
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Adrian Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,853.00

Museums are information centers whose mission is to serve and empower society
through conserving nature. Museum biological collections provide snapshots of
the past to answer questions about the present and future in ways that were not
previously imagined. These questions vary widely in both topic and relevancy to
the lives of the members of society museums serve. However, the local reach of
museums is limited to those who attend in-person to view the small number of
displayed specimens, while the remainder of the specimens are housed behind
closed doors or even offsite. Funds for the preservation of these collections
have been decreasing, putting these collections, their staff, and scientific
discoveries at risk. Therefore, determining how museums can use online digital
media to expand their reach and how those communication strategies impact
perceptions is essential to understand how these largely publicly funded
institutions can safeguard their future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
use three related studies to understand and develop evidence-based communication
practices for improving public perception of museum biological collections and
their associated research. First, a content analysis of the posts of prominent
museums on multiple social media platforms will be used to examine how museums
use social media to communicate their role in research that benefits society.
Second, a survey of U.S. adults will be conducted to assess whether scientists-
as-communicators are more or less effective than third-party communicators when
presenting research summaries in video format and whether that effectiveness is
consistent across research topics that vary in relevancy to an audience’s daily
life. And third, a survey of U.S. adults will be conducted to assess whether
repeated exposure to museum collection-based research summaries in video format
increases support for collection infrastructure funding and whether that support
is moderated by whether the scientist themself is the
communicator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.