* 2219897
* Collaborative Research: Tidally rectified flows in multiple inlet/lagoon systems: Consequences for transport and residence times
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Chant, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 508,608.00

Shallow, bathymetrically-complex lagoon systems comprise a significant fraction
of the worldâ€™s coastlines, including those of the United States. These systems
are highly impacted by human activity, yet are vitally important regions for
commercial and recreational fisheries, inland water transportation, buffering
coastal communities from storms, and are home to sensitive coastal benthic and
marsh ecosystems. This project would study lagoon systems with multiple inlets,
using idealized and realistic numerical modeling studies combined with field
observations. The work would focus on Barnegat Bay and adjacent lagoons in NJ to
test the hypothesis that tidally-driven residual motions at inlets are the
dominant mechanism controlling circulation, residence time and, consequently
water quality of lagoons. Residence time, water quality and overall ecological
health of lagoons are highly sensitive to net transport at lagoon inlets and are
likely sensitive to inlet modification. The study would seek to characterize
this sensitivity and provide a dynamical framework for understanding its
ecological and societal implications. The project includes support for the
professional development of two graduate students and will provide research
opportunities and experiential STEM education for undergraduate students.
Outreach presentations will be given to organizations, marine extension and
public programs concerned with lagoon conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will use idealized and realistic modeling with ROMS, combined with
observations to quantify both Stokes and Eulerian transport, which sum to the
Lagrangian transport through the multiple inlets in the representative Barnegat
Bay, NJ system. While the most detailed estimates of these transport quantities
will be obtained from model output, estimates from observational data will
provide key insights into the modulation of these terms by tidal amplitude,
variability of subtidal sea level, and tidal period processes such as
channel/shoal exchange and trapping. Three main hypotheses will be addressed:
H1. Mean circulation and net transport at connections between the lagoon and the
coastal ocean (inlets) are dominated by tidally-rectified flows. H2. The
presence of multiple inlets significantly influences net transport between the
lagoon and the coastal ocean as well as the circulation and residence time
within the lagoon. H3. Buoyancy inputs and storms modify tidal rectification
(and thus net transport) at inlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.