* 2219147
* OPP-PRF: The Marginal Ocean Zone: Definition, Dynamics, and Implications for a Changing Arctic Ocean through Model-Observation Synthesis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Astrid Pacini, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 213,300.00

The Arctic Ocean is one of the most rapidly changing regions of the World Ocean.
Specifically, the Seasonal Ice Zone, which is the area covered by sea ice in
winter but not in summer, is growing. As this area grows, the physical processes
that influence ocean motion and ocean properties like temperature, salinity, and
stratification are changing. These changing physics influence net primary
productivity, air-sea gas exchange, as well as processes up the trophic levels,
including impacting native communities, local fisheries, and global shipping
patterns. However, it is challenging to take measurements of the ocean in this
region. This research will combine all available data to determine the important
physical processes responsible for ocean motion and properties in the Seasonal
Ice Zone. This will advance current understanding of ocean-dynamics in the
vicinity of the ice edge, and thus will influence current understanding on a
host of interdisciplinary topics related to Arctic Ocean and sea ice
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant work has been done to characterize a
sub-region of the Seasonal Ice Zone known as the Marginal Ice Zone, which
represents the region within the 15% ice concentration contour. This definition,
however, is ice-centric. This project will approach the question from an ocean
perspective. The researchers hypothesize the existence of the Marginal Ocean
Zone, a region of the ocean which exhibits distinct dynamics from both the
Marginal Ice Zone and the open ocean. This research will characterize the
hydrographic conditions across spatio-temporal scales in this region of the
Arctic Ocean. Specifically, the project will synthesize all available data to
derive a universal definition for the Marginal Ocean Zone based on ocean
properties like temperature, salinity, and stratification. This project will
then quantify the seasonal evolution of properties within the Marginal Ocean
Zone as well as the regional differences in these dynamics. Subsequently, the
project will quantify the importance of synoptic scale processes and atmospheric
forcing on the mixed layer dynamics, as well as on the heat and freshwater
content of the Marginal Ocean Zone. Long-term changes within the Arctic Ocean
are influencing circulation patterns, dynamics, and climatic-scale feedbacks.
This work will diagnose, quantify, and explain long-term changes within the
Marginal Ocean Zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.