* 2219972
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the contribution of small eukaryotes to nitrate-based new production in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Angelicque White, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 11/30/2025
* USD 297,369.00

The subtropical oceans in the middle latitudes are “ocean deserts,” where there
are relatively little nutrients in the surface waters. Nitrogen is an important
nutrient that is particularly scarce. Nitrogen in the ocean occurs as nitrate or
ammonium. As a result of limited nutrients in the subtropical gyres, marine
algae or phytoplankton there grow slowly. In deeper waters below the surface,
there are more nutrients. However, it is not well understood how phytoplankton
living in surface waters in summer can access the nutrients in the deeper
waters. This award will investigate how phytoplankton access subsurface nitrogen
at Station ALOHA in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre (NPSG). Phytoplankton
will be sorted by size and pigment composition. The researchers will make
measurements of the stable nitrogen isotope ratios of sorted populations and
determine where phytoplankton are getting the needed nutrients, either nitrate
from the subsurface or ammonium from the surface waters. The researchers will
use metatranscriptomic analysis to investigate the physiological pathways that
different phytoplankton populations use to take up the needed nitrogen. The
metatranscriptomic analysis involves analyzing the RNA sequences transcribed by
plankton, comparing the sequence to documented gene sequences and mapped to
documented physiological pathways. The researchers will assess which taxonomic
groups are using nitrate versus recycled sources of nitrogen. They will test the
hypothesis that eukaryotic phytoplankton primarily use nitrate whereas
prokaryotic phytoplankton mostly use recycled sources of nitrogen. With these
measurements, the researchers will help the society anticipate climate impacts
on the productivity of subtropical gyres. This project will support two graduate
students and a post-doctoral researcher in laboratory and ship-based research.
Principal Investigator (PI) Granger in Connecticut will engage high school
students and sponsor graduate students from underrepresented groups via AGU’s
Bridge Partner Program. PI Marchetti in North Carolina will sponsor the
internship of a high school student from a local minority county. PI White in
Hawaii will engage with Hawaiian high school students though the Indigenous
Partnership for Ocean Monitoring program to mentor and teach essential research
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers of this project will investigate
the drivers of productivity at station ALOHA in NPSG. They will exploit a high-
sensitivity method for natural abundance N isotope analysis (the ‘persulphate-
denitrifier’ method) to evaluate the extent to which taxonomically distinct
components of the plankton sorted by flow cytometry rely on nitrate vs. reduced
N sources in surface waters. We will also query physiological nitrogen pathways
of the plankton with metatranscriptomic analysis to infer which clades are
reliant on nitrate. We will quantify the fraction of primary production fueled
by nitrate to characterize seasonal trends and explore potential mechanisms of
nitrate supply to the euphotic zone and its mixed layer. The work proposed here
will resolve the relative contribution of nitrate mixed from the ocean interior
to surface production at station ALOHA, to better define seasonal dynamics of
the biological pump in the NPSG. We will identify plankton groups that
contribute dominantly to nitrate-based production and resolve eco-physiological
strategies that confer fitness in a severely N-limited environment. Seasonal
trends in the contributions of nitrate to total nitrogen production will be
evaluated considering incident hydrography to infer potential mechanisms of
nitrate supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.