* 2219336
* Conference: UConn Sports Analytics Symposium: Engaging Students into Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jun Yan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 16,662.00

The UConn Sports Analytics Symposium (UCSAS) will be held on Saturday, Oct. 8,
2022, and annually on the second Saturday in October 2023-2024. The symposium is
designed to attract more students outside of traditional data science programs
into data science through sports analytics. Unlike other sports analytics
conferences that are often not accessible to students due to the technical
level, cost, or space limitations, the UCSAS has a unique focus on pre-college,
undergraduate, and graduate students who are interested in sports analytics as
well as data science in general. The event aims to showcase sports analytics to
students at an accessible level, train students in data analytics with
application to sports data, and foster collaboration between academic programs
and the sports industry. The program features student-friendly keynote
presentations, student poster competitions, training workshops at different
levels, data challenges, and career panels, with every component highlighting
students' needs. All outcomes from the event are permanently archived with open
access. The UCSAS accelerates the data literacy and "citizen data science"
movements from society's perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCSAS has great
potential to advance knowledge in sports analytics and the general data science
field. It has been well-documented that, as an interface between sports and data
science, sports analytics is extremely powerful in engaging students from
different backgrounds to learn more about and become good at data science. The
UCSAS brings students with a common interest in analytics together under a data
science umbrella. It facilitates the advancement of understanding about sports
analytics across the analytics and data science worlds. The student poster
competition and the data challenge will stimulate creative and potentially
transformative contributions to sports analytics. The training workshops
tailored to different levels offer an effective jump-start model for engaging
students in data science. Through these activities, the UCSAS fosters
partnerships between academia and the sports industry. The educational
materials, video recordings of the keynote presentations, poster submissions,
and data challenge submissions will be widely disseminated via social media and
GitHub repository in addition to standard channels such as websites and journal
publications. More details about the symposium can be found at:
https://uconnsportsanalytics.org/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.