* 2219760
* Collaborative Research: Toward universal quantum computing with heterogeneously integrated quantum optical frequency combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 359,999.00

Quantum computing is a disruptive technology capable of solving classically
intractable problems, such as factoring integers and breaking encryption codes,
and performing quantum simulations of major societal impact such as nitrogen
fixation for fertilizer production, carbon dioxide fixation for carbon
sequestration, and unlocking room-temperature superconductivity. The route
toward full scale quantum computing faces daunting challenges. One approach away
from the dominant quantum gate approach is measurement-based quantum computing,
and, in particular, one-way quantum computing using cluster states. This
approach circumvents the requirement of low decoherence and memories for
scalability. Our approach is purely based on using photons, operates at room-
temperature, and uses a wavelength compatible to present optical communication
networks. Large two-dimensional cluster states will be produced using quantum
optical frequency combs. These cluster states are deterministically and
unconditionally generated and scale exponentially. The cluster states are based
on continuous-variable quantum optical systems and are encoded over quantum
fields. The key objective of this proposal is to demonstrate the generation of
continuous variable cluster states on chip and to demonstrate the preparation of
resource states called Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill (GKP) grid states, which are
key to error correction and to universal quantum computing. To realize the chip-
scale quantum state generator, hetero-integration of different platform
technology on a silicon board will be used. In particular, a high quality factor
(Q) nanocavity using gratings will be realized on the SiN/SiO2 platform and will
produce an optical frequency comb. A narrow linewidth semiconductor laser based
on a III-V gain chip coupled to a high Q cavity will be mounted on the Si
platform. Finally, a thin-film LiNbO3 modulator for high speed modulation will
be heterogeneously integrated on the Si platform. A broad impact plan will be
set-up to educate high school students in quantum physics, train under-
represented groups in quantum engineering, and educate graduate students for
success in engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A realistic path to
quantum computation requires the implementation of standalone chipscale systems
to create and manipulate quantum states of light. These systems should ideally
operate at room temperature and at wavelengths compatible with those of
classical optical communication systems. In this project, a novel integrated
platform to realize some basic quantum protocols with high efficiency and
fidelity will be demonstrated. The proposal aims at the first realization of
cluster states, cat states, and Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill (GKP) states on a
photonic chip, with the overarching goal of realizing all the required building
blocks for a fault-tolerant photonic quantum computer. Measurement based quantum
computation primitives, namely, feedforward on cluster states informed by field-
homodyne and photon-number-resolving (PNR) detection will be realized. The
experimental platform is based on one optical parametric oscillator and one
electro-optic phase modulator integrated on Si. The core of the envisioned
quantum system is an integrated millimeter-size grating Fabry-Perot resonator,
featuring a free-spectral range of a few tens of GHz and a Q-factor better than
a million at 1550 nm. The Si3N4 microresonator is pumped by a co-integrated
narrow-linewidth single mode laser, and owing to the built-in Kerr nonlinearity
of the medium, outputs quantum-correlated photons distributed in the spectral
modes of an optical frequency comb. High-efficiency optical coupling from chip
to optical fibers will be used to interface with photodetection. The first
experimental objective is to demonstrate large-scale cluster state generation on
chip. The second experimental objective is to demonstrate non-Gaussian (e.g. cat
and GKP) state generation on chip, using PNR detection measurements. The full
spectrum of possibilities of this quantum photonic chip will also be studied in
microresonator optical parametric oscillators operated above
threshold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.