* 2219492
* Collaborative Research: CAFECS: AP CSP Access for All
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Lucia Dettori, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 937,454.00

The Learning Partnership, DePaul University, and Chicago Public Schools (CPS)
will collaborate to increase access to and success in AP Computer Science
Principles (AP CSP), for African American and Hispanic students, who are
traditionally underrepresented in computer science and specifically in AP
computer science courses. Each year, about 14,000 students in CPS graduate with
one year of high school computer science credit in fulfillment of the district’s
computer science graduation requirement. This accomplishment was the culmination
of over a decade of work by the Chicago Alliance For Equity in Computer Science
research-practice partnership, which includes CPS teachers, CPS administrators,
university computer science faculty, and educational researchers. However,
access to advanced computer science courses, specifically AP CSP, remains
limited, resulting in significant racial and ethnic disparities in access and
outcomes. With a specific focus on African American and Hispanic students, the
goal of this project is to ensure that every CPS high school offers AP CSP, that
enrollment in the course reflects the demographics of each school, and success
on the AP exam is equivalent by race, ethnicity, and gender. In addition to
addressing inequity in computer science education and supporting teacher
professional development, the project will ultimately lead to the development of
a stronger and more diverse computing workforce that will enhance U.S. economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide systems of
support to address the challenges inherent in preparing all students and
teachers for success in AP CSP and ensure the course is taught using culturally
responsive pedagogy. An increasing proportion of new AP CSP teachers do not have
a deep background in computer science, and this project will provide content-
specific professional development and ongoing coaching. Teachers will be
scaffolded in implementing culturally responsive teaching practices through the
Exploring Connections to Computer Science activities and professional
development program. These practices are especially important for addressing
gaps in course outcomes experienced by students of color who are the focus of
this project. The project will reach approximately 75 teachers, which would be
sufficient to have at least one CSP teacher in every school that does not
currently offer AP CSP. As a result, the number of students taking AP CPS should
double from roughly 2000 to 4000 students within three years with the increase
coming primarily from students at neighborhood schools who identify as Black or
Hispanic. The project will engage in hypothesis-driven research to identify
factors that predict, facilitate or hinder implementation of AP CSP in
neighborhood schools and create a framework of strategies to support the
district-wide effort to expand AP CSP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.