* 2219826
* I-Corps: Machine for Decentralized Recycling of Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Siamak Farhad, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a machine designed to address the lithium-ion batteries recycling
needs in an economically feasible way so that it directly benefits the society
in numerous ways. It reduces the environmental impacts and the associate health
risk for human and wildlife that may be caused due to landfilling these
batteries. If lithium-ion batteries are landfilled, society will encounter
environmental issues such as land and water contaminations and fire and
explosion of landfilled batteries. It also reduces the needs to extract rare
elements such as lithium and cobalt from mines to save the mines for next
generations. Lastly, it improves the United Statesâ€™ national security because
recycling can keep the major elements or materials of lithium-ion batteries in
the closed-loop of manufacturing in the country and reduces the dependency of
the United States to import these elements or materials from other countries.
This project will generate new jobs for labors and engineers in the United
States and opens job opportunities for persons with disabilities since the
process/machine can be automated. This work will increase the economic
competitiveness of the United States compared to China and Europe, which are
currently the pioneer in recycling lithium-ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a recycling machine based on our two fundamental research activities, one for
effective separation of electrode materials from current collectors, and one for
efficient separation of anode and cathode active materials from each other. The
key point is that the separations are performed without causing any damage to
the morphology and composition of the anode and cathode active materials so that
the separated materials can be directly regenerated and returned to the battery
manufacturing process. This increases the profit from the obtained recycled
materials from the proposed machine. These two key separation processes enable
us to (1) offer a potentially small machine for recycling lithium-ion batteries,
and (2) recycle all types of lithium-ion batteries with different chemistries
and manufacturers with one machine. However, the machine operating parameters
should be adjusted for each type of battery. Some of the value propositions of
this machine are (1) it can be deployed fast in any location, (2) it reduces the
cost of spent lithium-ion batteries transportation, handling and storage, (3) it
improves the recycling efficiency, and (4) it produces more valuable outputs
from spent lithium-ion batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.