* 2219947
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating the Pace of Paleotropical Environmental and Ecological Change During Earth’s Previous Icehouse
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Randall Irmis, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 116,693.00

Sedimentary rocks in southeastern Utah are key to understanding dramatic climate
change that occurred 304-280 million years ago during the transition from the
Carboniferous to Permian periods (C–P). Cutler Group rocks have been
geologically mapped for over 150 years, but their unique fossil
assemblages—including charismatic sail-backed mammal ancestors (Dimetrodon) and
the first large-bodied vertebrate herbivores (diadectids)—have only recently
begun to be placed into a global context. This project will illuminate the
fundamental climate processes that influenced terrestrial ecology in the western
Pangean supercontinent, and provide new baselines for studying the impacts of
climate change on terrestrial cold-blooded communities at low
latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals combine paleontology, isotope
geochemistry, and magnetostratigraphy: Aim 1: Identify the stratigraphic
position of the C–P boundary and correlate the Cutler Group to the geologic
timescale. Aim 2: Determine the pace and intensity of C–P climate drying in the
region and its relationship to the Late Paleozoic Ice Age maximum. Aim 3:
Elucidate the patterns and processes driving the evolution of paleoequatorial
C–P vertebrate communities. Grant activities also support rural outreach with
educational partners who largely serve native communities, including Whitehorse
High School and the Friends of Cedar Mesa Bears Ears Education Center. The PIs
will run a summer field experience with Jemez Pueblo students to learn about the
geology of the Bears Ears region; conduct K–12 teacher workshops and community
outreach events at community centers and libraries in San Juan County, Utah; and
create a special exhibit and produce a video for the Bears Ears Education
Center. The research will also be shared at the Natural History Museum of Utah’s
‘DinoFest’ and ‘Behind the Scenes’ in Salt Lake City, and at its sister ‘Dino
Fest’ at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.