* 2219610
* Tailoring and probing electronic/magnetic structure of engineered magnetic topological insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 472,826.00

Non-technical Abstract: Remarkable properties of topological materials, such as
ability to conduct electric current without dissipation, were first discovered
four decades ago, but only under extreme experimental conditions of nearly
absolute zero temperature and high magnetic field. &lt;br/&gt;It was
subsequently recognized that such a remarkable transport property is derived
from material “topology”. This recognition has launched the era of topological
quantum materials with the potential to realize the remarkable properties at a
much higher temperature without an external magnetic field. There are, however,
several technical challenges that need to be overcome before bringing such
technical promises to reality. This research program is set up to address some
of the most important materials science issues and to lay the foundations for
tailoring the new class of magnetic topological insulators using multi-layered
heterostructures. Educationally, the PI will create a new course beyond the
current curriculum to provide students with academic training so they can be
well-prepared to enter this new exciting research field of topological quantum
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: In magnetic topological
insulators (MTI), the incorporation of magnetism breaks the time reversal
symmetry and creates a Dirac mass gap in the otherwise massless surface states
of topological insulators (TI). In MTI remarkable transport properties such as
quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE) have been predicted and observed in
extrinsic MTI materials (i.e. TI with magnetic dopants). However, due to the
dopant disorder effect, the QAHE can be observed only at a very low temperature
(~ 30 mK). The newly emerged intrinsic MTI materials such as MnBi2Te4 (MBT)
offers an alternative platform by incorporating a stoichiometric magnetic layer
(MnTe) into the center of Bi2Te3. An ideal intrinsic MTI would be free of dopant
disorder, thus offering the possibility to observe QAHE up to the magnetic
transition temperature. Already several groups have reported observation of QAHE
at ~ 1K, significantly higher than that in extrinsic MTI, albeit still smaller
than the magnetic transition temperature (~ 20K). These earlier works have
stimulated intensive worldwide research work. However, several outstanding
issues remain unresolved. Meanwhile, efforts have been devoted to designing new
magnetic topological quantum materials beyond simple MBT and related compounds.
This project combines molecular beam epitaxy with in-situ scanning probe
microscopy to study artificially engineered MTI and MTI/TI heterostructures. The
object is three-fold: (a) controlling the formation of MTI and MTI/TI
heterostructure layer-by-layer with ultimate control in defect density and
chemical potential; (b) resolving key outstanding issues that challenge the
current understanding of the connection between the topological surface states
and the magnetic textures; (c) determining key designing parameters for
artificial engineering of topological properties using MTI/TI superlattices.
Educationally, the graduate students trained in this research program gain a
broad scientific perspective. Through the design of a special course in
topological quantum materials, the PI will significantly broaden
graduate/undergraduate education in contemporary condensed matter physic. The
program also broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.