* 2219294
* Analysis of Multi-Year Surface Current Mapping Data from HF Radar: Cross Validation of Submesoscale Divergence and Wind Stress Curl
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Paduan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 339,657.00

This project would collect, organize, and quality control a thirty-year record
of surface current mapping (radar) data along the U.S. west coast, encompassing
the California Current System (CCS). These data would then be paired with high-
resolution retrospective analysis of wind fields to validate the coincidences of
current and wind pulses. Such validation will enable the use of these products
to understand the effects of mountains and wind anomalies on coastal upwelling
circulation. The CCS comprises a critical, productive marine ecosystem supported
by nutrient supply from coastal upwelling, which displays mesoscale (~100 km)
and submesoscale (~10 km) filaments and eddies, as observed in satellite
imagery. Surface current maps are capable of resolving filaments and eddies at
much higher temporal and spatial resolution than with available satellite
imagery. High-resolution atmospheric circulation models provide even higher
resolution for surface wind stress, but they have lacked validation at the
appropriate temporal and spatial scales. If successful, the validation of
atmospheric circulation model results with the historical radar observations
will enable interpretation and location of critical habitats within the CCS. The
work itself will be conducted with the aid of graduate students at the Naval
Postgraduate School and the University of California Santa Cruz.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Since 1993, multiple operators have deployed CODAR-style HFR systems
along the U.S. West coast to measure surface currents, largely in support of
operational goals. Operators provided these data to the public in near-real-time
and with minimal quality control (QC), and were seldom funded for subsequent QC
or analyses. The PI is uniquely positioned to acquire these datasets from
multiple sources, and effectively QC them. The analysis plan to compare
divergences in the resulting dataset will rely on the PIs extensive experience
with divergence calculations and with comparison to wind stress curl estimates
for the same period from a high resolution numerical model. The model to be used
is the Coupled Ocean/Atmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System (COAMPS), a state-
of-the art atmospheric circulation model developed by the Naval Research
Laboratory, with high resolution grids nested within a global forecasting system
to support regional requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.