* 2219488
* FRR: Collaborative Research: Collaborative Learning for Multi-robot Systems with Model-enabled Privacy Protection and Safety Supervision
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhaojian Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 303,618.00

This project provides a collaborative reinforcement learning approach for multi-
robot systems that ensures safety and is privacy-preserving. The approach
enables robots to continuously learn and adapt to dynamic situations within the
systems constraints. Moreover, this new approach ensures that the private
information of the participating robots, such as identity and position, can be
protected in collaborative tasks involving multiple participating robots. While
the approach for multi-robot learning is general, it has application to
intelligent transportation systems on roadways driven by autonomous and semi-
autonomous cars and trucks. A demonstration of this approach is to be conducted
in a full-scale test environment of a realistic urban
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines model-based safety with
model-free reinforcement learning to enable reinforcement learning's
applicability to safety-critical collaborative multi-robot systems. It will
first address single-robot reinforcement learning using a deep Koopman-based
safety regulation for general nonlinear robotic systems to guarantee safety
while retaining learning efficiency. The result will then be extended to multi-
robot collective reinforcement learning where robots are deployed in shared,
contested, or resource-constrained environments. By exploiting the inherent
dynamics of collaborative learning, the project will also enable dynamics-based
privacy protection for collected and shared data during learning. Different from
conventional privacy mechanisms that either trade accuracy for privacy or incur
heavy computation/communication overhead, the dynamics-enabled privacy approach
can maintain learning optimality while incurring little
computation/communication overhead. The algorithms and frameworks will be
evaluated using both numerical simulations and experiments with real connected
vehicles on real tracks. Results of the project will be used to enrich both
graduate and undergraduate courses. The PIs will also use existing various on-
going outreach opportunities to energize interests in STEM in K-12 students and
community college technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.