* 2219711
* Participant Support for 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Additive Manufacturing of Soft Materials; Ventura, California; 7-12 August 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Chenfeng Ke, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide registration aids to selected students and post-doctoral
scholars to attend a Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Additive Manufacturing
of Soft Materials at Ventura, California, 7-12 August 2022. The meeting will
include speakers from a variety of backgrounds in design, engineering, and
chemistry who carry out research related to additive manufacturing of such
materials as synthetic and natural polymers, biomacromolecules, hydrogels and
composites, etc. This GRC meeting will provide unique opportunities for
researchers with expertise in digital design, multiscale simulations,
manufacturing methods, materials synthesis, and performance engineering to
exchange scientific results and foster interdisciplinary discussions and
collaborations. The conference will incorporate established GRC programs such as
the Power Hour, which is a discussion hosted by speakers at the meeting from
underrepresented groups, aimed at helping students and post-doctoral scholars of
similar backgrounds learn how to cope with challenges in their careers, and for
all attendees to discuss ways to create a more inclusive environment for
scientific researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this GRC meeting is to
enable collaborations between scientists and engineers who study different
fundamental areas in additive manufacturing of soft materials, fostering not
only the development of new materials that are compatible with additive
manufacturing, but also the establishment of comprehensive structure-property-
processing relationships. The conference will attract a broad and diverse
audience of attendees to highlight the importance of curiosity-driven research
in the creation of new additive manufacturing technologies and materials. The
project will prioritize the support to graduate students and post-doctoral
scholars from underrepresented groups to attend this GRC meeting and help build
the additive manufacturing community by enabling these attendees to network with
potential employers or research advisors that will further their academic or
industrial careers. Supported participants will have an opportunity to present
posters in dedicated sessions where there are no other competing events, giving
them a chance to discuss their research with all other
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.