* 2219403
* Investigation of Dominant Controls on Electrical Properties of Granitic Regolith
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Qifei Niu, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 12/31/2025
* USD 377,392.00

The Earth's critical zone is the thin layer that extends from the top of the
bedrock to the canopy of trees. Despite its relatively thin thickness, the
critical zone plays a vital role in our society by providing life-sustaining
resources such as water and food. Knowing the internal structure of the
underground part of the critical zone is an important step that will help us
understand and predict its role in global water, energy, carbon, and nutrient
cycles. Geophysical imaging is used to "see" the unseen critical zone underneath
the surface. However, the acquired geophysical images need to be translated into
physical properties such as density, moisture content, and chemical composition
that are understandable and usable to other scientists. This project will
advance current understanding of the physical properties of geological materials
in the critical zones by using a combination of laboratory and geophysical field
investigations. The outcome of this project will help scientists better depict
the subsurface of this thin but invaluable critical zone layer of the Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the dominant controls on
the electrical properties of granitic regolith from a combination of field
sampling, laboratory experiments, and theoretical modeling. Granitic regolith
samples will be collected from the field, and their electrical properties, under
controlled hydraulic states, will be measured using a newly developed soil
column and a pressure plate extractor equipped with novel hydro-geophysical
probes. Experimental data will be used to quantify the relative influences of
hydraulic state, chemical weathering-induced textural change, and chemical
weathering-induced mineralogy alternation on the electrical properties of the
samples in both fully developed regolith and the weathering front. A new
electrical model integrating chemical weathering will be developed to describe
the entire regolith. This process-based understanding and modeling will enhance
our ability to see into the complex underground environment and monitor various
important subsurface processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Hydrologic Sciences, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Geobiology and Low Temperature geochemistry
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.