* 2219128
* Collaborative Research: Building a Team for EXtragalactic AStrophysics (TEXAS) in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michael Kesden, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 195,175.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). The foundations of a new partnership will be established between the
University of North Texas, an R1 Minority-Serving Institution / Hispanic-Serving
Institution, and the University of Texas at Dallas. During this pilot phase, the
team will establish a post-baccalaureate bridge program and organize monthly
colloquia and annual symposia to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in astronomy. Faculty will continue to develop outreach activities aimed
at encouraging and inspiring underrepresented and socio-economically
disadvantaged children and students to pursue degrees in astronomy and
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will provide research, education, and career
development opportunities for two underrepresented post-baccalaureate bridge
fellows per year, one at each institution. The team will mainly recruit bridge
fellows from the Dallas Fort Worth area, where many colleges are minority-
serving. The fellows will carry out exciting research in extragalactic
astrophysics. They will be carefully mentored by primary and secondary faculty
advisors and a graduate student. To better prepare for graduate school, the
bridge fellows will have the opportunity to take one undergraduate or graduate
class in astrophysics per semester. They will be assisted with their
applications to graduate school. The bridge fellows will meet regularly and
informally with all the TEXAS faculty to discuss their individual development
plans, drawn up at the start of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.