* 2219904
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Fast Algorithms and Novel Continuous-depth Graph Neural Networks for Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 125,000.00

In algorithmic threat detection, understanding the interactions of multivariate
time series is crucial. Graph neural networks (GNNs) with attention mechanisms
have proven effective in learning and predicting such time series. This project
aims to investigate GNNs for improved acceleration and accuracy. The research
will have broad applicability in fields such as Artificial Intelligence (AI),
traffic analysis, power systems, and health analytics. The project will provide
training opportunities and promote STEM education for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address three key challenges
in threat detection within multivariate time series: 1) maintaining accuracy
with deep GNNs, 2) training GNNs with limited data, and 3) reducing
computational costs in training and deploying deep GNNs with attention layers.
The research advances continuous-depth GNNs and efficient attention algorithms
based on the partial differential equation (PDE) theory. By leveraging the
continuous viewpoint of GNNs, the project aims to develop theoretically-grounded
and computationally efficient algorithms for accurate graph deep learning with
limited supervision. The project will focus on three research thrusts: Thrust A:
Bridging diffusion equation theory and GNN architecture design to develop a new
class of GNNs based on diffusion equations on graphs. These GNNs overcome over-
smoothing and reliably learn and predict with limited supervision. Thrust B:
Developing fast algorithms for GNN and attention training, testing, and
inference. Thrust C: Application of the new algorithms to anomaly detection and
software development, specifically in benchmark graph learning tasks and anomaly
detection in traffic flow, power distribution, and epidemic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.