* 2219825
* Collaborative Research: The Heated Wind- and Wave-Driven Ocean Surface Boundary Layer: Synergistic Analyses of Observations and Simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tobias Kukulka, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,900.00

The ocean's surface layer in contact with the atmosphere (or surface boundary
layer -- OSBL) controls climate, weather, and Earth system dynamics by coupling
the ocean and atmosphere through air-sea fluxes. Turbulence in the OSBL
distributes biogeochemical and ecologically relevant tracers that are floatable
(buoyant), such as plankton, bubbles, nutrients, oil, and microplastics. Wind
and waves drive OSBL turbulence in several critical ways: Wind-generated ocean
currents; wave-current interactions result in wind-aligned vortices, called
Langmuir turbulence (LT); and breaking waves inject turbulent kinetic energy to
the subsurface . The present conceptual and theoretical framework of wave-driven
OSBL dynamics is largely based on conditions for which surface heat fluxes are
assumed to be either neutral or conducive to overturn the surface water column.
However, diurnal heating or rain events prevent overturning and are omnipresent
over the world oceans. This project would use numerical simulations and analysis
of existing data sets to explore the effects of surface waves on the stratified
OSBL in surface heating conditions. The objectives of this study are to: (1)
identify limitations of traditional surface boundary assumptions due to wave
effects; (2) reveal the dynamics of wave effects on the heated OSBL, based on a
systematic analysis of momentum, buoyancy, and turbulent kinetic energy; (3)
integrate data and simulations to establish a turbulence regime diagram that
reveals the conditions in which Langmuir turbulence (LT) and breaking wave
effects affect OSBL dynamics; (4) perform an analysis of turbulence statistics
to assess and proposes improved ocean mixing parameterizations. These new
parameterizations will be applied to demonstrate the importance of wave effects
on the transport of buoyant tracers during diurnal OSBL heating. The work will
be relevant across many oceanographic and atmospheric sub-disciplines; support
an early career researcher; train graduate students; and engage in outreach.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will test specific hypotheses: (1)
wave effects on heated OSBL dynamics are significant and quantifiable through
observations and simulations; (2) LT is essential for OSBL mixing but
sufficiently strong heating generates favorable conditions for shear-driven
turbulence due to jets; (3) breaking waves prevent flow laminarization in strong
heating conditions; and (4) wave-driven mixing in heated OSBLs can be accurately
represented in improved turbulent mixing parameterizations to capture
accelerated jet transport and the deep submergence of buoyant tracers. The team
has access to several extensive observational data-sets, from which they will be
able to determine the presence of LT during surface heating and assess the
impact of LT on OSBL dynamics. Numerical experiments will be conducted using
Large Eddy Simulations (LES) which produce LT through vortex forcing and include
effects from breaking waves. Based on results from a combined data, LES modeling
analysis, physics-motivated and practical mixing parameterizations for the
heated OSBL will be developed, assessed, and applied to transport of buoyant
tracers, such as microplastics, plankton or oil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.