* 2219703
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: CPS: Cyber Resilient 5G Enabled Virtual Power System for Growing Power Demand
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ayush Goyal, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 110,851.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for clean power is on
the rise globally. The United States Department of Energy has projected that the
percentage of clean electricity generated by solar power will increase to 33% to
compete with the ever-growing electricity demand in the United States (US) by
the year 2050. To minimize the upgradation of the existing substation and source
infrastructure, it is favorable to integrate a solar energy source aided with
battery storage system at the distribution level. The combination of these
energy sources can be managed efficiently to behave like a "single utility-scale
power station”. This is the concept of Virtual Power Plant (VPP). This project
aims to address the implementation of cyber-secure pole mounted solar and
battery systems equipped with smart controllers to provide a framework to
remotely control and optimize the system to provide a solution to the growing
power demands. Furthermore, by employing and mentoring students from
underrepresented backgrounds in STEM, this project will aim at bridging the gap
in institutions across the US. It will train the next generation of scholars
from minority serving universities and marginalized communities in the fields of
cybersecurity, utilization of renewable resources, and machine learning to
address the pressing problems of this age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
aspect of the project aims to design and implement a 5G-enabled, cyber resilient
smart Artificial Intelligence (AI) based microinverter for a pole-mounted solar
power system with an energy storage system connected to the low-voltage
distribution networks to operate as a VPP. The data collected from the smart
microinverter will be used to train a predictive model to better manage the
system for improved performance. A secure and privacy-preserving 5G based
communication protocol will allow uninterrupted and secure data flow between the
photovoltaic and the battery system, the smart microinverter, and the
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. Hence, a security
framework based on Machine Learning (ML) models will be designed and it will be
based on prior cyber-attack datasets and will include continuous learning using
the data collected from smart controllers and the SCADA system used to detect
cyber-attacks and exploring mitigation solutions for 5G-enabled SCADA-controlled
VPP network system. Guidelines and procedures will be designed to help secure
the physical systems while ensuring privacy and data protection by alerting
administrators regarding security compromises of the VPP network to mitigate the
risks and attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.