* 2219216
* OPP-PRF: Demographic, Epidemiologic, and Social Consequences of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Taylor van Doren, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2025
* USD 315,337.00

This biocultural research explores the long-term demographic, epidemiologic, and
social consequences of the 1918 influenza pandemic in Alaska. Using mixed
methods, the research will evaluate pandemic impacts on life expectancy and
survivorship in a region where infections such as tuberculosis and other
respiratory diseases were prevalent. The proposed work will also investigate how
catastrophic mortality events affect health, demography, and society in the
decades after the pandemic ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a
mixed-methods approach, integrating quantitative demographic data with
qualitative archival records from 1910â€“1939. Demographic impacts will be
analyzed using multiple decrement life tables for major causes of death
(respiratory diseases, tuberculosis, cancer, cardiovascular disease,
gastrointestinal infections, etc.) to detect changes in life expectancy and
survivorship. Survival analyses will be performed to assess significant
differences among regions and between males and females. Finally, thematic
analyses of qualitative archival data will identify major themes related to the
pandemic, health, subsistence, and social organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the OPP Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship Program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the Arctic Social Sciences
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.