* 2219987
* Mixing in the Indonesian Throughflow: Analysis of Lagrangian observations of shear, watermass modification, and internal wave climates
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 482,834.00

Recent computer simulations have suggested the appearance of tides at the
interfaces between different layers (internal tides) in the basins and straits
of the Indonesian and Philippine Archipelagos (the Coral Triangle), with
subsequent mixing of the layers. These tides carry and transform waters from the
Pacific on their path to the Indian Ocean. Despite the computer-generated
results, direct measurements of internal tides and mixing have been scarce in
this region. This project will use Lagrangian (i.e., following the horizontal
flow pathway) measurements of temperature, salinity, and currents from
vertically profiling floats to investigate the levels of internal waves,
especially internal tides, and their role in transforming water properties
through vertical mixing. The project will use existing data from the Philippines
Archipelago, along with additional new float deployments in the separately
funded (NSF) "Measuring and Modeling the INdonesian Throughflow International
Experiment" (MINTIE). Results will be used to evaluate the internal tide and
circulation characteristics of computer models being used in the region. The
project will support an international (US–Australia) collaboration and
facilitate the broader use of electromagnetic velocity profiler data by
providing raw profiles and derived internal wave and mixing products through
national data centers. The project will furnish project material for
undergraduate interns in a new APL-UW program targeting
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing along the Pacific-to-Indian Ocean
throughflow pathway is a key water mass transformation step in the global
thermohaline circulation and has a first-order influence on sea-surface
temperature and air–sea interaction. The locations of predicted internal tide
generation are very likely to be mixing hot spots, but it remains an open
question where and how the radiated internal tide energy is dissipated. This
proposal will test the dominance of internal tides as mixing agents. The results
will be used to evaluate the internal tide and circulation characteristics of
numerical models being used to test throughflow sensitivity to the level and
distribution of mixing in the region. Project's goals include: 1) the
description of internal tide amplitude and radiation patterns in both the
Philippine and Indonesian Seas to verify sources, diurnal and semidiurnal
contributions (including the spring/neap cycle of each), and vertical wavenumber
structure; 2) constraining the parameters appropriate to internal tide
parameterizations, especially the fraction of energy radiated and the vertical
structure of the resulting dissipation; 3) evaluation of along-path water mass
transformation rates; 4) establishing a shared and publicly available database
for EM-APEX profiles, of use for research studies like this one and ocean state
and forecast systems assimilating stratification and velocity
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.