* 2219435
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-ED: SaTC: Increasing Cybersecurity Research Capacity and Support Services for Underrepresented Computer Science and Information Technology Majors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Gregory Simco, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 382,760.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Minority-Serving Institution (CISE-MSI)
Research Expansion Program, this project aims to develop a minimum of 6 new in-
person and online cybersecurity research activities and incorporate them into 6
existing courses in the College of Computing and Engineering, focusing on
improving the safety and security of critical computer applications, systems,
and data. Activities also will include seminars, events, and mentoring to
further engage and motivate students, especially Hispanics, Blacks, and women
who are underrepresented in STEM. The project will contribute important findings
to the body of knowledge in STEM higher education regarding the relationship
between academic success, research experiences, and supplemental support
activities. Increasing the success of students (especially those who are
underrepresented) to pursue high demand STEM fields will contribute to the
American innovation economy, and benefit society by increasing underrepresented
student graduation leading to increased employment diversity in cybersecurity-
related occupational fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team of
researchers will enhance the capacity of the College of Computing and
Engineering to engage undergraduate and graduate computing and information
technology Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Science/Master of Science dual
admission majors in the research enterprise by demonstrating the effectiveness
of expanding faculty use of technology systems and research-informed
instructional approaches designed to broaden the participation and success of
all students, including those who are underrepresented in STEM. Faculty will
develop instructional strategies that increase student access to advanced tools
and resources to bolster preparation for and participation in cybersecurity-
related research activities, focusing on building secure system architectures,
securing critical components, and examining attack patterns through simulations,
including use of artificial intelligence and data analytics. The body of
knowledge shared will advance opportunity equity, increasing US intellectual
capital for underrepresented students who have the potential to succeed in
greater numbers in the Hispanic-Serving Institution environment, bringing a new
perspective to conventional instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.