* 2219934
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Role of Ocean Dynamics in Atlantic Sea Surface Temperature Variations Using a Hierarchy of Coupled Models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sarah Larson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 207,801.00

Observations and models indicate that Atlantic sea surface temperatures (SSTs)
exhibit significant low- frequency (interannual to decadal) variability, and a
significant portion of these variations is related to internal variations of the
climate system. However, the origin of these internal Atlantic SST variations is
yet to be fully understood. This project will develop a hierarchy of coupled
models in which various oceanic processes are disabled; comparing model pairs
will enable the role of one-dimensional and three-dimensional ocean dynamics to
be separated robustly, as well the separate roles of wind and buoyancy forcing
in creating dynamical ocean variations. Much of the literature on decadal
Atlantic SST variations is focused rather narrowly on the Atlantic Multidecadal
Variability (AMV) and the role of the atmosphere and the ocean therein. Instead
of focusing on one specific mode (e,g., the AMV), this research will isolate the
modes of Atlantic SST variability related to specific oceanic processes,
throughout the Atlantic basin on multiple time scales. This variability impacts
regional and global climate, including temperatures across North America and
Europe, rainfall in the Sahel region, and frequency and intensity of Atlantic
hurricanes. Improved knowledge of low-frequency SST variability is essential for
efforts aimed at climate predictions on seasonal to decadal time scales.
Understanding the respective roles of atmospheric forcing and ocean dynamics in
setting SST anomalies has implications for predictability of SSTs, as higher
predictability is expected if ocean dynamics play a dominant role, and practical
questions regarding the importance of monitoring ocean currents as part of a
decadal prediction system. This project will also advance statistical methods
for analysis of climate data by providing codes for covariance discriminant
analysis to the broader community. This proposal will support a graduate student
at WHOI and a postdoctoral researcher at NC State for a year each. The proposal
will also support 2 female early career PIs. Lead PI Buckley is a Co-Leader of a
mentoring group for Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention
(MPOWIR). The PIs will also engage in K-12 Science-Technology- Engineering-Math
(STEM) education by serving as mentors and judges for the local public school
annual science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
disentangle the roles of atmospheric forcing and various ocean dynamical
processes in Atlantic SST variability and predictability on interannual-to-
decadal time scales. In order to achieve this goal, a hierarchy of coupled
models will be developed using the Community Earth System Model version 2
(CESM2). The model hierarchy will include ocean model components of varying
complexity and comparing model pairs will enable the team to quantitatively
determine the roles of specific aspects of ocean dynamics, including one-
dimensional processes (vertical mixing, interannual mixed layer depth
variations, entrainment) and three-dimensional ocean dynamics (including wind
and buoyancy-driven processes), on driving SST variability. A rigorous
statistical technique, called covariance discriminant analysis, will be applied
to diagnose the leading differences in Atlantic SST variance between model
pairs, thus elucidating the impact of specific ocean processes on Atlantic SST
variability. Additionally, a comparison of the predictability of Atlantic SST
between models in the hierarchy, will help elucidate the role of oceanic
processes in predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.