* 2219354
* CAREER: Enhancing the User Experience of Privacy Preference Specification
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Sameer Patil, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 695,971.00

The privacy settings provided by people's computers and mobile devices are the
primary means by which users engage in privacy management. The constant stream
of privacy related scandals and controversies highlight the challenges people
face in understanding and utilizing these privacy settings to achieve the levels
of privacy they desire. This research aims to overcome these challenges by
developing and testing techniques to enhance the people's experience with their
privacy preference specifications. The techniques to be developed and evaluated
include minimizing the effort and complexity of setting privacy preferences and
enabling user imitation of the privacy settings of trusted experts. These
technique could help non-experts find, understand, and utilize available privacy
settings appropriately and effectively, thus significantly aligning system
operation with people's privacy expectations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will conduct research into two strategies for increasing the usability
of privacy settings. The first is to prioritize and customize user privacy
settings by breaking down privacy management tasks into manageable segments for
users. The second is to leverage expert community support for individuals'
privacy protection. The project involves conducting user studies that inform the
design and development of each of the proposed techniques. These techniques
retain the human-in-the-loop and provide a useful complement to automated
predictive approaches. Findings from the research studies will be used to
implement mockups and prototypes that will be evaluated and iteratively refined
via pilots and field studies. The research activities will be integrated with
educational components using active learning principles. Student involvement in
courses and mentoring activities will generate insight related to the research
project and the results will be incorporated in course development and
curriculum design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.