* 2219906
* Superstructures, Miscibility Gaps and Superconductivity in Two-Band Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Theo Siegrist, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 494,733.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity, where a material
loses its resistivity, is an interesting and technologically important
phenomenon. For instance, medical diagnostic systems, MRIs, use superconductors
to generate the high magnetic fields needed, and power transmission lines may
use superconductors to transmit electrical power without losses. However,
superconductors are sensitive to magnetic fields, with superconductivity
suppressed if the magnetic field exceeds a material specific threshold. This
threshold is usually related to the temperature where a material becomes
superconducting, and represents an upper limit. Research into materials that
substantially exceed this limit indicates that the superconductivity in this
class of materials may be due to different effects than in the classic systems.
This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in
NSF’s Division of Materials Research, will allow researchers at Florida State
University to explore possible origins of this effect, and is expected to
provide insights into ways of improving the performance of superconductors. A
material consisting of niobium, palladium and sulfur or selenium is the focus of
this research, where its crystal structure and electrical resistivity depends on
the palladium content, and the magnetic field threshold exceeds the expected
value more than four-fold, making this compound well suited to study this
effect. In this particular compound, the electrons carrying the current
experience additional interactions that affect the superconductivity, and thus,
the magnetic field threshold. This research further develops the work force for
tomorrow’s technology needs, and advances the understanding of exotic
superconductivity. It combines the discovery and growth of materials with novel
structural features with an in-depth characterization of their properties, an
interdisciplinary activity that requires a variety of skills that are applicable
in many fields. Training students in the art and science of crystal growth and
characterization of materials at undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate levels
is instrumental to the next generation of scientists and engineers that will be
active in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional multi-band superconductivity has
been observed in ternary niobium-palladium and tantalum-palladium chalcogenides,
phases with variable palladium stoichiometry. The interactions between charge,
spin and lattice are at the core of these effects, giving rise to unconventional
physical behavior. This project, supported by the NSF’s Division of Materials
Research, focuses on the interplay of intercalation, miscibility gaps,
structural order, superstructure formation, and electronic behavior in Nb2PdxX5
(X=chalcogen) and related systems, where the palladium atoms can be considered
the intercalating atoms. Superconductivity in these phases is associated with a
record high ratio of the upper critical field Hc2 to the superconducting
transition temperature Tc. In these systems, the palladium atoms order in long-
range incommensurate superstructures for different palladium content, and induce
miscibility gaps, where certain palladium concentrations are not found. The
superconductivity is linked to the Pd stoichiometry and the development of these
superstructures, where the derived superconducting coherence length is of the
same order as the superstructure periodicity, suggesting an intimate coupling of
the two effects. Single crystals of Nb2PdxX5 will be grown and characterized
using X-ray diffraction to investigate the details of the superstructures, and
their correlation with the superconducting transition temperature and the upper
critical field Hc2. NSF supported National Facilities are crucial to this
research, where X-ray diffraction at synchrotron sources and high magnetic field
measurements will be carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.