* 2219735
* Investigation of measurement protected many-body quantum states
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Xiao Chen, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2025
* USD 315,074.00

NONTECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to discover and study emergent phenomena in
a monitored quantum system composed of quantum qubits. These qubits are quantum
analogues of classical bits and have two distinct states. They are the
fundamental blocks for quantum computing. When the qubits are coupled together,
quantum entanglement is generated, which links the qubits together even when
they are separated far away from each other. Quantum entanglement is a special
property of quantum mechanics, in this case involving multiple qubits and
provides the resource for various computational tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
a quantum system with many qubits, when they are coupled together, the entire
system can become a highly entangled quantum state after a long time. This
strong entanglement can lead to the quantum system thermalizing and reaching the
tranquil state of equilibrium. Recently, it was discovered that if these qubits
are further subject to continuous monitoring, the system may avoid
thermalization and exhibit interesting and unusual behavior.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team plan to investigate monitored many-qubit systems,
mainly from the perspective of quantum entanglement. In these systems, the
interaction can build up quantum entanglement among the qubits while
measurements can disentangle the system by leaking the information to the
environment. The competition among them can potentially lead to the creation of
novel phases with interesting entanglement structures. In this research, various
quantum circuits and numerical tools will be developed to efficiently simulate
quantum dynamics. In addition, analytical methods from statistical physics will
be used to analyze and classify these new phases. These research activities can
help advance our understanding of many-qubit quantum dynamics. The research is
interdisciplinary in nature and can significantly impact not only physics, and
materials research, but also quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s education and outreach activities are integrated with his
research. The focus will be on mentoring graduate and undergraduate students
interested in quantum physics. These students will be trained as a new
generation of researchers, so that they will be able to work across and between
disciplines in the future. The PI will also organize an exchange program and
focused seminar series for the students in his home college to convey the
importance of quantum physics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to study quantum phases in
a monitored quantum system. Different from a closed quantum system, which
typically thermalizes under unitary dynamics, the quantum system subject to
continuous monitoring is governed by non-unitary dynamics and may avoid
thermalization. Recently, it was discovered that by tuning the monitoring
strength, this system can undergo a continuous quantum phase transition from a
highly entangled volume law phase to a disentangled area law phase. Motivated by
this finding, this research intends to explore the non-thermal phases in non-
unitary dynamics from the perspective of quantum entanglement. Two classes of
circuits will be investigated: (1) Unitary circuits interspersed with repeated
measurement. Here the PI mainly focuses on the quantum automaton (QA) circuit
subject to repeated measurement. This circuit allows large scale numerical
simulation and provides a nice physical picture for the non-unitary dynamics. By
introducing various symmetries and constraints, the PI plans to analyze various
non-thermal volume law phases and critical phases in the non-unitary QA circuit.
The PI will also develop an effective theory to understand and classify these
phases. (2) Resource state subject to one layer of measurement. Here the PI
first prepares a two-dimensional resource state generated by a shallow circuit.
By monitoring the bulk degrees of freedom, the one-dimensional boundary state
can exhibit interesting entanglement structure by manipulating the bulk degrees
of freedom. The PI will study the underlying physics by developing various
numerical/analytical tools based on the previous study of random circuits. In
addition, this protocol can be potentially realized in the noisy near-term
devices due to the fact that the preparation of the resource state only requires
a shallow circuit. &lt;br/&gt;The educational activity focuses on mentoring
graduate/undergraduate students interested in quantum physics. These students
will be trained as a new generation of researchers, so that they will be able to
work across and between disciplines in the future. The PI will also organize an
exchange program and focused seminar series for the students in his home college
to convey the importance of quantum physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.