* 2219512
* Synthesis and Properties of Heterostructures Containing  Magnetic 2d Layers Not Found As Bulk Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2010 Nobel prize in physics was
awarded for the discovery of novel properties in monolayers of compounds with
two dimensional (2D) structures that are not present in the bulk compounds. The
resulting field of science - 2D materials and stacked layers of 2D materials
known as heterostructures - has exponentially expanded as theorists proposed new
exotic properties and experimentalists discovered new properties in monolayers
and heterostructures. Currently the preparation of heterostructures is done by
cleaving bulk materials to the monolayer limit and stacking them in designed
sequences. This approach is limited to constituents that are stable as bulk
compounds which are cleavable. New synthesis approaches are needed that enable
preparation of heterostructures at a wafer scale, that provide a wider selection
of constituent layers, and that provide control over the nanoarchitecture
(stacking sequence and thickness of constituent layers). In this project, with
the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Ceramics Programs in
the Division of Materials Research, Dr. David Johnson and his research group at
the University of Oregon, will develop new synthetic approaches to preparing
heterostructures containing 2D magnetic constituent layers with structures and
compositions that are not thermodynamically stable as isolated compounds. Three
different strategies, all of which use precursors with targeted composition
profiles that match that of the targeted heterostructures, are being tested.
This research program provides a broad technical background for graduate
students in deposition technologies, thin film characterization techniques, and
physical phenomena that occur in 2D heterostructures. This training enables them
to thrive in a variety of future careers (high tech industries, academia, or
national laboratories). Internships will provide an opportunity for graduate
students to “test drive” future careers while expanding their knowledge base,
leading to more productive researchers. Engaging undergraduate students in this
research enables them to apply principles learned in classes to solve research
challenges. Providing undergraduate research opportunities is a critical tool to
increase the number and diversity of students pursuing science as a career.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support
of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Ceramics Programs in the Division
of Materials Research, Dr. David Johnson and his research group at the
University of Oregon will develop synthetic approaches to preparing
heterostructures containing 2D magnetic constituent layers with structures and
compositions that are not thermodynamically stable as isolated compounds.
Synthetic targets include diselenides (TSe2) and rock salt structured
Pb2+nT1+mSe3+n+m layers, where T = Cr, Mn, Fe and Ni. Three synthesis
strategies, which use precursors with targeted local composition and
nanoarchitecture to control nucleation and growth, are being tested. One
strategy is to prepare a precursor designed such that one layer crystalizes as
2D sheets separated by amorphous layers of controlled composition. The resulting
2D form factor and composition of the interleaved amorphous layers as well as
the structure of adjacent crystalline layers will be used to control the
nucleation and growth of the metastable constituent layers. A second strategy
will be to seed nucleation of the desired structures by controlling local
composition. A third strategy will be to use charge transfer from an adjacent
layer to stabilize the targeted structures. The companion constituents in the
targeted heterostructures will be critical to controlling the reaction pathways
for each of these strategies, and our list of potential constituents include
piezoelectric (GeSe, SnSe), topological insulating (Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3),
semiconducting (PbSe, MoSe2, SnSe2) and/or superconducting (NbSe2) layers. A
rich collection of new materials with diverse and tunable emergent properties is
anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.