* 2219669
* Collaborative Research: The Dynamics of Near-Surface Velocity Structure in the Coastal Ocean from Observations and Models
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Gregory Gerbi, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 296,858.00

This study will concentrate on elucidating the processes that influence the top
part of the water column, from about 10 m depth to the air-water interface. This
layer is unresolved by different techniques that are used to measure ocean’s
near-surface currents. For example, high-frequency radars resolve the skin of
the water column but provides no information underneath. On the other hand,
current velocity profilers tend to miss the portion of the water column right
underneath the surface. This study will attempt to fill in the gap with the help
of a numerical model that resolves the hydrodynamics of the upper-ocean layer
and that considers the effects of surface waves. The study will also investigate
the influence on surface currents of different water densities within the
surface layer. The initial proposition is that wave action will tend to
homogenize the vertical distribution of near-surface currents. The project will
support one graduate student and undergraduate research opportunities at
University of Maine, and will develop outreach activities with US Coast Guard
Academy cadets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will study the dynamics of
flows in the upper meters of the coastal ocean, including the influence of
surface gravity waves and the modification to the dynamics by stratification and
buoyancy fluxes. This portion of the water column is rarely observed and limited
to short periods, which makes it difficult to distinguish the effects of winds
and waves on water velocity profiles. The approach of the study will be to pair
existing HF-radar measurements with upward-looking current profilers, and
compare the velocity profiles to 1D numerical model (GOTM) results with distinct
turbulence parametrizations and vertical stratification. The PIs propose that
wave breaking and Langmuir turbulence will tend to homogenize vertical gradients
in the velocity profile, together with an Eulerian flow related to the Stokes-
Coriolis mechanism. In terms of BI, beyond the scientific merit, the proposal
would provide parametrizations of near-surface processes driven by waves in
models and for particle trajectory studies. The study would support a graduate
student and undergraduate research opportunities at University of Maine, and
will develop outreach activities with USCG Academy
cadets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.