* 2219012
* MCA: Divergent Thinking Skills Training in Undergraduate Engineering Education: An Investigation of Stakeholder Perceptions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Elif Akcali, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2025
* USD 360,404.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
divergent thinking skills in undergraduate engineering education. Engineering
students are trained to find one correct solution to a well-defined problem
(convergent thinking). However, in the engineering workforce they are asked to
think outside of the box (divergent thinking) to find a new solution to ill-
defined challenges of the 21st century. Thus, there is a critical gap between
engineering education and its practice. Currently, there are few opportunities
in engineering degree programs for students to practice, develop, and apply
their divergent thinking skills. This project will study the perceptions of
divergent thinking in engineering education stakeholder groups, identify
barriers to divergent thinking, develop methods to assess students’ divergent
thinking skills, and develop course content to improve these skills. Stakeholder
groups will include undergraduate engineering students, engineering faculty,
university administrators, and engineering professionals. Project results and
outcomes will be disseminated via engineering education conference
participation, local and national workshops, journal publications, blog posts,
and Creative Commons licensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to develop instructional materials and assessment methods that will
help students learn and practice divergent thinking skills. This study intends
to address the following research questions: What are the students’ experiences
with divergent thinking skills during their degree program? How do engineering
faculty develop students’ divergent thinking skills in their classes? How do
employers benefit from divergent thinking skills of engineers? What value do
administrators gain from the development of divergent thinking skills in
undergraduate engineering education? Using a transcendental phenomenological
approach, the project plans to collect and analyze in-depth interview data from
members of each stakeholder group. Via purposive sampling, the perspectives of a
diverse group of members from each of the stakeholder groups from a broad range
of engineering disciplines will be examined. Assessment tools for divergent
thinking will be developed based on the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking.
Results from the interviews will be used to inform the adaptation of scaffolding
mechanisms in the learning sciences to support student learning of divergent
thinking skills and the development of instructional materials. This MCA award
is funded through NSF's IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.