* 2219741
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: CNS: Efficient Data Communication and Processing for Intelligent Medical Systems with Edge-Cloud Interplay
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Uttam Ghosh, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The healthcare industry’s digital
transformation initiative is driven by the need for virtual visits, remote
patient monitoring, and consumer wearables. The execution of this initiative
will generate vast and diverse data artifacts that need to be analyzed to
deliver care to patients anywhere and anytime. The response to COVID-19 has also
contributed to developing a holistic and intelligent healthcare capability.
Traditionally, cloud computing technology has been employed by healthcare
providers for analyzing vast health data. However, the technology suffers from
drawbacks such as dependency on a central arbitrator, increase in network
latency, and high throughput. In addition, there is a lack of trusted Artificial
Intelligent/ Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms which can lead to erroneous
results causing catastrophic impacts in the healthcare domain and increasing the
frequency of security attacks on the cloud infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an edge-cloud interplay
platform to realize efficient data communication and processing for Intelligent
Medical Systems. The platform leverages software-defined 5G and AI-enabled
distributed edge-cloud technologies to ensure critical health data is managed
securely and made available in a responsive manner. The first step is to develop
an SDN-driven architecture to classify healthcare data at the edge devices for
real-time service delivery. Next, the project intends to develop models based on
AI/ML algorithms to identify patients’ potential medical conditions. The models
are to be validated by calculating the access time of the local data from the
central server to the local database in any healthcare unit and performing a
comparative time analysis. Besides, the interplay between the edge and cloud
will be investigated to support the demand for real-time applications for
healthcare systems. The project will provide research experiences to students
from underrepresented communities in areas at the intersection of AI, SDN,
cloud, and edge technologies and also support the modernization of the
curriculum at Meharry Medical College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.