* 2219048
* Collaborative Proposal: Harvesting electronic flat bands and strong spin-orbit coupling for novel functionalities in metal monochalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chun Ning Lau, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 108,445.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials made from a single
atomic layer or a few layers have electronic properties that profoundly differ
from those of bulk materials. For example, two-dimensional materials can combine
high mechanical strength and optical transparency with efficient charge
transport. These properties could be exploited to create new classes of devices
with novel functionalities. One could make a material that could become
electrically conducting or insulating, but also magnetic or non-magnetic, at the
flip of a switch. Such a material could enable development of ultra-sensitive
optical or magnetic sensors. This research project will focus on one class of
ultrathin materials—metal monochalcogenides such as gallium selenide or gallium
sulfide. Researchers will investigate these materials and seek to endow them
with specific electrical, magnetic, and optical properties upon exfoliation,
encapsulation and twisting. This research will be integrated with the mentoring
and training of the next generation of physicists, materials scientists, and
engineers. Both team members actively recruit and mentor undergraduate and
graduate students from underrepresented groups, while also reaching out to high
school teachers and students. The team collaborates with the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University to develop hands-on
instructional materials for schools in the surrounding North Florida
counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this collaborative project is to harness the electronic flat bands and
strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) inherent to the family of the III-VI metal
monochalcogenides (MMCs), to achieve gate-tunable ferromagnetism and half-
metallicity, fractional quantum Hall (QH) states in the limit of large SOC. The
work will enable novel spintronic, valleytronic and optoelectronic devices.
Investigators will: i) explore, tune, and understand the nature of the
fractional quantum Hall states in the regime of large SOC, which has
implications for topological quantum computation; ii) achieve gate-tunable
ferromagnetism due to half-metallicity and their interplay with other possible
correlated states (such as possible superconductivity and correlated phases ) in
hole-doped few-layer MMCs; iii) create spin- and valley-polarized currents in
heterostructures based on metal monochalcogenides on transition metal
dichalcogenides, and iv) achieve gate-tunable excitonics in MMCheterostructures
with moiré superlattices, for optoelectronics with an unprecedented level of
tunability. This project will directly support one graduate student at each
participating institutions. The students will circulate among both institutions
and other national facilities. In addition, both principal investigators will
continue their established efforts at mentoring undergraduate and high school
students, while also recruiting and mentoring students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.