* 2220556
* NNA Incubator: Collaborative Research: Sustainable Transitions through Arctic Redevelopment (STAR)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Timothy Scarlett, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 09/30/2024
* USD 79,998.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, and addresses important societal challenges and engages with
international partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the launch of the Decade on
Ecological Restoration by the United Nations in 2021, momentum is growing
towards visioning a sustainable future for aging industrial sites worldwide. In
the Arctic, these aging sites, including mining operations, have experienced
immense neglect in part due to the remoteness of the region. With climate
warming leading to increased ice and permafrost melt and expanded access to the
region, these sites are increasingly vulnerable to further deterioration but
pose an opportunity to understand how these sites can be developed for the
future. This project lays the groundwork for understanding these futures for
diverse industrial sites across the Arctic, focusing on cooperation with local
communities to understand and vision sustainable development goals for the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant brings together a team of
scholars with broad experience across the Arctic to develop a research agenda
around sustainable redevelopment goals of postindustrial extractive sites. It
includes five case study sites with varying physical and political geographies
in the United States (Alaska), Canada (Northwest Territory), Finland (Lapland),
Greenland (Southeast) and Sweden (Norrbotten). Post-industrial redevelopment
themes will be investigated by conducting Participatory Spatial Analysis and
Visioning Workshops and will include, a) new mineral extraction prospects in old
tailings residues; b) tourism around mineral extraction co-existence; c)
transformation of underground mines for novel energy storage infrastructure; d)
diversifying regional economy and minimizing land use impacts; and e) ecological
restoration for Indigenous livelihood generation. The study will contribute to
understanding the multifaceted relationship between Arctic residents that live
in post-mining communities and their natural and cultural landscapes. It will
also contribute to expanding the definition of resilient infrastructure to
include sustainable post-primary use and redevelopment. The project will
strengthen partnerships among the three lead U.S. institutions and international
partners, particularly the European Union.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.