* 2220927
* Collaborative Research: ORCC:RUI: Integrating evolutionary and migratory potential of Chamaecrista fasciculata into forecasts of range-wide population dynamics under climate change
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Jennifer Cruse-Sanders, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,070,538.00

Successful conservation of global biodiversity requires that biologists
accurately predict the risk of species extinction under future climate
conditions. However, current models often make simplifying assumptions about the
biology of plants and animals. For example, some models assume that a species
can easily migrate through the landscape when this is not the case, or that a
species is not able to evolve rapidly to environmental change when this is
actually a possibility. Our interdisciplinary team will study the biology of a
plant species to determine what data researchers and conservationists need to
predict how climate change will influence extinction risk for plants in the
natural environment. We will use the partridge pea (Chamaecrista fasciculata), a
common and widespread plant in natural grasslands, to identify the type of data
needed to improve ecological models for conservation planning. We will evaluate
genetic differences and rates of gene flow among populations and estimate these
populationsâ€™ ability to evolve in response to climate change to identify models
that best describe or forecast rates of change under new climate conditions. In
collaboration with the Georgia Plant Conservation Alliance and the Southeastern
Grasslands Initiative, we will apply what we learn to develop a series of tools
that practitioners can use to predict extinction risks under climate change for
at-risk grassland species. This work will significantly improve our ability to
protect biodiversity in the southeastern U.S. and in habitats around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Populations across the range of a species vary in
their migratory and adaptive potential under climate change. Most approaches
aimed at predicting population persistence under climate change make simplifying
assumptions about plasticity, adaptation, and gene flow that are commonly
violated in natural systems. We combine approaches from evolutionary biology,
field ecology, and population genomics to forecast range-wide dynamics under
climate change in a broadly distributed native legume (Chamaecrista
fasciculata). Our studies examine the migratory potential of populations under
climate change using population genomic estimators of historical gene flow. To
evaluate adaptive potential, we will expose paternal half-sib families from 12
populations to contemporary climates and simulated climate change in common
gardens across the range. Finally, we will forecast eco-evolutionary dynamics
under climate change using models that differ in the degree to which they
incorporate data on species occurrence, additive genetic variance in fitness in
response to climate, trait expression, sequence variation, and gene flow. Our
work will provide a robust framework for predictions of range-wide responses to
climate change in systems that are less amenable to manipulation. We will
collaborate with conservation practitioners in the Georgia Plant Conservation
Alliance and Southeastern Grasslands Initiative to produce risk assessment tools
that project range dynamics under climate change for endangered plant species.
In workshops, we will discuss our progress and provide opportunities for our
trainees to forge connections with conservation practitioners. The PIs will
recruit, train, and mentor scholars from historically marginalized backgrounds
in population genomics, quantitative genetics, data analysis, and ecological
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.