* 2220889
* WORKSHOP: Training the Next Generation of Workers and Outreach in Plant Tissue Culture for Crop Improvement Using Genome Editing
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Marietta Saunders, Society for In Vitro Biology
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The Society for In Vitro Biology (SIVB) will hold four workshops at its 2022 and
2023 annual meetings designed to educate participants on the topics of plant
tissue culture and genetic engineering. The workshops will target researchers
including faculty, students, post-docs, and industry personnel involved in
utilizing plant tissue culture and gene insertion techniques for the development
of improved crop cultivars. Programs will contain both in-person and virtual
content. Following the conferences, presentations and other generated materials
will be made available to interested groups who wish to use them for research
and educational purposes in classroom teaching or laboratory
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently there is a need for experts in the
field of plant tissue culture and transformation. Many have spent decades of
research and continually seek opportunities to share and disseminate knowledge,
good practices and learnings to the emerging group of scientists, especially
those in underserved or minority communities who may not have ready access to
this information. These workshops serve as a perfect platform and aim to target
new and young faculty and industry personnel involved in tissue culture and
genetic engineering/genome editing research along with students and community
college educators who wish to introduce these topics in the classroom. It is the
expectation that organizers will generate sets of informational material that
will enable the long-term dissemination of this crucial knowledge. The workshops
will impact a diverse community of researchers who are involved in plant tissue
culture and genetic engineering/genome editing research activities. It will also
ensure that the expertise generated in the area of in vitro plant tissue culture
during the 20th century will be successfully passed on to the incoming
generations of new researchers and help create a workforce for advancing genome
engineering and crop improvement technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.