* 2220948
* The Impact of Arctic Amplification on the Midlatitude Circulation: Non-linearity and Non-additivity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Yutian Wu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 646,193.00

The impact of Arctic sea-ice loss and rapid surface warming over the Arctic
(associated with Arctic Amplification) on the atmospheric circulation in the
Northern Hemisphere is not fully understood. As the sea-ice loss worsens, does
the effect on the atmospheric circulation, jet stream, and extreme weather
events intensify? Does the different sea-ice loss over various Arctic regions
complicate the influence of Arctic Amplification? This proposal addresses these
questions and aims to advance the current understanding of the impact of the
Arctic sea-ice melting and Arctic Amplification on high-impact weather extremes.
The emerging results can improve the predictability of these extreme events that
have significant societal impacts in the planning and management of
transportation and energy production practices. The project will train and
support a graduate student and two undergraduate summer interns, the latter
through a summer program focused on the recruitment of underrepresented and
community college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigative team
hypothesizes that (1) atmospheric blocking and weather extremes respond to
Arctic sea ice loss and warming non-linearly: when the Arctic forcing magnitude
is small, the frequency and local persistence of blocking increases with
forcing; however, as the forcing magnitude becomes large, blocking decreases
with forcing; (2) responses to regional Arctic sea ice melting are not linearly
additive and the non-additivity component is significant due to the nonlinear
wave-mean flow interaction. The proposed tasks will test these hypotheses in a
hierarchy of models ranging from a simple dry dynamics representation to a
state-of-the-art atmospheric general circulation model. It will assess the
robustness of non-linearity and non-additivity and examine the underlying
dynamical mechanism using novel diagnostics such as the local finite-amplitude
wave activity. The research will provide a systematic and process-oriented
dynamical understanding of the large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns
underlying the changes in atmospheric blocking and weather extremes and promote
the future workforce and diversity in the research area of climate and large-
scale dynamic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.