* 2220667
* Logic-gated pro-MMP activation for tumor-specific motility in nanocarriers
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2026
* USD 320,734.00

Nanoparticles deliver anti-cancer drugs to tumors. They prevent exposure of the
rest of the body to these toxic drugs. Penetrating the tumor is difficult.
Understanding the factors that govern the behavior of drug nanocarriers within
the tumor could help improve delivery. One strategy to improve delivery has been
to try digesting the matrix material surrounding tumors. The enzymes used are
referred to as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Unfortunately, MMPs can be
toxic to surrounding cells and tissue. The major objective of this research is
to create ‘smart’ MMPs whose activity is specific for tumor matrix material
only. Outreach and educational efforts are designed to attract students to
careers in engineering and improve technological literacy. Pre-college research
internships, drug delivery teaching modules for a local middle school, and new
course modules in protein engineering and drug delivery are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocarriers offer numerous potential benefits in
drug delivery. These include their abilities to precisely target drug delivery,
to control release, extend circulation time within the body, and offer stimulus-
responsive features. Poor penetration caused by the features of the tumor
stroma/matrix is cited as a primary challenge to drug delivery effectiveness.
This project fuses diverse expertise in synthetic biology/protein engineering
and drug delivery/biomaterials to create tumor-actuatable pro-MMPs and uncover
mechanisms governing their site-selective unmasking, proteolytic activity, and
capacity to enhance nanocarrier transport within tumor-relevant extracellular
matrix. Certain MMPs (MMP-9 for example) have elevated concentrations in tumor
microenvironments. Synthetic pro-MMPs that are conditionally activated by the
elevated MMPs will be designed. The ability of these conditional pro-MMPs to
provide MMP-specific mobility enhancements to protein nanostructures will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.