* 2220881
* CyberPEERS
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Sharon Moran, Hillsborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2027
* USD 748,300.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Hillsborough Community College (HCC). HCC is a federally designated
Hispanic Serving Institution located in Tampa, Florida. Over its five year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique students pursuing
associate degrees in cybersecurity, cybersecurity operations, network digital
forensics, network security, and network enterprise cloud. First-year STEM
students will receive up to two years of scholarship support. The project will
use a peer ecosystem to increase student persistence. Activities include
national cybermentoring programs, entrepreneurial growth mindset training, cyber
league competitions, faculty mentoring, peer role models, and local technology
conferences. This Track 1 Institutional Capacity Building project will expand
the workforce with two-year degree technicians and will broaden the field with
females and minorities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Four objectives guide the project: 1) recruit
low-income, talented students with targeted outreach to women and students from
groups underrepresented in cybersecurity; 2) increase students' identity in
cybersecurity fields with mentors, professional networks, entrepreneurial growth
mindsets, and cybersecurity peer role models; 3) raise retention and graduation
rates with faculty mentoring, early warning risk assessments, and tutoring; and
4) increase graduates' advancements in cybersecurity with internships, pathways
to universities, and national cyber league competitions. The project includes a
collaboration with Women in Cybersecurity (WiCyS), a national organization
advancing women in cybersecurity fields. Literature on retention among STEM
students attaining associate degrees is limited and this project will generate
knowledge of how strategically selected supports can be used effectively in the
community college setting. Project evaluation will help shape an understanding
of impacts (e.g. In what ways and to what extent was the project successful in
raising graduation rates through mentoring, industry conferences,
entrepreneurial growth mindset, cyber league competitions, and peer role
models?). The project evaluation will include assessments of impacts on women
cybersecurity students or students from underrepresented groups. This project
has the potential to strengthen STEM education, contribute to the STEM
workforce, and provide new insights into practices to promote the success of
undergraduates, particularly women and minorities in Associate in Science STEM
degree programs. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.