* 2220505
* Collaborative Research: Separating the Climate and Weather of River Channels: Characterizing Dynamics of Coarse-Grained River Channel Response to Perturbations Across Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Colin Phillips, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2025
* USD 295,214.00

Mountain rivers play a distinctive role as the primary agents of distributing
sediment and nutrients from mountains to lowlands, as critical freshwater source
areas for the Western United States, and as vital aquatic habitats. However,
mountain rivers are highly susceptible to the compound hazards presented by
global climate change and shifting precipitation patterns. Increasing rainfall
intensity can result in more frequent flooding and landsliding while increasing
drought severity enhances the threat of wildfire, vegetation loss, and extreme
erosion risks. This project aims to develop a physical model to assess the
sensitivity of mountain river channels to these shifts in climate and their
associated hazards. This research will help to identify where river channels are
susceptible to significant change and guide management and engineering practices
for mitigation and sustainable restoration. Project results will directly
support underserved and minority high school and undergraduates with hands-on
engaging learning and research STEM experiences at project
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop an
understanding of how mountain river channel geometry dynamically responds to
flooding and other watershed perturbations. The research is organized around the
central question of separating river response due to a perturbation from the
inherent natural variability present within watersheds. Separating signals of
change from variability involves three components: a physics-based model for the
expected river conditions under natural forcing, quantification of the inherent
natural variability within the river channel system across the riverbed and
reach scale, and a physical description with quantified adjustment times for
river response to perturbations across these scales. This research will
accomplish all three components by: (1) leveraging high resolution lidar
topography and sediment transport data to establish a baseline level of
variability and the dependence on the scale of variability on climatic and
geologic factors; (2) developing a physical link between hydraulic
perturbations, river planform instability, and the threshold processes
underpinning sediment transport through high resolution laboratory experiments;
and (3) pilot a signal-to-noise framework at sites where documented
perturbations have both destabilized the system or appear to have been buffered
by river processes. Expected results will aid researchers and engineers in
determining which river systems are vulnerable to erosion due changing climate
and landscapes, and provide a foundation for treating rivers dynamically within
the next-generation of river flood hazard forecasting
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.