* 2220888
* NRI: Food Is Fundamental: The Profound Ethical and Social Impacts of Robot Kitchens
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Patrick Lin, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2026
* USD 715,309.00

This project tracks the rise of robotic kitchens and explores their ethical and
social issues. Because food is so fundamental, automating kitchens can have far-
reaching impacts beyond the usual kinds in technology ethics. Kitchens are often
the heart of our homes, where traditions and science education are passed along
to children. Restaurants and their kitchens are also the heart of our
communities and culture. Automating that creative labor may impact values that
society cares about, such as: child development, family and communal
relationships, gender roles, cultural and religious traditions, authenticity,
nutrition and wellbeing, food safety and waste, kitchen hygiene, economic
vitality, agriculture, and more. Given this interdisciplinary complexity and
potential for widespread disruption, responsible innovation here requires
anticipating and addressing possible harms, while maximizing the benefits. The
current project develops a framework and analysis of these ethical and societal
factors to understand the risks associated with robotic
kitchens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the first extensive conversation on
the subject, the project will map out and develop a full range of issues in this
emerging space, looking at both benefits and risks. It also builds upon and
advances more familiar issues in technology ethics, such as economic
displacement, social isolation, pursuit of efficiency and convenience,
artificial intelligence bias and errors, cybersecurity, and so on. To ensure
that the work is inclusive, three workshops will be held in different global
geographies to help account for cultural or regional differences in attitudes
and impacts. The goal is to deliver a public “ethics impact report” on the
subject, along with other scholarly products and public outreach. Automation
always comes with trade-offs, and it is even more essential to apply foresight
to automation in domains like this, which are so entangled with relationships,
cultures, and societies. In addition to these broader impacts, curriculum
development, outreach and educational activities are planned as part of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.