* 2220695
* Collaborative Research: EDGE FGT: Genome-wide knock-out mutant libraries for the microcrustacean Daphnia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Sen Xu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2023
* USD 275,000.00

Mutating the DNA sequences of genes of interest is a valuable approach for
understanding their biological functions in diverse organisms. In contrast to
established model systems, large collections of gene knock-out mutants are not
widely available in emerging model organisms. This limitation greatly diminishes
the power of emerging model systems for making novel scientific discoveries. To
address the issue, this project will develop a large collection of gene knock-
out mutants using CRISPR gene editing in three species of the freshwater
microcrustacean Daphnia (D. magna, D. pulex, and D. pulicaria), which is an
emerging model system in ecological genomics, evolutionary genomics, and
environmental genomics. The Daphnia knock-out mutants will provide unprecedented
opportunities for the scientific community to characterize the biological
functions of the genes. The project will also disseminate technical expertise
for CRISPR gene editing in Daphnia through free workshops, targeting biologists
at different career stages including undergraduates, graduates, postdoctoral
researchers, and faculty. Furthermore, the project will develop an innovative
genomics curriculum to enable hands-on research in the classroom and enhance the
education experience of diverse undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan is to knock out genes in Daphnia, including many
candidate genes that may play critical roles in acclimation, adaptation, and
evolution of these species. Individual knock-out mutant lines will be generated,
maintained in the laboratory, and freely shared with the research community.
Each mutant line will be whole-genome sequenced to characterize its genomic
background. In collaboration with the global Daphnia research community, this
project will evaluate the functional changes in knock-out mutants at both
genomic and organism levels to validate the role of the genes in various
environmental settings and to infer gene interaction and gene regulation
networks. Lastly, a free, public-facing database will be developed to host the
genomic and phenotypic data of the mutant lines, to promote and manage the
distribution of Daphnia mutants, and to distribute experimental protocols and
reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.