* 2220683
* Industries of the Future Research Experience for Preservice Teachers in STEM Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Driss Benhaddou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing prospective high
school teachers through research experiences in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Settings. The project will provide summer
research opportunities for prospective secondary STEM teachers to engage in
Industries of the Future (IotF) research, comprising artificial intelligence,
quantum information science, advanced manufacturing, advanced communications,
and biotechnology. The project intends to aid the formation of a strong
partnership among the University of Houston and Houston metropolitan area school
districts and local industries. The IotF research areas are cutting-edge and
prospective teachers will be guided in transferring STEM knowledge into
innovative course modules. The cross-disciplinary nature of the research allows
an opportunity to incorporate the results in a wide variety of courses for high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Houston
includes partners with high-need school districts, including the Spring Branch
and Alief districts in the Houston metropolitan area. Project goals include: 1)
Recruit 30 prospective high school teachers with diverse backgrounds from the
teachHOUSTON teacher education program; 2) Provide interdisciplinary and hands-
on research experiences to stimulate the interest of STEM prospective teachers;
and 3) Develop course modules by translating cutting-edge research in IotF for
high school classrooms, and meeting Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
standards. Various enrichment activities, including field trips, will allow
prospective teachers to connect academic research with real-world engineering
and technology. Academic-year follow-up includes course module discussion and
feedback from field teaching experiences. Participants’ research experiences
will be disseminated to other prospective teachers through workshops, a website,
conference and journal publications, and other channels. Through the partnership
with schools in the Houston metropolitan, the project will likely influence the
learning and career paths of high school students, especially those from
underserved districts and underrepresented groups in Texas. This Noyce Research
Experiences for Pre-service Teachers project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.