* 2220747
* EDGE FGT: MUSH-IT: MUlti-Species Hemimetabolous Insect Tools
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Cassandra Extavour, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 850,000.00

Most animals on earth are insects, and studying them is essential to understand
the evolution of life on Earth. They are the only animals that colonize habits
in air, land and water. Figuring out how insect bodies can function in such
diverse environments has led to the creation of new robotic designs, generating
robots that can fly, swim, or crawl over rough terrain. Insects are also
essential to human health because they are major plant pollinators, and thus
crucial for the agricultural activity that provides human food. As for all
animals, the body shapes and behaviors of insects are largely governed by their
genes, making the study of insect genetics a high priority. Despite their
obvious importance, our ability to study the true diversity of insects in the
laboratory has been severely limited by the fact that no methods have been
developed to understand the function of genes in the vast majority of insects.
In this proposal, we will develop new methods for learning about the sequences
and functions of genes in insects from five different major insect groups. We
will generate new genome sequences, improve and streamline methods for rearing
these insects in controlled laboratory environments, and improve on existing
methods or develop new ones to interfere with gene functions to understand how
genes regulate insect biology. We will share our findings and new methods with
the global community of insect scientists in the form of video protocols, an
interactive Slack group, and in-person and livestreamed
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects have dominated animal diversity since
their first appearance on Earth over 500 million years ago. Studying insects has
led to ground-breaking discoveries across all fields of science. Despite this,
only two of the 19 major groups (orders) of these insects contain model
laboratory species with robust functional genetics techniques that are used
outside of the laboratories that initially developed them. This gap will be
addressed by generating novel MUlti-Species Hemimetabolous Insect Tools (MUSH-
IT) for species from five hemimetabolous insect orders. First, the cricket
Gryllus bimaculatus will be developed into a highly sophisticated hemimetabolous
insect for functional genomics. Second, species from four additional
hemimetabolous orders will be developed into laboratory model organisms for
functional genetics, providing researchers with a broader phylogenetic range of
study systems across the base of insects. Annual workshops will be held to help
researchers working with Hemimetabola learn, troubleshoot, adapt and develop new
methods for control of gene function in this critical branch of insects. This
project will enhance existing infrastructure for research and education across
the many fields of science that use insects as study
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.