* 2220980
* MCA: Data Science for Global Change-Does Plant Diversity Imply Forest Resilience?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Martin Dovciak, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2025
* USD 293,033.00

Two ongoing global crises – climate warming and species loss – make it difficult
to predict how our planet’s forests will look in the future. Are species-rich
forests more resilient to changing climate, or more vulnerable to change? Should
we expect greater changes in species-rich tropical forests, or in species-poor
northern conifer forests? All forests deliver important ecosystem services to
humanity as they moderate climate and provide wood, clean water, wildlife
habitat, and livelihoods and recreation opportunities. This project will help us
understand how the world’s forests are changing and what role biodiversity plays
in forests’ resilience to changing climate. This work will focus on the most
vulnerable stage in forest development – tree seedlings – to create new
conceptual and statistical models to aid forest management and conservation in
varied settings across the globe. The project will also compare how different
countries monitor early stages of forest change and will contribute to the
sharing of best practices and the best science across borders. The findings will
be widely disseminated to major agencies in forest management and monitoring.
Ongoing societal conversations about climate change and biodiversity loss will
be aided by sharing the project’s findings with the public via interviews, press
releases, and lectures at regional high schools and nature centers. Advanced
training in ecology, forest monitoring, and data science will be given to 15-30
graduate students, including those from traditionally underrepresented
backgrounds. Long-term impacts will include a newly developed course, new
teaching materials, and new study plots established to monitor future forest
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As global forest ecosystems experience
interconnected contemporary crises – climate change and biodiversity loss – it
is increasingly important to understand if forests composed of more species are
also more resilient to changing climate. This proposal will help answer this
question by studying how forests change in time and space along the global
latitudinal diversity gradient (LDG), focusing particularly on the early stages
of forest change (tree seedlings) that influence future forest character. The
proposal seeks to use diverse data science approaches to help us understand how
tree seedling banks change along the LDG with climate and how they relate to
characteristics (such as diversity and resilience to change) of forest overstory
and understory plant communities. We will specifically address key aspects of
tree seedling bank dynamics such as tree seedling diversity, resilience to
change, abundance, and composition. The project integrates four activities: (1)
fine-scale analyses of field data from sites along the tropical-temperate-boreal
gradient, (2) broad-scale analyses of forest inventories spanning the LDG (Big
Data), (3) systematic review and meta-analysis of published papers, and (4)
review and synthesis of data science approaches used for monitoring tree
seedlings in major forest monitoring systems of the world. Data will be analyzed
using generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) and meta-analyses. The proposed
project will address decades old, yet still unresolved discussions of the
effects of diversity on forest ecosystem resilience and stability, while
focusing on the most sensitive stage of forest dynamics using modern data
science approaches along the global diversity
gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.