* 2220221
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Arctic, Climate, and Earthquakes (ACE): Seismic Resilience and Adaptation of Arctic Infrastructure and Social Systems amid Changing Climate
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2027
* USD 559,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents,
Education, and Resilient Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of
Alaska and many other areas of the Arctic are seismically active, experiencing
thousands of earthquakes with different magnitudes every year. Given the
vulnerability of the Artic to earthquakes and the accelerating environmental and
social changes, it is critical to evaluate the resiliency of the region’s
infrastructure to seismic events in the context of the natural environment,
built environment, and social systems and understand how these changes interact
and impact the region’s preparedness and response to earthquakes. The
overarching goals of this NNA Collaborative Research project are to: 1) Improve
the fundamental understanding of the impact of Arctic changes on the region’s
preparedness and response to future earthquakes through seismic
monitoring/modeling, community engagement, and targeted investigations of the
interactions between the relevant components of the natural environment, built
environment, and social systems; and 2) Enhance the seismic resilience of Arctic
communities by providing them with the necessary training and tools to manage
future earthquake-related disasters including planning, preparedness,
mitigation, and recovery. The project research and education activities will
include targeted research studies, workshops, and workforce development
including the training and mentoring of three graduate students at the
University of New Hampshire, one graduate student and an undergraduate student
at the University of Georgia, one graduate student at Pennsylvania State
University, one graduate student at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and one
graduate student at the University of Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NNA
Collaborative Research project builds upon the results of a planning grant and a
workshop with significant community input that identified six major community
concerns and high priority research topics regarding the seismic challenges
facing the new Arctic and the region’s preparedness and resilience to manage
future earthquake-related disasters. To address these challenges, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) of this NNA Collaborative Research project propose to carry
out a convergent research and education program structured around four strategic
pillars and objectives. The specific objectives of the research include 1)
Infrastructure seismic response assessment under climate-driven changes of the
Arctic ground through the monitoring of key infrastructure systems in Alaska in
combination with centrifuge physical modeling to simulate and evaluate the
impact of permafrost thawing on soils and building/infrastructure foundations,
2) Co-development of equitable seismic resilience capacities for local
communities through surveys, interviews, and participatory mapping workshops, 3)
Seismic resilience modeling and assessment through systems dynamics modeling,
review of seismic design/planning strategies, and climate adaptation planning at
community and state levels, and 4) Outreach and education through ACE youth
training camps, STEM research experience for Indigenous youth, and an
international workshop on Arctic seismic resilience and adaptation. The
successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact by seeding and catalyzing research that could lead to breakthroughs in
fundamental science and engineering, informed by community participation and
Indigenous knowledge, to address seismic challenges facing the new Arctic and
improve the region’s preparedness and response to future earthquake-related
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.