* 2220836
* Conference: Auxin 2022: Cavtat, Croatia 2-7 October 2022
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Lucia Strader, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 22,315.00

This award supports travel and registration fees for selected US participants in
the Auxin 2022 meeting of international scholars in Cavtat, Croatia, in October
2022. The award covers travel expenses for two early-career female faculty from
the US who are invited speakers, and meeting registration fees to allow 30
American early-career scientists, including students, post-doctoral fellows,
faculty, and members of groups under-represented in science, to participate in
the meeting. The meeting focuses on recent advances and future directions in the
study of the plant hormone auxin. Plants are “born,” or germinate from a seed,
with a simple body plan. Initially, young plants consist of a set of young
leaves and a simple root. From this simple seedling, cues from the environment
(Where is the sunlight? Where are the soil nutrients? What season is it?) shape
the growth of new organs, such as branches, leaves, and flowers. How this
happens is not yet fully understand, but it is known that auxin is an essential
regulator of almost every aspect of plant growth and development. The auxin
field is one of the most active and rapidly developing areas in plant biology,
and new discoveries in this field are contributing to the development of new
crops and solutions to food insecurity. To encourage interaction and
collaboration among researchers working in the field, this award facilitates
inclusion of US scientists in the Auxin 2022 meeting in Croatia, where they will
be exposed to new discoveries, interact with international colleagues, and
become part of new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The quadrennial Auxin
Meeting, held in October 2022 in Cavtat, Croatia, seeks to promote the exchange
of ideas, establishment of future research directions, and development of
collaborative relationships among international scientists who study multiple
aspects of how the plant hormone auxin regulates plant growth and development.
The meeting also represents an opportunity for early-career investigators,
trainees, and individuals from underrepresented groups to interact with leaders
in the field and to join the international auxin community. More than 30 leading
scientists from thirteen countries have agreed to share their latest results at
the meeting. The list of invited speakers includes twelve women and eight junior
scientists. The award will support travel for two of these invited speakers and
meeting registration for 30 additional individuals. To promote dissemination of
new discoveries on auxin, invited speakers will prepare papers summarizing new
directions in the field that will be published in a special issue of The Journal
of Experimental Biology, and an overview of the auxin field will be submitted to
the journal, Plant Cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is co-funded by the
Plant Genome Research Program and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.