* 2220292
* IMR: MM-1C: Learning-driven Models for 5G Internet Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Enriched with exciting applications providing `smart services,’ next-generation
(NextG) cellular networks will fundamentally transform today’s perception of the
Internet. Leveraging major advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML), the envisioned NextG Internet measurement infrastructure will
markedly enhance network monitoring, management and deployment. Toward this
goal, formidable challenges emerge as measurements can be diverse, complex, and
even unavailable. In this context, the present project advocates a learning-
driven methodology for systematic, robust, and large-scale NextG Internet
measurement infrastructure. This methodology will be informed by extensive, in-
depth measurements conducted, and will further utilize the platform and
measurement tools developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key intellectual advances are
pursued in three intertwined research thrusts: T1) novel ensembles of Gaussian
Processes to model rich, cross-layer features, and environment, user, and
application dynamics; T2) innovative Bayesian active sampling to guide the
measurement process; and, T3) path-breaking tools to de-bias, de-noise, and
integrate crowd-sourced measurements that may contain missing features (e.g.,
due to privacy protection); and may be biased, conflicting, or even adversarial.
Outcomes will be integrated with an available measurement platform to improve
the sampling process, data curation, and analytics that will be continually
refined and validated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will broadly impact
the measurement, design, deployment, and operation of NextG networks, through
novel applications and services, many yet to be imagined, thereby bringing
significant benefits to the society at large. The project also offers
opportunities for engaging undergraduate and K-12 students -- especially women
and underrepresented minority groups -- in integrated research, education, and
outreach activities. Through collaborations with Industry, the technology
transferred will influence the development of NextG networks. In addition, the
novel Internet measurement tools will come with open-source software to render
the models, codes, datasets, evaluation tests and pertinent artifacts, publicly
available. Project’s URL https://spincom.umn.edu/research/currently-funded-
projects/nsf2220292&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.