* 2220332
* Oxygen and Carbon-based Production and Respiration Rates Across the Pacific Ocean from Profiling Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Angelicque White, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2026
* USD 912,167.00

Ocean chemistry and biology play an important role in the global carbon cycle.
This project will characterize key components of biological carbon cycling in
the Pacific Ocean. The team will use profiling floats (autonomous vehicles
equipped with several sensors) to measure oxygen and particulate carbon
concentrations and estimate the amount of carbon and oxygen produced, consumed,
and lost by algae, bacteria, and other organisms in the top 200 meters of the
ocean on a day-to-day basis across all seasons. They will also make direct
measurements of these daily quantities and other properties from a research
ship. The ship-based measurements will be used both to calibrate the float
measurements and to determine how the ratio of oxygen produced to carbon dioxide
absorbed during photosynthesis, as well as the ratio of oxygen utilized per
organic carbon molecule consumed during respiration, vary over space. These
quantities are poorly understood and are rarely measured but are critical to
determine marine ecosystem health. In addition to allowing measurements over a
full seasonal cycle, the float data will support validation of satellite-based
methods for estimating carbon production over broad areas of the ocean.
Collectively these efforts address the critical need for better understanding
how ocean productivity changes over time and space and how much carbon is
sequestered to the deep ocean due to biological processes. The project will
include active participation of graduate and undergraduate students at sea. The
researchers will also participate as mentors in the Indigenous Partnership for
Ocean Monitoring led by the Consortium for Increasing Research and Collaborative
Learning Experiences, CIRCLE, program at the University of Hawai’i. This program
engages local high school students to conduct research to learn about the
connection between their health and the health of the ocean. Students will be
trained to analyze float and satellite data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
determine the metabolic state of global oceans over time and space, we must be
able to accurately characterize both primary production (PP) and community
respiration (CR) rates. Spatial and temporal variations in PP are poorly known
because the effort required for the traditional carbon and oxygen-based bottle
incubation methods limits their application. Satellite-based PP estimates on
which we rely for regional and global patterns are poorly validated and can be
inaccurate. Building upon preliminary work demonstrating that diel cycles of
dissolved oxygen and optically-derived particulate carbon obtained via
autonomous profiling floats can yield reliable estimates of gross production
(GP) and community respiration (CR) rates in the North Pacific Ocean, the team
plans to resolve the seasonal cycle of GP and CR across the Pacific basin using
long-term float deployments programmed to obtain diel-resolving measurements of
oxygen and particulate carbon throughout the euphotic zone. Previous ship-based
work in the subtropical and subpolar North Pacific regions found ecosystems
marked by consistent production to respiration ratios, which was unexpected
given the approximately 10-fold increases in biomass, particulate carbon, and
chlorophyll, and 50-fold increase in nitrate across the region. It is unclear
how these ratios may vary over time, whether patterns extend to the Equatorial
and South Pacific oceans, and what role dissolved organic matter production and
respiration, particle export, and phytoplankton composition may have in driving
and/or biasing measured rates. Together, float-based rates and ship-based
experiments will shed light into those unknowns, allowing an unprecedented view
into basin-scale ecosystem functioning. The team expects to obtain approximately
70 oxygen-and carbon-based daily rates per float per year over the seasonal
cycle, potentially revolutionizing our understanding of how production and
respiration rates vary over time and space. This effort will showcase a powerful
means to evaluate satellite-based PP estimates across vast areas of the ocean,
which has been critically needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.