* 2220273
* Broadband multispectral microscopy of insulin granule dynamics in live pancreatic islets
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Diabetes is a chronic disease characterized by a high blood sugar level over an
extended period of time. As of 2019, it was estimated that 463 million people
worldwide or almost 9% of the world adult population, had diabetes, with rates
continuing to rise. The hallmark of diabetes is the failure of insulin secreting
beta cells located in the pancreas. The beta cell is the only cell in the body
that secretes insulin, which in turn is the only hormone able to lower plasma
glucose levels. Given the importance of beta cells, numerous methods have been
applied to study their physiology. Beta cells store insulin in small
compartments called insulin granules and when blood sugar levels rise, these
granules fuse with the cell membrane, allowing beta cells to release large
quantities of insulin at once. Unfortunately, direct visualization of insulin
granules is not straightforward, since current methods require external labels
that can affect granule function and dynamics. The team of investigators has
been developing a straightforward optical microscopic technique called Confocal
Broadband Backscattering Microscopy (CBBM) that can visualize insulin granules
without any labels and monitor their dynamics over the course of hours and even
days, which could potentially lead to a new treatment for diabetes. Project
outcomes and efforts will be integrated into a course on optical microscopy in
biology; provide training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and post
graduate students; and enhance research experiences for K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
label-free microscopy system for functional imaging and continuous monitoring of
insulin granules in live pancreatic islets in a custom islet-on-a-chip. The
approach will combine novel confocal broadband backscattering microscopy (CBBM)
with the existing confocal FRET and super-resolution STORM modalities, with all
three sharing a major part of the optical train and having a common field of
view. The CBBM technique will provide a functional image of a beta cell, resolve
insulin granules, monitor the conversion of proinsulin into insulin inside the
granules, and visualize granule-based insulin intercellular transport. The
project will also develop a physical and mathematical model to describe light
scattering from insulin granules within the confocal volume of the label-free
microscopy system and an inverse algorithm to differentiate insulin and non-
insulin granules label-free. These algorithms will be used to monitor temporal
changes in granules and continuously visualize them in 3D during insulin
intercellular transport and release. To better understand islet function and the
optimal environments for transplantable islets, glucose exchanges will be
combined with in vivo functional imaging in human pancreatic islets, allowing
investigation of important feedback loops in glucose/insulin cycles. Experiments
will also be performed to investigate critical differences between islets
derived from diabetic and healthy subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.