* 2220703
* Topological order and Anyons in and out of Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Ashvin Vishwanath, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research into the quantum physics of many interacting particles, often referred
to as quantum matter. These systems are the gateway to a rich and promising
scientific arena, given the extraordinary ability of quantum particles to remain
tied to one another even when separated, a property termed quantum entanglement.
Realizations of quantum matter are everywhere, ranging from electrons in
crystals to engineered platforms consisting of arrays of atoms. In this project,
the PI and his team will explore strategies to create highly entangled quantum
matter and to identify the features that characterize them. A particularly
interesting subclass is topological matter, in which new excitations called
"anyons" arise that are entirely distinct from the individual components that go
into building them. Such excitations are speculated to lead to novel material
properties and capabilities in quantum information. The PI will explore new
arenas to realize topological states, including in artificial materials created
by stacking atomically thin sheets and by driving matter with external fields
far from thermal equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education of the next
generation of junior scientists is a key part of this project. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be exposed to modern ideas of quantum condensed matter
physics through coursework as well as research collaborations. This will
contribute to the US workforce in fundamental science and quantum technologies.
The research outcomes and course materials developed throughout the course of
this project will be widely disseminated via non-technical summaries,
pedagogical lecture notes, as well as seminars, colloquia and lecture series at
scientific schools for young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on quantum
states of matter with novel excitations stabilized by topology, to identify
their experimental signatures and to enable their realizations in solids and
ultracold quantum gases. While a glimpse of topological order and the associated
anyon excitations have previously appeared in the fractional quantum Hall
effect, this award will focus on realizing these and other topological states in
a wider set of systems and in the absence of strong magnetic fields. The
topological character of these states make their detection a challenge. The PI
will study models of electronic and cold atom systems that are both promising
platforms for topological orders and allow for measurements that can
unequivocally point to their realization. Moving beyond ground states, driven
systems harboring anyon excitations exhibit an extra layer of complexity and
richness, and furnish an alternate route to stabilizing topological orders. The
PI will explore topological orders driven far from equilibrium, due to external
drives and/or measurements as well as out-of-equilibrium routes to realizing new
states, including ones with non-Abelian anyon
excitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the training of the
next generation of researchers in modern theoretical physics, via research and
coursework. New course material at the graduate level will be developed, which
will incorporate insights gleaned from research. The research outcomes and
course materials developed throughout the course of this project will be widely
disseminated via non-technical summaries, pedagogical lecture notes, as well as
seminars, colloquia and lecture series at scientific schools for young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.