* 2220973
* Enhancing Career Outcomes Through Mentoring, Research, and Focused Career Discernment in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Mark Jordan, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,485,762.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Seattle University, a comprehensive private Jesuit university of
approximately 7,500 primarily undergraduate students. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 24 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, or mathematics. Low-
income, academically-talented, and first-generation students will be awarded
scholarships of $10,000 for four years. Building on institutional research,
lessons learned from prior awards from the S-STEM program, the research
literature, and an understanding of the unique experiences of low-income first-
generation students, the project will provide financial support and a system of
academic and support services to foster student success. Through evaluation, the
project will assess the significance of an early research experience in data
science as a catalyst for biology, chemistry, and mathematics majors’ further
research and job placement. Examinations of an innovative badging program to
incentivize the use of campus services and participation in project activities
will generate knowledge about the effectiveness of gamification in encouraging
participation in a multi- dimensional, structured career discernment process,
thus complementing an emergent literature focused on gamification in classroom
settings. Graduating scholars will have fundamental skills in data science, a
critical area of national need and a valuable skill set across a range of STEM
industries. They will be well prepared for regional opportunities in the
technology, life sciences/biotech, and environmental sectors. Beyond the
students directly served, this program will improve Seattle University’s
mechanisms for connecting all STEM majors to support offices across campus,
increasing the retention and career preparation of our diverse student
body.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Four key objectives guide the project. First is to award
scholarships to low-income, academically talented students majoring in biology,
chemistry, or mathematics. Second is to increase graduation rates of low-income
students in those fields. Third is to provide students with an early,
interdisciplinary research experience in data science and targeted career
formation activities. Fourth, and finally, is to improve understanding of how to
connect students with academic and career services, such as tutoring and career
planning. To meet these objectives, the project includes three major components:
a badge-award system to incentivize the use of support services; a Career
Discernment Toolkit, which encourages students to explore possible career
options; and a second-year data science course, which is designed as an entry
point into undergraduate research. Using a mixed methods design, the project
will assess the impact of student participation in project activities on
academic success and employment outcomes and the effectiveness of gamification
in encouraging the use of campus services. Promising practices adapted or
developed through this program, such as badging, the Career Discernment Toolkit,
and the interdisciplinary research course, will be disseminated broadly to other
colleges and universities through the University website, conference
presentations, and publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.