* 2220912
* JCCC STEM Scholars Program: Achieving Successful Transfer (Self-Efficacy, Independence, Persistence, and Momentum)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Beth Edmonds, Johnson County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,487,766.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Johnson County Community College, the largest community college in
Kansas. Over its 6-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to 54
undergraduate students who are pursuing associate’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, and/or Physics with the intent to
transfer to a university. First-year students will receive up to two-years of
scholarship support. This project develops a series of co-curricular activities
seeking to empower community college students when navigating the transfer
process to a 4-year institution of higher education. This project will adapt,
pilot, and evaluate pre-transfer activities for community college students
interested in pursuing bachelor’s degrees in STEM fields. This project will have
significant impact on two areas: 1) increasing diversity of low-income students
pursuing and earning STEM degrees and 2) increasing the number of community
college students successfully transferring and continuing as STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Seeking to advance knowledge in best practices for
recruiting, retaining, graduating/transferring community college students in
STEM majors, this project will 1) recruit and retain financially needy and
academically talented fulltime STEM students, focusing on women and
underrepresented minorities, into STEM degree programs; 2) improve graduation
and transfer rates for students recruited into the JCCC STEM Scholarship program
compared to general student population; 3) adapt and pilot cohort building
activities, transfer-oriented activities, and support structures from existing
programs to foster a learning community among STEM scholarship students; and 4)
adapt and pilot outreach/recruitment activities, particularly targeting female
and underrepresented high school students in STEM, that will be sustained past
the grant period. The project will study how guiding students to develop a
transfer success plan can increase recruitment, retention, graduation and
transfer rates into STEM majors. Research has shown that policies and practices
which empower students to be proactive in creating a transfer success plan
results in the kind of academic momentum which propels them to achieve success.
These activities will have immense value for other 2-year institutions and the
4-year institutions that recruit from them. The results of the project will be
disseminated through conference presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.