* 2220553
* NNA Incubator: Collaborative Research: Historical Ecology of the Pacific Cod Fishery
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Courtney Hofman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2024
* USD 81,490.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and social systems, and addresses
important societal challenges, builds significant educational opportunities,
and engages with local and Indigenous communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine
heat waves have resulted in dramatic production failures among coastal
fisheries. Although these heat waves have affected fisheries everywhere, their
effects in the Arctic have been both acute and particularly difficult to
predict. Yet, predicting the timing, extent, and consequences of marine heat
waves is increasingly critical as their intensity is predicted to continue to
rise. This project uses a marine historical ecology framework to investigate
patterns and consequences of climatological and cod population changes over
multiple timescales. It combines data from archaeological, historical,
climatological, Indigenous Knowledge, and biological records to understand the
dynamic interactions among climate, people, fish, and marine ecosystems in the
Arctic. The project supports the training of numerous students, solidifies
convergent, multi-institution partnerships, and disseminates results broadly to
academic and non-academic audiences and stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to form a convergent research team to address the
relevance of long-term data to contemporary fisheries management, using Pacific
cod as a case study. Specifically, this research is guided by an
interdisciplinary, marine historical ecology framework that looks to long-term
records, including archaeological, paleo-climatological, historical, genomic,
and Indigenous Knowledge, to capture a long range of ecological and social
variability and to provide an historical context for informing current
management. The project pursues the following objectives: 1) to understand and
make recommendations for how long-term data might be used in fisheries
management; 2) to assess whether there are historical analogs that could help
understand recent climate changes and fisheries crashes; and 3) to prioritize
collaboration with Native residents, drawing on their expert observations of
local environmental conditions and historical precedents. As increasingly
unpredictable marine conditions threaten to destabilize well-established
fisheries across the Artic, climate readiness is critical. This project
contributes to this aim by addressing the extent to which long-term data
reflecting multiple domains of climate action capture trends that facilitate
prediction of modern climate phenomena that are less apparent in short-term
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.