* 2220408
* FMitF: Track I: Principles for Modular Probabilistic Programming and Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2026
* USD 750,000.00

The concept of a model is central to the field of machine learning: it is a
simplified representation of the world that facilitates automated reasoning and
learning. Designing these models is a critical part of any machine-learning
project, and there is a pressing need for tools that make it easier and faster
for practitioners in the field to apply machine learning to a relentlessly
broadening set of applications. Probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) are
an answer to this pressing need: they endow a typical programming language with
the ability to manipulate and reason about probability distributions, empowering
software developers who are less comfortable with the standard tools and
techniques of machine learning with the ability to make their own machine-
learning models. However, programming in PPLs today remains very difficult, even
for experienced programmers. This project tackles one of the main shortcomings
of today's PPLs: a lack of strong notions of modularity. Modularity is a
critical property for designing scalable and efficient software systems. This
project's impact is to develop a new foundation for scalable and modular
probabilistic programming languages that empower a broader audience to create
and maintain machine learning and AI models, transforming the way machine
learning models are developed and deployed today. This project's novelties are
(1) the development of a new PPL called ModPPL that enables programmers to
develop modular machine learning models; and (2) new methods for creating large-
scale ModPPL programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this project is
to develop a new family of PPLs with a rich and general-purpose notion of
modularity. Accomplishing this will require deeply integrating techniques from
formal methods into the foundations of the language. The core of the approach
will be a new separation logic for specifying the independence structure of
probabilistic programs. The investigators will integrate this logic into ModPPL,
borrowing ideas from Hoare Type Theory; in doing so, the type system itself will
capture the necessary structure to empower programmers to reason locally about
their programs. Next, the structure of this type system will be leveraged to
state and certify correctness criteria for heterogeneous inference algorithms,
and further leveraged to design new and more scalable heterogeneous inference
strategies. Finally, the type system will be enriched by making it cost-
aware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.