* 2220657
* Workshop Proposal: Redefining the Future of Computer Architecture from First Principles
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Brandon Lucia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 02/29/2024
* USD 9,985.00

Modern computer architecture is facing many new challenges introduced by
emerging applications and technologies and experiencing unprecedented
reformation in its foundational technologies across architecture, compiler,
operating systems, software stack, and system integrations. The purpose of this
project is to organize a National Science Foundation (NSF) sponsored online
workshop named ``Redefining the Future of Computer Architecture from First
Principles (Arch-1)". The workshop will be held at the end of March 2022. The
participation in the workshop will be by invitation only, and the majority of
the participants will be invited from academia, industry, government
laboratories, and funding agencies by considering the representations of the
expertise from all relevant research pillars. Underrepresented groups will be
particularly encouraged to attend the workshop and receive priority in the
considerations. This workshop will provide a forum for leading experts in the
relevant research thrusts of computer architecture, specifically architecture,
compiler, operating systems, software stack, system integration, and
applications, to brainstorm the latest research progress and discuss their
visions of redefining the future of computer architecture in the next 10-15
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.