* 2220234
* Collaborative Research: Testing for Channel Flow and Ductile Extrusion In The Southeastern New England Appalachians Using An Integrated Geophysical and Geological Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 165,353.00

The formation of mountain belts is one of the most important processes that
takes place on Earth. Mountain belts affect the distribution of key Earth
resources, including economically important minerals, petroleum, and water. They
form as a result of plate tectonics, along boundaries between converging plates.
When mountain ranges become too high to be stable, the mountain belt may expand
laterally, or material may ‘escape’ from the belt, due to the force of gravity.
This escape may occur along faults that are exposed at the surface, where
material is pushed away sideways from the mountain belt, or simply by collapse
of material from higher to lower elevation. At mid-to deep-crustal levels (more
than ten kilometers below the Earth’s surface) rocks flow in a fluid-like
manner. In present-day mountain belts such as the Himalaya, these fluid-like
rocks can be squirted away from the mountain belt, either toward the surface or
entirely below the surface along tabular channels. These are important processes
that contribute to the formation and modification of mountain belts, but they
remain imperfectly understood. Specifically, because these rock flow zones are
often below the surface, they are difficult to investigate in present-day
mountain belt systems. The purpose of this project is to investigate an ancient
flow zone in eastern Massachusetts that formed about 420 to 360 million years
ago and today is partially exposed at the surface. Geological techniques will be
used to investigate the zone at the surface and geophysical imaging techniques
to elucidate the subsurface geometry. A better understanding of the formation of
these flow zones will help us understand both ancient and modern mountain
building processes in more detail, with important implications for our
understanding of how Earth resources are distributed. This project will involve
multi-disciplinary research that brings together geologists and geophysicists
working in the Appalachians, and is synergistic with ongoing national and
international collaborations. This project will contribute to the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, with a focus on training students from
historically untapped groups through various programs at the Colorado School of
Mines and Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated geophysical and
geological approach will be used to test a model of channel flow and ductile
extrusion for one of the Appalachian terranes, the Nashoba terrane, in SE New
England. Channel flow is flow of a weak, partially molten mid- to lower crustal
layer between more competent overlying and underlying crust as a result of
crustal thickening and pressure gradients. Localized denudation at the surface
may cause ductile extrusion towards the surface. The purpose of this project is
not only to further test a hypothesis for the evolution of the Nashoba terrane
based on field and geochronology data, but also to visualize ductile flow of
rocks during the geologic past below the surface using geophysical data. To do
this, a tightly spaced array of six broadband seismic stations will be deployed
across the Nashoba terrane in eastern Massachusetts, complementing currently
available data in the area. Additionally, existing data from the Putnam terrane
in eastern Connecticut, as sampled by the SEISConn array, will be used. While
the top of the interpreted ductile extrusion zone is well constrained along the
NW boundary of the Nashoba terrane, the SE part of the zone may have
incorporated part of the Avalon terrane SE of the Nashoba terrane. New
structural mapping and geochronology will be carried out in this part of the
Avalon terrane to constrain the boundary of the ductile extrusion zone better.
Combined new and existing structural, geochronological, and seismic imaging
constraints will be used to test the channel flow hypothesis against alternative
hypotheses, including thrust and normal faults, a positive flower structure, or
a metamorphic core complex. The evolution of the Nashoba and Putnam terranes
will then be placed in the overall context of the tectonic history of the SE New
England Appalachians. Methods used and potential outcomes may provide new
evidence for fundamental processes behind evolution of orogenic systems,
enabling comparisons with modern systems (the Himalayas) as well as other
ancient orogens (e.g., Canadian Cordillera) where channel flow and ductile
extrusion have been proposed.&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is provided by
NSF EAR Tectonics and Geophysics Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.