* 2220231
* ATD: Statistical Modeling of Spatial Temporal Human Mobility Flows from Aggregated Mobile Phone Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Huiyan Sang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The widespread usage of smartphones and GPS-enabled applications has led to an
increase in the availability of movement data products. An example of such data
is the spatial temporal human mobility flow, which captures the movement
patterns of individuals from specific origin locations to destination locations
over time. Learning the patterns of human mobility flow in a normal context
could provide valuable information for applications such as urban and traffic
planning. Furthermore, analyzing the impact of events such as crises on mobility
patterns can aid in the deployment of early interventions and responses. In this
project, the investigator will study community detection problems of spatial
temporal human movement origin-to-destination (OD) flow networks, with a focus
on asymmetric flows and evolving community structures. The project will also
provide training to graduate students involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator will develop a new class of
Bayesian random graph partition prior models that take into account spatial
structures and contiguity constraints for clustering while allowing the number
of spatial clusters to be unknown. The investigator will use this method to
build a flexible Bayesian hierarchical stochastic block model for the spatial OD
flow networks to detect origin and destination communities. Furthermore, the
investigator will design an efficient Bayesian algorithm for the estimation of
community structures together with uncertainty measures. Finally, the
investigator will extend the model to a dynamic setting for the detection of
temporally varying community structures while accounting for temporal dependence
between community structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.