* 2220387
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1A: MapQ: Mapping Quality of Coverage in Mobile Broadband Networks using Latent Gaussian Process Models
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ellen Zegura, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 220,180.00

About 85% of people in the United States own a smartphone and use it to access
the Internet on a regular basis, checking e-mail, using video conferencing
applications, communicating with a doctorâ€™s office, or searching for an answer
to an urgent question. Sometimes these applications work well, and other times
they do not. When they do not work well, the problem is often with the mobile
broadband cellular network in the place and at the time of use. Unfortunately no
one knows completely and accurately where high quality access exists, nor where
regions of limited or no access are present. Accurate maps of coverage quality
would enable resources to be directed to areas of greatest need, allow long term
tracking of progress on the digital divide, and form a building block for new
applications that can adapt to network quality. This project aims to create
accurate and complete maps of cellular coverage quality by bringing together
multiple measurement datasets and creating guidance for new
measurements.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project brings together
experts in statistical modeling, machine learning, and mobile networking from
Georgia Institute of Technology and University of California, Santa Barbara. The
project has two thrusts. The first focuses on creating mathematical models to
predict cellular network quality using latent Gaussian processes in novel ways
to combine measurement datasets collected with different methodologies. One set
of models will consider how coverage quality varies over geographic space; the
other will consider how it varies over time. The second thrust focuses on using
the predicted coverage quality maps in two key ways, to use the models to create
a Quality of Coverage metric that provides useful information to network users,
and to use the models to guide in future measurement campaigns so that regions
that are not well understood get prioritized.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The United
States Federal Government and other government and non-government organizations
have allocated funding to broaden Internet access. However, because no one
accurately knows where high quality access exists (or does not), it is difficult
to target investments to communities of highest need. If successful, this work
will be able to inform local, state, and federal governments about where
investment should be made to ensure all Americans have access to high quality
mobile Internet. As a result, residents of these communities will benefit from
the educational, economic, and medical benefits that Internet access enables.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;https://sites.gatech.edu/mapping-broadband/ - this site
will contain products of the project, including datasets, models, algorithms,
and publications resulting from the work. The website and repository will be
maintained for at least five years, from 2022 to 2027.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.