* 2220401
* FMitF: Track I: Generative Neural Network Verification in Medical Imaging Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Taylor Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2025
* USD 747,533.00

Medical images, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scans, are routinely transformed and analyzed using computers and
software. Medical images are increasingly processed and analyzed with
artificial-intelligence and machine-learning methods, such as deep neural
networks. In such safety-critical domains, stringent guarantees on the behaviors
of these machine-learning methods are essential, but many recent studies have
shown risks with these methods, such as lack of robustness and bias. Neural-
network formal verification is emerging as an approach to provide guarantees on
these machine-learning models to precisely characterize their behaviors. This
project's novelties are to develop a neural-network formal-specification and
-verification framework for medical-image analysis tasks, apply it to ensure
specifications across the medical-image-analysis technology stack, and evaluate
it on two specific medical-imaging analysis tasks. The first image-analysis task
is the segmentation of brain lesions from MRIs of multiple-sclerosis patients,
which is the process of automatically characterizing different regions of the
MRIs into corresponding anatomic structures. The second image-analysis task is
image synthesis for denoising optical-coherence-tomography (OCT) scans of the
retina. The project's impacts are to enable medical-imaging analysis by
enhancing confidence in the machine-learning models through formal verification.
Beyond the development and application of these formal methods to medical-
imaging analysis, the results of this project may enhance trustworthiness in
other domains, such as perception and sensing components in autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most neural-network verification methods developed
so far are applicable only to simple computer-vision tasks, such as image
classification, whereas medical image analysis typically requires more
sophisticated generative computer-vision methods to solve more sophisticated
tasks, such as semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and image
synthesis. Developing formal methods for these generative computer-vision tasks
in the context of medical-imaging analysis is the core of this project. The
first major objective of the project is to develop a robustness-specification
framework, building on robustness to adversarial perturbations, specification
mining, and metrics from computer vision used for generative tasks. The second
major objective is to develop the formal-verification methods, building on
reachability analysis of neural networks, specifically developing reachability
methods for up-sampling layers used in generative models. The third major
objective is to consider the robustness of generative models for image
synthesis, such as those trained through generative-adversarial-network (GAN)
processes. The fourth major objective is to evaluate these specification and
verification methods on the MS lesion segmentation and OCT image-synthesis
denoising tasks. The researchers will organize relevant competitions and
challenges, such as continuing the Verification of Neural Networks Competition
(VNN-COMP) and the IEEE ISBI Longitudinal MS Lesion Segmentation Challenge, and
will develop benchmarks for the formal-methods, machine-learning, computer-
vision, and medical-imaging-analysis research communities based on the research
and results of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.