* 2220876
* NRI: Integrating Perception and Manipulation of Deformable Objects by Learning Implicit Representations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Nima Fazeli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 749,653.00

The goal of this National Robotics Initiative 3.0 project is to develop models
and algorithms that enable autonomous robotic manipulation of deformable objects
by integrating sight and touch for contact-rich interactions. Manipulation of
deformable objects is essential in many day-to-day tasks ranging from cooking
(e.g., using a compliant spatula to scrape a wok) to manufacturing (e.g.,
assembly tasks involving flexible parts and materials such as composites and
cables). These tasks require the robot to perform complex maneuvers to bring
deformable objects into contact and apply forces to bend and shape them to
achieve tasks. Recent advances in collaborative robots (e.g., the Franka Emika
Panda and Kuka LBR iiwa robots) have made robotic manipulation of deformable
objects physically possible but robots still lack the models and algorithms
necessary to perform practical tasks such as cooking, cleaning, and flexible
manufacturing. This project will have broad societal impact through its
applications in in-home assistive and manufacturing robotics. The ability to
robustly manipulate deformable structures is an important precursor technology
towards realizing intelligent robotic assistants. Robotics and their assistive
applications have the potential to inspire children to pursue careers in STEM
fields and meet the needs of America's growing assistive and manufacturing
robotics industry. Integration of the research activities with education will
emphasize actively involving undergraduates in research activities and
introducing new lecture material and projects into undergraduate and graduate
courses. Also, special emphasis will be given to recruit qualified students from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
integrated methods for perception and manipulation of elastically deformable
objects via novel implicit function representations. Elastic objects are
ubiquitous in people's lives, from spatulas and sponges in the kitchens to
elastic rods on manufacturing floors to surgical tools and tissue. Their
manipulation is an essential skill for practical robotic systems. The proposed
integrative approach brings together methods from computer vision and robotics
to address the need for seamless visio-tactile reasoning and acting that is
essential for robotics applications. Specifically, this approach integrates and
extends recent theoretical and computational advances in implicit function
learning to model, perceive, and intelligently manipulate elastic objects.
Implicit representations of 3D geometries have recently gained traction in
computer vision owing to their compactness and computational efficiency;
however, they have yet to be deployed successfully for robotics. Towards their
successful integration, the outcomes of this project are: 1) A generalization of
implicit function theory and algorithms for 3D visio-tactile deformable object
representations. This addresses the need for dynamic and multi-modal deformable
object representations particularly suited for robotics; specially to streamline
the sense-reason-act pipeline. 2) Algorithmic tools for implicit state-
estimation. These algorithms will bridge inherently uncertain robotic sensing
modalities with implicit representations. 3) Theoretic and algorithmic
foundations for implicit control and planning. The resulting tools from this
project will enable real-time closed-loop control of deformable objects for
practical robotic systems. For evaluation, this project will explore the
integration of these algorithms for assistive robotics (food preparation) and
warehouse logistics (dense packing). The research outcomes contribute to several
related fields including continuum mechanics, computer vision, and learning
theory where object deformations subject to boundary conditions and/or implicit
function theory are studied. In particular, this approach will offer a flexible,
generalizable, and computationally efficient alternative to the current state-
of-the-art methods using finite element analysis or particle
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.