* 2220347
* Collaborative Research: SHIELD: Strategic Holistic Framework for Intrusion Prevention Using Multi-modal Data in Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Overbye, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 375,000.00

This NSF project aims to strengthen the protection of national power grid
against cyber-physical attacks. The project will bring transformative changes to
the existing detection and prevention strategies that rely either on physical
measurements or cyber data. This will be achieved through: (1) the fusion of
cyber and physical power system data to better detect coordinated cyber-physical
attacks and (2) the isolation of the impacted cyber-physical sections to contain
the damage spread across the power system. The intellectual merits of the
project include: (1) proposing novel methods to generate cyber and physical data
that reflect the behavior of the power system under normal operation and
coordinated cyber-physical attack scenarios, (2) proposing novel intrusion
detection methods that fuse cyber and physical features from the power system,
and (3) proposing novel intrusion prevention methods that isolate the impacted
cyber and physical sections of the power system. The broader impacts of the
project include: (1) defending critical infrastructures (power systems) against
cyber-attacks via state-of-the-art detection and prevention strategies, (2)
training of graduate and undergraduate students on cyber-physical system
security through summer schools and STEM workshops, and (3) dissemination of
research results to both industry and academic communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern power systems are cyber-physical in nature.
However, the existing attack detection strategies leverage either physical
measurements or cyber data. Furthermore, the existing attack prevention
strategies do not jointly isolate the impacted cyber and physical sections of
the power system. To close this gap, this project proposes to develop SHIELD -
Strategic Holistic framework for Intrusion prEvention using muLti-modal Data in
power systems. SHIELD aims to offer better detection and prevention performance
via: (1) optimal fusion of cyber and physical data for improved attack detection
and (2) joint partitioning of the cyber and physical sections of the power
systems for effective prevention results. To develop SHIELD into a practical
architecture, the following research thrusts will be considered in this project:
(1) Creation of comprehensive datasets of cyber and physical features of power
systems under normal operation and coordinated cyber-attack scenarios, (2)
Development of cyber-physical intrusion detection strategy via advanced deep
machine learning techniques, and (3) Development of cyber-physical prevention
strategy via optimal joint partitioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.