* 2220511
* Collaborative Research: OSIB: Chemical signaling in a host-microbe symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Mandel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 260,552.00

Despite an appreciation of the importance of symbiotic microbes, the chemical
language used between hosts and microorganisms is poorly understood. There is a
current gap in knowledge when it comes to the expressed chemistry that bacteria
utilize to adapt to host environments, and the identification of the chemical
matter responsible would add significantly to our understanding of how bacteria
are able to colonize and maintain themselves in niche environments or out-
compete other microorganisms for the same niche. Our proposal is highly
interdisciplinary, as is our team, incorporating forward genetics, cutting-edge
analytical measurement science, and medicinal chemistry to identify how the
glowing bacterium, Vibrio fischeri, uses a small chemical compound to better
colonize its squid host while also discovering other molecules that have yet to
be identified. Our system thus provides an entry point to identify chemical
signals that may be relevant in other beneficial and pathogenic colonization
systems and to elucidate the relevant targets in an accessible model. We will
leverage our tractable, environmentally intriguing model system to create a
hands-on outreach workshop with young girls in grades 5-10 in the greater
Monterey Bay area, which has a high Latinx population, in collaboration with
Expanding Your Horizons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is significant interest in
identifying and characterizing small molecules that underlie host-microbe
communication in plant, animal, and human host-microbiome interactions. The
naturally simple association between Euprymna scolopes bobtail squid and Vibrio
fischeri luminescent bacteria provides a symbiotic relationship that can be
interrogated in situ to discover functional compounds. Bacterial colonization of
the host is accessible to sophisticated bacterial genetic and genomic
approaches, and the site of infection can be imaged in live animals. Our
collaborative efforts have developed novel methods to identify and study small
molecules in this symbiosis. This work has resulted in the identification of a
small organic molecule, termed diketopiperazine (DKP), as a potential
contributor to symbiotic biofilm and luminescence phenotypes from V. fischeri.
We have used imaging mass spectrometry to identify additional biofilm-associated
molecules, and, using structure elucidation and synthetic chemistry, we have
synthesized large amounts of the DKP. Here, we will leverage our
interdisciplinary expertise in imaging mass spectrometry, structure isolation
and elucidation, forward genetic screening, and synthetic bioorganic chemistry
to identify the function of this DKP and identify the biosynthetic origin of
this molecule to explore whether it is used in other microbial-host systems.
This model system will allow us to address current knowledge gaps in our
understanding of the small molecules that symbiotic bacteria produce during
colonization of host specific tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.