* 2220685
* I-Corps: A Resilience Analytics Technology for Enhancing Seismic Rehabilitation Decision Making for Water Infrastructure Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Mohsen Shahandashti, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to assess, analyze, and report water infrastructure
resilience to disaster events. U.S. water infrastructure comprises more than 2.2
million miles of pipes, most of which are underground and unseen by millions of
consumers. A large proportion of these pipes are located in areas vulnerable to
earthquakes. This project targets water utilities in these critical earthquake
zones (around one-fourth of all utilities in the U.S.) as potential customers.
These water utilities must confront deep uncertainties about their aging water
pipe networks and their ability to sustain natural and human-induced
earthquakes. The utilities have to conduct a seismic vulnerability assessment
and identify critical pipes in their networks that should be rehabilitated. This
project may help water utilities in critical earthquake zones that need to make
difficult rehabilitation decisions about their water infrastructure system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of water
infrastructure systems for a highly uncertain environment. Despite technological
advances, water utility managers are often limited in their understanding of
seismic concerns. The proposed resilience analytics technology provides a
software application backed up with risk-based robust decision analytics
algorithms to identify the best seismic rehabilitation policy with controllable
risk aversion levels for a city-level network in a few
minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.