* 2220611
* NetEthics: Building Tools &amp; Training to Advance Responsible Conduct in Complex Research Networks Pioneering Novel Technologies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Korkut Uygun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,971.00

The NetEthics project will make a major advance in the responsible conduct of
large, complex engineering research projects such as NSF-funded Engineering
Research Centers (ERCs). Engineering research increasingly involves big,
multidisciplinary teams networked across multiple universities and other
institutions to develop new technologies. However, tools to help these teams
conduct research ethically and develop technologies for societal benefit are
lacking. Instead, current research ethics and tools tend to focus either on the
responsibilities of individual researchers or the broad societal issues that the
new technology will raise. These two ends of the spectrum – the micro level of
the individual and the macro level of overall impacts -- leave a troubling gap
in the middle by offering little guidance to the leaders of complex research
networks. Those leaders regularly face difficult issues such as how to reconcile
conflicting ethical approaches across the network, how to ensure ethical and
respectful laboratory leadership and mentoring, how to create network-wide
processes for resolving disputes, and how to build a network culture valuing
inclusion and diversity. Network leaders also face challenges in building
community and stakeholder relationships, ensuring responsible commercialization,
and making sure that the entire research network fulfills ethical
responsibilities such as responsible conduct of research (RCR) with human
participants, ethical treatment of animals in research, and avoiding conflicts
of interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NetEthics project will use a three-part
approach, building on the NSF ERC for Advanced Technologies for the Preservation
of Biological Systems (ATP-Bio). Study 1 will identify the roster of key values
that should guide ethics and RCR at the level of a complex research network.
Methods will include literature review and analysis, plus a modified Delphi
process to support consensus among ATP-Bio’s Ethics &amp; Public Policy Panel of
leading authorities on ethics and RCR. Study 2 will develop a survey assessment
tool to assess the range of approaches to key values across a network to
reconcile differences. Methods to develop the tool will include semi-structured
interviews of ATP-Bio researchers with qualitative analysis of resulting
transcripts, pilot testing of the survey, and administration of the survey tool
across the ATP-Bio network. Study 3 will develop educational case studies for
use by complex research networks to advance ethics and RCR at the network level.
To develop those case studies the NetEthics team will collect candidate cases
from Study 2 inputs and embedded ethics engagement in the research network. The
team will select cases that illuminate the key network ethics and RCR values
identified in Studies 1 and 2, and pilot the cases in ATP-Bio workshops to
refine them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.