* 2220295
* SBP: Collaborative Research: Testing the Stress-related Cyclical Nature of Socioeconomic Status Stigma
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Janet Tomiyama, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2025
* USD 137,361.00

Nearly 40 million people live in poverty in the United States. Climbing the
socioeconomic ladder requires overcoming many barriers. This project offers a
novel analysis of psychological barriers that make upward social mobility so
difficult: feeling stigmatized for being lower on the socioeconomic ladder is
stressful, and that stress undermines the ability to improve one's educational,
occupational, and financial standing. People who are low on the socioeconomic
ladder risk feeling stigmatized in the US, a country that embraces the American
Dream of improving one's standing. Experiencing stigma-related stress sets into
motion a vicious cycle that leads to barriers for achieving higher socioeconomic
status. This work examines causes and consequences that guide the self-
fulfilling nature of low socioeconomic status, and it tests new targets to
remove roadblocks to prosperity for all Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests hypotheses from the Cyclical Social Stigma Stress model, which
proposes that stress induced by feeling stigmatized disrupts the very things
needed for upward social mobility. Study 1 is an experiment with college
students testing whether feeling stigmatized because of low socioeconomic status
causes physiological stress, which then undermines basic cognitive processes
that are necessary for educational and financial success. Study 2 is an
experiment that tests how socioeconomic status stigma among students impacts a
sense of campus belonging and academic-related outcomes, such as academic
persistence. This study also tests targets that could reduce the negative impact
of stigma. Study 3 involves community participants who report on their daily
lives multiple times a day, to determine whether feeling mistreated due to their
socioeconomic status causes them to anticipate similar feelings in the future,
which may cause them to change how they interact with others and avoid resources
designed to increase socioeconomic success. Studies 1 and 3 include a 1-year
follow-up to measure longer-term changes in income, education, and employment.
This project also contributes to NSF's efforts to broaden participation in STEM
through a summer research program for underrepresented community college
students and research support for graduate students. More broadly, this project
brings attention to barriers that contribute to limited socioeconomic
advancement and provides information for developing targeted intervention
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.