* 2220291
* Collaborative Research: A Coordinate-Free Framework for Improving Eddy Parameterizations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Lilly, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 334,786.00

This project is to create and apply a new theoretical framework for developing
and assessing parameterizations of eddy transport in numerical models. The
framework constitutes a set of principles linking physical meaning to
parameterization form, including extant as well as yet-unformulated variations.
This work will provide an avenue for the cross-evaluation of existing or
proposed parameterizations from first principles. Two significant software
packages that will result from this work are (i) symbolic algebra software for
implementing eddy parameterizations in an arbitary model coordinate system and
choice of discretization, and (ii) numerical code for error diagnostics in model
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Explicit, Stochastic, Coordinate-
independent (ESC) framework will incorporate: (i) explicit and rigorous
definitions for filtering and averaging operations; (ii) a flexible approach to
stochastic modeling that relaxes the unrealistic constraints implicit in
existing parameterizations on eddy path smoothness and dependence on local
conditions; and (iii) the use of coordinate-independent representations to
express the physical essence of parameterizations free from choice of model
geometry. This work will clarify the link between parameterization forms and
conserved properties (energy, enstrophy, etc.); speed the identification and
assessment of discretization errors in multiple model systems; uniquely identify
the advective and diffusive components of parameterized fluxes across
implementations; and account for the impact of the observed range of high-
frequency trajectory behavior on parameterization
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.