* 2220322
* MPS-ASCEND EM: A Postdoc Community of Mentoring and Networking
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Moses Ntam, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 714,130.00

With support of the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Drs.
Michael Young of Carnegie Mellon University, Pamela Harris of Williams College,
Jennifer Ross and Moses Ntam of Tuskegee University and Tera Jordan of the Iowa
State University form the core leadership team that will provide mentorship and
other support to the first two cohorts of the MPS-Ascending Postdoctoral
Research Fellows. The MPS-Ascend funding mechanism (NSF 21-573 and NSF 22-501)
is intended to recognize beginning investigators of significant potential and
provide them with experience in research that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and help broadening participation
within MPS fields. The purpose of the MPS-Ascend External Mentorship program is
to support these postdoctoral Fellows who will broaden the participation of
groups that are underrepresented in MPS fields in the U.S. including Blacks or
African Americans, Hispanics, Latinos, Native Americans, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians and other Native Pacific Islanders. This team will develop a network
of mentors and sponsors who will enhance the Fellowsâ€™ professional preparation
and equip them for leadership roles as equity-focused scholars. The community
will function using a layered mentor approach that connects the fellows with
one-on-one, peer, and volunteer expert mentors. Through professional development
and learning activities, as well as interaction with mentors, the Fellows will
be prepared for career success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will bring
together a diverse group of educators with experience in math and physical
sciences (MPS) as well as social sciences to provide MPS postdoctoral fellows
with mentoring experiences that will strengthen their career preparation. The
knowledge gained through this project will help to contribute to higher
education and science literature regarding promising practices related to
preparing postdoctoral fellows for successful professional experiences and
seamless transition into the academic arena. This project will develop future
faculty and industry leaders who will understand the importance of providing
holistic mentoring to support postdoctoral fellows. The planned professional
experiences of the postdoctoral fellows will equip them to interact with people
from all backgrounds and contribute to broadening the participation of
individuals from historically underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.