* 2220663
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Interactions between Mesoscale and Microscale Flows in the Stable Boundary Layer over Shallow Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* David Kristovich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 463,755.00

Atmospheric flows under unstable conditions (e.g., sunny days) are better
understood than that under stable conditions which often occur at night. If the
terrain is not perfectly flat or the surface is vegetated, flows become even
more difficult to understand. This uncertainty means nighttime weather forecasts
can lack accuracy. This is particularly true in slightly sloping topography as
seen through much of the central US. This project will answer fundamental
physics questions that exist for stable conditions over much of the planet
including: How do plant, terrain, and elevation changes impact atmospheric
flows? How do the impacted atmospheric flows interact with flows from other
regions? What special flows (like down gully cold air flow; flows colliding)
exist in gently sloped areas? This project will use previously collected
experimental data to deduce empirical relationships defining when, where, and
why these phenomena are likely to occur. This improvement of current theoretical
frameworks will further understanding of nighttime pollutant transport and
transformation. Public health and safety can benefit from improved quantitative
prediction of transport of chemical or biological hazardous pollution. The
agricultural community will benefit from increased knowledge of physical
processes controlling field-scale temperature, including those affecting crop
health and those leading to patches of frost and subsequent crop loss, a major
challenge in ensuring global food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using unique
observations taken during the NSF funded Stable Atmospheric Variability ANd
Transport (SAVANT) campaign, this work will lead to an improved understanding of
impacts of shallow complex terrain on mechanical and thermodynamic properties of
the stable boundary layer and to fill the knowledge gap in scale interactions
between environmental and local flows, specifically with respect to flow
patterns that occur in shallow topography. SAVANT collected concurrent in-situ
and remote sensing observations during two intensive months in the fall of 2018.
The field setup was designed to investigate causes and effects of cold air
drainage (down gully) flow in a shallow gully. Tracer plume releases tracked
with multiple lidar (Light Detection and Ranging) systems offer the unique
opportunity to examine interacting flows at multiple spatial scales. Two
critical factors for stable-layer turbulent mixing in complex terrain, wind
shear and the stable stratification, will be used to stratify observations to
describe the most energetic turbulence eddies using the tower data within and
above the main gully, augmented by spatial shear observations from lidars.
Vertical scaling factors for turbulent eddies and the influences of drainage
flows will be investigated. Factors leading to non-uniform drainage flows (i.e.,
pulsing, meandering, and converging flows) will be detailed. The unique
combination of tower and 3-D lidar observations will allow for improved
parameterizations of energy and mass exchanges, which will improve predictive
model capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.