* 2220587
* EDGE FGT: Creation of a Genetically Tractable Cephalopod Model using the Hummingbird Bobtail Squid
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Joshua Rosenthal, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,704,749.00

Cephalopods offer tremendous opportunities for biological discovery. Their
novelties include the most complex invertebrate nervous systems and behaviors,
the ability to create near-perfect camouflage, unique body plans, taxon specific
genes and gene family expansions, specialized organs for hosting microbes, and
an enormous capacity to edit genetic information within mRNA. There is a large
and diverse cephalopod research community that takes advantage of these unique
features for neuroscience, developmental biology, physiology, biomechanics,
microbial-host interactions, material properties, genomics, and molecular
biology. Despite these biological attributes, cephalopod research has been
limited because specimens are difficult to obtain and there is a complete lack
of genetically tractable model species. To this end, we are developing gene
manipulation and husbandry methods and resources for Euprymna berryi, the
hummingbird bobtail squid, a species native to Japan that has proven to be
robust in laboratory settings. As part of this effort, we will develop the
technologies to drive reporter gene expression and use these methods to create
transgenic lines and resources to serve the research community. The tools and
methods developed in this work will open up new areas of investigation for the
large and diverse community that studies cephalopod biology, and we will hold
laboratory-based hands-on workshops to rapidly share our technical advances.
Through this program, we have also created an internship program to provide
mentorship, professional development, and on-the-job training to aid upper-level
students pursuing careers as aquarists and researchers using aquatic
organisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; A key bottleneck in the study of cephalopod
biology is the absence of a genetically tractable model species. This is, in
part, due to the relative difficulty of culturing cephalopods in laboratory
settings, the difficulty of accessing and manipulating early embryonic stages,
and the absence of molecular and sequencing resources for this taxon. To address
this these limitations, our goal is to develop the methods to create transgenic
lines of Euprymna berryi, a culturable bobtail squid, and then to use these
methods to create resources to serve the research community. As part of this
effort, we will optimize protocols for creating transgenics by testing random
and site-specific insertion of DNA cassettes. We will also create sequence
resources for the identification of promoters and enhancers to drive tissue-
specific and ubiquitous reporter gene expression. Finally, we will establish
robust husbandry conditions for maintaining these lines across multiple
generations. This work is expected to have a strong impact on the cephalopod
research community by providing new tools and techniques that will open novel
avenues of inquiry, making cephalopod biology accessible to both new and
established research labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.