* 2220938
* Undergraduate Scholar Education and Research: Program To Usher Scholars Into Success in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Matin Pirouz Nia, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,498,677.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated computer
scientists by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at California State University,
Fresno (CSU-F). California State University, Fresno is both a Hispanic-Serving
Institution and an Asian American, Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution. Over its five-year duration, the Undergraduate Scholar Education
and Research (USHER) project will fund $10,000 annual scholarships to 28 unique
full-time students. Seventeen freshmen will receive scholarships for four years
and 11 transfer students will receive scholarships for two years. USHER provides
a suite of activities to support Scholars from matriculation to graduation,
including intensive faculty and peer mentoring and 25 Challenges for
Computational and Algorithmic Thinking (C2ATs) that expose students to various
fields in Computer Science and give them a glimpse of real-world problems and
how to solve them. Faculty will mentor students to draft a blueprint for career-
long STEM Impact Identity that allows the Scholars to see a path to giving back
to their home communities through research projects. The STEM Impact Identity
process makes broader impacts a core feature of USHER, creating a new generation
of computer scientists who have strong service-oriented identity. The project
intellectual merit consists of addressing three gaps in the research: measuring
the effectiveness of mentorship, intentional activities, and customized academic
support services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need to succeed in increasing Computer Science
degree completion. It is essential to shed light on the unique factors related
to the retention, persistence, and timely graduation of these students. The
USHER research project explores the motivations and expectations of these
students. This research will help fill the gap in documenting the various
factors that contribute to the persistence of students, including enhancing the
student’s sense of belonging in the field of computer science. An independent
external evaluator will also gather data on the effectiveness of the USHER
program in delivering the suite of activities to support Scholars’ needs and
interests and to ascertain whether there is a difference in disciplinary
interest and sense of proficiency between USHER Scholars and participants in the
matched sample. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.