* 2220603
* Physics of Non-Fermi Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Qimiao Si, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2025
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on the physics of strongly correlated quantum materials.
While the textbook description of electrons in solids has been enormously
successful in describing conventional metals such as Aluminum and simple
semiconductors such as Silicon, its reliance on essentially independent
electrons has proven to be inadequate for a broad range of quantum materials.
Electrons in such materials cannot be considered to move independent of each
other, as they experience strong correlations with each other. Such correlations
can produce novel quantum phases and give rise to phase transitions at the
absolute zero of temperature. These are quantum analogues of familiar phase
transitions such as water freezing into ice. In a class of such quantum phase
transitions, electrons act in a highly collective way and a “strange-metal”
behavior develops. The PI will apply or develop theoretical methods to study
this strange-metal physics near such quantum phase transitions including a type
of a phase in which electrons flow without any loss of energy
(superconductivity) that may be relevant for quantum information technologies.
The fundamental knowledge gained from these studies could, in the long run, help
in significant technological advances in the areas of quantum computation,
quantum sensing and metrology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will create
training opportunities for postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduate
students who will form the future workforce in quantum science and technology.
This award will also support the preparation of a book on "Heavy Fermions and
Quantum Phase Transitions" intended for graduate students taking a one-semester
course. The PI will disseminate research advances in the area of quantum
materials by writing review articles and organizing workshops, which will help
in educating and training junior scientists and students in topics at the
forefront of condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research in the
physics of strongly correlated quantum systems. The general goal is to
understand how strong correlations lead to unusual excitations and novel quantum
phases in metallic systems. The PI will apply and develop controlled theoretical
methods to study well-defined theoretical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
specific research directions will be pursued. First, heavy fermion quantum
criticality will be analyzed, with a focus on new regimes characterized by
singular charge responses. Second, the PI will initiate theoretical studies on
the novel phases that emerge near quantum critical points, with a particular
focus on candidate spin-triplet superconductivity. Third, non-Fermi liquid
physics in Weyl-Kondo semimetal systems will be explored. Fourth, the PI will
investigate out-of-equilibrium physics of quantum critical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will create training opportunities for
postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduate students who will form the future
workforce in quantum science and technology. This award will also support the
preparation of a book on "Heavy Fermions and Quantum Phase Transitions" intended
for graduate students taking a one-semester course. The PI will disseminate
research advances in the area of quantum materials by writing review articles
and organizing workshops, which will help in educating and training junior
scientists and students in topics at the forefront of condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.