* 2220981
* Growing STEM Student Success through Scholarship and Community Building with Experiential Learning and Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Nina Theis, College of Our Lady of the Elms
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

The College of Our Lady of the Elms (Elms College) will increase the retention
and success of academically-talented STEM students with financial need through
community-engaged experiential learning incorporating data science and
supportive student learning environments. Elms will provide scholarships and
educational support for at least 40 unique low-income students (10 first-year
students and 30 transfer students) in the STEM majors of Biology, Biotechnology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Computer Information Technology and Security, and
Mathematics. All STEM scholars will be provided community-engaged experiential
learning activities and opportunities to build data science skills in each year
of their studies, culminating in an internship or research experience. With STEM
outreach events to recruit and retain STEM students, this project will serve as
a model for cooperation between two-year and four-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elms College will implement an innovative high-
impact S-STEM program involving community-engaged experiential learning and data
science skill-building to increase the retention, success, and career outcomes
of academically talented, low-income STEM scholars. The broader impact of this
initiative is to increase the number and diversity of the STEM workforce by
removing the barriers to success for low-income students who have thus far
remained underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM fields of study. This
initiative will strengthen STEM transfer pathways and improve transfer and
degree completion rates. Findings from this project will generate knowledge on
how participation in community-engaged experiential learning and data science
skill-building positively impacts the retention, graduation, and success of low-
income STEM students. Community engaged experiential learning will be built into
cohort activities, such as the STEM Innovation Challenge, and courses, such as
Data Science/Analytics, internships, and scientific research. These
opportunities will allow students to explore hands-on projects directly related
to their career goals and to acquire and practice skills needed in their chosen
STEM careers. This initiative will build pathways from community colleges to
liberal arts colleges and increase retention and graduation rates in STEM areas
of national need. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.