* 2220537
* ATD: Algorithms for Real-time Dynamic Risk Identification with Statistical Confidence
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jingshen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Recent advancements in digital technologies, such as wide-bandwidth networks,
online marketplaces, large supply chain and logistics networks, widespread
smartphone usage, wearable devices, and digital health technologies, have
facilitated the generation and storage of near-real-time, high-resolution
datasets. These datasets are sequentially available at a high frequency from a
large number of subjects, spanning various fields including healthcare,
medicine, mobile health, supply chain, and network monitoring. This type of data
collection, commonly referred to as streaming data, has brought about a paradigm
shift in technology and presents significant opportunities for real-time threat
detection by monitoring data in motion and making continuous decisions in a
timely manner. This research project leverages the potential of streaming data
research by developing algorithms for real-time dynamic risk identification that
fully explore the unique features of massive data streams. The project will
provide research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to develop algorithms and
statistical methods for real-time risk detection in streaming data, particularly
in the domains of electronic medical records, mobile health, and supply chain.
The developed approaches allow for dynamic revision of statistical models,
efficient storage of summary statistics, and accurate detection of threats and
abnormal behaviors as new data arrives. By incorporating dependent and non-
identically distributed samples, the project moves away from simplistic models
and embraces new frameworks to reflect domain problems and data realities. The
approaches will be applied to address significant scientific questions in HIV
prevention, mobile health with depression disorders, and supply chain
disruptions. The project will create a unified framework for dynamic risk
identification that can be readily incorporated into various disciplines,
fostering collaborations with subject-matter scientists, and involving students
in state-of-the-art research through educational
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.