* 2220615
* NNA Research: Reducing Fuel Oil Consumption in Rural Arctic Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Stephen Colt, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Education, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across the Arctic, many remote communities have an energy-
inefficient housing stock and rely on expensive, imported fuel oil for both
electricity generation and space heating. Together, these factors create an
exceptionally high energy cost burden for households. To reduce dependence on
fuel oil, some communities in Alaska have integrated renewable energy (RE)
resources into their electrical microgrids. Flexible loads, such as
supplementary space heating, can buffer fluctuations in renewable electricity
generation and allow utilities to generate more electricity from renewables.
When excess renewably generated electricity is available, it can be sold at a
discounted rate and used by consumers to charge electric thermal storage heaters
(ETSH), thereby reducing heating costs. Energy efficiency must also be
considered as it may be most cost-effective to reduce fuel oil consumption
through a combination of energy efficiency improvements and RE capacity
additions. This research investigates whether displacing fuel oil used for space
heating with energy efficiency improvements and renewably generated electricity
can substantially reduce householdsâ€™ energy cost burden, reduce carbon
emissions, and increase the RE contribution in isolated microgrids in remote
Arctic communities. This research has energy justice implications for the
hundreds of Arctic communities currently using fuel oil for space heating and
electricity generation. This research may lead to the broader adoption of a
cost-effective combination of energy-efficient homes and low-cost, renewably
generated electricity for space heating, which could reduce residential sector
carbon emissions and household energy cost burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project incorporates dimensions of the natural environment, built environment,
and social systems through four components: 1) a residential heating field
experiment in Kotzebue, Alaska; 2) energy system modeling; 3) economic and
policy analysis; and 4) energy education. The research objectives of the project
are: 1) measure the electricity and heating fuel oil consumption in treatment
and control homes before and after energy efficiency improvements and ETSH are
installed in the treatment homes; 2) extend an existing microgrid simulation
software (MiGRIDS) to add building thermal loads and ETSH; 3) use the MiGRIDS
model to optimize and value various levels of energy efficiency retrofits, ETSH,
electrical energy storage, and RE; 4) develop a process that can be replicated
elsewhere to optimize and value various levels of energy efficiency retrofits,
ETSH, electrical energy storage, and RE; 5) collaborate with the Tribal
government, local energy experts, and community members to design a survey that
satisfies both the community needs and research objectives; 6) estimate
reductions in energy cost burden, carbon emissions, and air pollutant emissions
associated with displaced fuel oil use; 7) identify regulatory, institutional,
and/or policy changes required to enable the widespread adoption of renewably
generated electricity for space heating in other communities in Alaska and the
circumpolar North; 8) identify how existing statewide energy policies can be
adapted to be more equitable and effective; 9) collaborate with local K-8
educators and elders to create culturally responsive, place-based curriculum
materials for a science unit on energy use in Arctic communities; 10) provide
energy efficiency and energy auditing training to local high school students;
and 11) teach Arctic Remote Energy Network Academy (ARENA) program participants
how to apply the energy system model developed for this project to reduce fuel
oil consumption in their own communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.