* 2220278
* Collaborative Research:  An open, platform-agnostic sediment trap controller and imaging sensor
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Melissa Omand, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 255,901.00

The ocean naturally moves carbon produced by living organisms from the
atmosphere to deep water, and this plays an important role in how Earth’s
climate may respond to increasing amounts of carbon dioxide. Additionally, some
have proposed attempting to intentionally accelerate this process in an effort
to reverse human carbon dioxide emissions. However, teasing apart the different
biological influences that drive sinking carbon remains a major challenge. The
tools that are required to measure sinking carbon are often expensive and
specialized, limiting their accessibility. In this project, a camera-equipped
sediment trap that catches and identifies sinking particles will be developed,
tested, and refined. It will utilize openly shared software, and hardware
designs that are based upon commercially-available components, to enable easier
adoption by other researchers. This project will also provide opportunities for
mentoring and training to a graduate student and undergraduate summer students,
and would support an early-career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biological carbon pump, which delivers organic carbon into the ocean’s interior,
has received focused scientific attention for decades because it maintains the
ocean’s vertical dissolved inorganic carbon gradient, and is closely linked to
global climate via exchange of carbon dioxide with the atmosphere. Ongoing
anthropogenic impacts on the ocean may drive future changes in the efficiency of
the biological carbon pump, which would have important climate implications.
Intentionally increasing the input of biological carbon into the ocean, either
through nutrient fertilization or biomass injection, is also proposed as a
candidate method to increase ocean carbon sequestration. The development of
widely-available tools for measuring sinking organic matter fluxes is therefore
of great importance. The first objective of this project is to develop and test
a sediment trap controller that would simplify the construction and deployment
of neutrally-buoyant sediment traps based upon commercially-available profiling
floats, thus broadening the potential user base of such traps. The second
objective is to integrate with the trap controller a low-cost, upward-looking in
situ camera to image sinking particles. Characterizing this camera’s laboratory
and field performance under a variety of platform hydrodynamic conditions, and
developing software for onboard data reduction, will lay the groundwork for its
use to quantify sinking carbon fluxes aboard autonomous platforms. Finally,
recognizing that the lower mesopelagic zone (defined here as 500-1000 m) is
critical to observations of biological carbon sequestration over long
timescales, the third project objective is to optimize these tools for use at
these typically under-sampled depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.