* 2220309
* Collaborative Research: Methane efflux from river influenced coastal marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Christof Meile, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 199,278.00

Collaborative Research: Methane efflux from river influenced coastal marine
sediments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane is a strong greenhouse gas and the amount
of methane in the atmosphere is increasing. Large amounts of methane are present
in sediments. Thus, understanding how much methane is released from sediments is
a key first step for improving estimates of methane emissions. Coastal sediments
are thought to be large sources of methane to the overlying water and
potentially the atmosphere. Yet, fluxes of methane from coastal environments are
poorly known. This project will measure methane fluxes from coastal sediments
into the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Methane is produced in sediments when
microorganisms break down organic matter and from geological sources. However,
the amount of methane released from sediments can be reduced by microorganisms
that oxidize methane near the sediment surface where oxygen is present (aerobic
oxidation) and deep in the sediment where oxygen is not present (anaerobic
oxidation). This study focuses on environments where the aerobic oxidation of
methane is the key process that prevents its release to the water column.
Results from this project will help identify areas of the coastal ocean that are
significant sources of methane release. This work is timely, as river-influenced
marine sediments are sensitive to anthropogenic activities and global climate
change. Scientists involved in this study will translate the findings into
useful information for carbon cycle scientists, policy makers, students,
teachers, and the public. They will work with education and outreach programs at
Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium, University of Georgia, and Louisiana
State University, and provide training to scientists from undergraduate to
postgraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High sedimentation rates, like those
found near rivers, can drive methane efflux from sediments, as evidenced by
elevated methane concentrations in bottom waters. Observational data suggest
that sediments from river influenced shallow shelf regions with low dissolved
oxygen concentrations in the water column emit more methane to the water column
than typical continental shelf sediments. This project combines benthic flux
measurements, geochemistry and rate analysis into a reaction-transport model
that will evaluate environmental influences on benthic processes. The team of
scientists will measure benthic fluxes of oxygen and methane using an in situ
lander, and sediment micro-profiles of oxygen and sulfide. Sedimentation and
mixing rates will be determined using naturally occurring radioisotopes. Sulfate
reduction and methane oxidation rates will be determined using radiotracers and
a broad suite of contextual geochemical analysis will be performed. During two
cruises off the southeastern coast of Louisiana, a total of 5 sites will be
targeted. The data synthesis will help refine our understanding of the
interactions between rivers, marine sediments, and methane releases from marine
sediments. The project supports the development of an early career investigator
and will provide training for one postdoctoral associate, two graduate students,
three research assistants. This effort will leverage the LUMCON REU site program
to support at least one student per year. The education goals emphasize informal
education through outreach, formal education in the classroom, and authentic
research experiences for community college students. Many of the activities
emphasize the importance of communicating information to the scientific
community, students, policy makers, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.