* 2220959
* Scholarships, Mentoring, and Professional Support to Improve Engineering &amp; Artificial Intelligence Student Success at Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Gabriela Rosu, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,499,629.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Chandler-Gilbert Community College. Chandler-Gilbert Community College,
a Hispanic Serving Institution is in the Southeast valley of Phoenix, Arizona
where fast-growing high-tech manufacturing industries reside. Over its 6 year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to at least 48 unique students who
are pursuing Engineering, Engineering Technician, Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning degrees. The project has the potential to contribute to the
national needs for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and
technicians by increasing the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students. The project team plans to educate a new generation of engineers
and artificial intelligence specialists while collecting student success data.
The project has the potential to benefit society by developing highly qualified
personnel in the community to a growing high-tech workforce while promoting more
racial, ethnic, and gender diversity to the engineering and artificial
intelligence industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project is to make
accessible specialized educational opportunities in Engineering, Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning in Maricopa County. The project has three
components: 1) providing 192 scholarships to at least 48 students; 2)
maintaining the eligibility of the recipients by providing academic support; 3)
organizing and facilitating extracurricular events, industry partnerships, and
professional development. The project will be measured through three indicators:
1) participants will complete their degrees at a higher rate than non-
participants; 2) participants will have a higher sense of belonging to the
scientific community than their peers; 3) the monthly individual development
plan completed by the scholars and their mentors will lead to course completion
and scholarship eligibility through up to four semesters. The project team plans
to evaluate the project using data collection, surveys, and statistical
analysis. The results of the project will be shared with the STEM education
community through annual reports, presentations at regional and national
conferences, as well as publications. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.