* 2220439
* Internal tides in straits and small ocean basins: resonant modes vs. propagating waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* James Lerczak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 456,261.00

Tides are generated by astronomic body forces on the entire water column but in
the stratified ocean, their interaction with topography or similar mechanisms
also generate internal tides, which manifest themselves as a periodic
displacement of the various density levels vertically from their normal resting
position. These internal tides can propagate large distances away from the
topography, and their dissipation away from the generation site results in ocean
mixing that is thought to contribute to sustaining abyssal stratification and
overturning circulation. A large number of both numerical and observational
studies regarding internal tide generation have been focused on either
generation at ocean ridges and isolated topographical features or generation at
the open coast, but not in semi-enclosed basins, such as bays, gulfs, marginal
seas, and straits. Under appropriate basin configuration, tidal forcing can
elicit a resonant response for an appropriate basin geometry, yet what such
“appropriate” configuration may be is yet poorly understood. Few previous works
considered basin mode resonance to tidal forcing in barotropic or two-layer
models. However, vertical stratification and its interaction with coastal
bathymetry are likely to have a significant impact on the generation of internal
waves and their dynamics within a basin. This project will conduct numerical
simulations to investigate under what physical characteristics of a basin,
internal tides can be characterized as resonant basin modes rather than freely-
propagating waves. Satellite-based estimates of internal tide elevation
(amplitude and phase) will be used to investigate in which basins resonant
internal tides are observed and these estimates will be compared with numerical
simulation results. Although the scope of this project is primarily focused on
physical mechanisms of internal tide dynamics, the results and analysis will
have broader interdisciplinary application. For instance, vertical transport due
displacements of density layers by the internal tides can deliver nutrients to
the surface or oxygenate the bottom waters. Such vertical mixing is important
for biological productivity of a basin, especially if internal tide amplitudes,
and subsequently vertical excursions, can be resonantly amplified. Analysis in
this study will highlight in which basins internal tides might play an important
role, especially relative to wind stress-induced mixing. Furthermore,
theoretical understanding of the physical mechanisms is crucial to improving
models that estimate internal tide amplitudes from satellite observations. The
forthcoming launch of Surface Ocean and Water Topography (SWOT) satellite
mission, which has unprecedentedly high resolution and wide spatial coverage,
provides further promise for estimating internal tides. Using SWOT data in
models will be particularly useful for small basins and coastal regions that are
not well sampled by existing satellites. Theoretical results from this study
will shed light on the new physical mechanisms for internal tide dynamics, which
will be important for validating and understanding the satellite-based
estimates. Additionally, this proposed project will support the professional
development of an early career female
oceanographer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses a
significant gap in literature regarding internal tides: their dynamics in small
basins. Much of the previous research efforts have focused either on the
interaction of internal tides with isolated bottom topography and effects on
abyssal mixing in the open ocean or the generation of internal tides at coastal
shelves, while there is a paucity of studies investigating the response to tidal
forcing in semi-enclosed basins, such as bays, gulfs, marginal seas, and
straits. However, because of their long wavelengths (comparable to horizontal
basin scales), internal tides may be resonant with natural basin modes, which
would explain previous observations of large amplitude internal tides in some
basins. This study will build an understanding of the basin response to tidal
forcing by systematically adding complexity to numerical simulations to
investigate the effects of basin characteristics (e.g., size, topography,
stratification) on its response. These results will shed light on the criteria
for basins, where internal tide response may be amplified, thus potentially
resulting in greater vertical transport and mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.