* 2220924
* NRI: A Novel Framework for the Hardware and Control Co-design of Dynamic Humanoid Robots with Electric Motors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Patrick Wensing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Quadruped robots are now doing real work including exploration of abandoned
mines, inspection of power plants, transportation of payloads on rough terrain,
and more. The remarkable recent transition from research platforms to useful
robots was enabled by fundamental innovations on powerful, inexpensive, and
widely available electric motors. But quadrupedal robots cannot use tools
created for humans or work in environments designed for the anthropomorphic
form, such as narrow corridors or climbing ladders. Instead, capable humanoid
robots could help prevent the recurrent injuries and disabilities of
firefighters, nurses, or warehouse workers in the US, and save billions of
dollars on health care each year. The fundamental challenge preventing the
advent of widely adopted humanoid robots is that their mechanical structure and
motion control are significantly more complex than those of quadrupedal robots.
This project will close this gap by translating the technology that enabled the
remarkable success of quadruped robots to the creation of physically capable
humanoid robots via a formal and systematic design process. The robot Dash
fabricated in this project will realize athletic tasks, such as running and
powerlifting, with a performance comparable to humans. The robot will be open-
sourced to lower the barrier to entry for research, establish a common platform
for benchmarking performance, accelerate the research progress on humanoid
robots, and expedite their transition to useful tools in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an integration framework for
the co-design of the hardware and control of humanoid robots with electric
motors to maximize their physical capabilities. The main fundamental science of
this project is a holistic framework for robot integration of dynamic humanoids
and at the core of this framework is a novel co-design optimization formulation
that is scalable to multiple tasks. The transformative nature of this
formulation is amplified by three fundamental scientific contributions of this
work: (i) Derivation of performance metrics and design principles tailored to
dynamic humanoid robots; (ii) Creation of efficient computational tools for
simulation and identification of the complex mechanisms employed by these
robots; And (iii) extension of dynamic whole-body control techniques to address
self-collision. The open-source humanoid robot Dash will be integrated with this
framework for realizing demanding physical tasks including running,
powerlifting, and carrying a substantial payload. The lessons learned from this
research will be reflected in education through the creation of a course on the
design and control of dynamic robots jointly taught by the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.