* 2220824
* Pan-American School on Commutative Algebra (PASCA 2022)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Kenneth Jeffries, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 11,900.00

The Pan-American School on Commutative Algebra is a two week long summer school
focusing on a range of topics of current interest in the field. The school will
take place on the premises of Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas in
Guanajuato, Mexico, which has a long tradition of successful international
events. In addition to introducing active research topics to the participants,
another major goal of the school is to foster international connections among
the participants. This grant will fund the participation of US-based graduate
students to the school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of significant
breakthroughs have occurred in Commutative Algebra in recent years. These
results arrived by integrating various techniques in Commutative Algebra and
methods from other areas such as number theory, convex geometry, and
representation theory. The basic scientific purpose of this school is to connect
students with a range of questions and techniques of current interest in
Commutative Algebra. Topics for the school include lectures on toric varieties,
algebra structures on free resolutions, methods in positive characteristic, and
differentials and derivations with applications. For more information on the
summer school, see https://www.jack-
jeffries.github.io/PASCA.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.