* 2220433
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1B: Foundations for Differentially Private Internet Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Tianhao Wang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,619.00

Internet measurement research has been providing critical insights and evidence
support in guiding the design of Internet infrastructures. However, how to share
and use Internet measurement data while respecting users' privacy is still
challenging. To protect privacy, most works choose to anonymize sensitive fields
or only publish the aggregated statistics, but such methods are vulnerable to
privacy attacks. Differential privacy, which provides guaranteed privacy
protection for data release, has gained prominent traction from companies and
government agencies, and is a natural choice for sharing Internet measurement
data. However, a critical gap remains to identify how differential privacy can
be applied to networking problems. This project aims to understand privacy
issues and then lay the foundations for deploying differential privacy in the
processing pipeline of Internet measurement data. The project's broader
significance and importance include transferring the technologies to industry,
involving members from under-represented groups, and disseminating outcomes
through K-12 outreach and community services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is structured around three main aims. Thrust 1 conducts a comprehensive study of
the privacy issues in the existing practices in collecting and sharing Internet
measurement data, and develops an inference attack benchmark to assess the
privacy risks and the benefits of different protection mechanisms. Thrust 2
investigates how differential privacy can be adjusted and integrated into the
processing pipeline of Internet measurement data, by developing new configurable
and relaxed differential privacy notions. Thrust 3 develops methods to publish
synthetic Internet measurement data while satisfying differential
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.