* 2220426
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track II: Enhancing the Neural Network Verification (NNV) Tool for Industrial Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Taylor Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,309.00

The safety and reliability of systems incorporating machine-learning components
are significant challenges. New techniques are crucial to enable rigorous
analysis before deploying these data-driven machine-learning components for
tasks ranging from sensing and perception to planning and control in safety-
critical domains, such as aerospace and automotive systems. This project
enhances the Neural Network Verification (NNV) software tool for deep neural
networks and learning-enabled autonomous systems to enable industrial usage
through engagement with industry partners in aerospace, automotive, and design
automation. The project's novelty is the development of new verification
techniques for neural networks that process time-series data and new ways to
specify temporal behaviors. The project's impact is developing and applying
rigorous analysis methods, as well as helping transition these methods to
industry, which may eventually be used in the engineering-assurance and
certification processes of real-world learning-enabled
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new neural-network
verification methods for time-series data and architectures, then implement
these in the NNV software tool, and evaluate them on challenging benchmarks and
case studies from industry. The new time-series analysis techniques combine the
relaxed star reachability approach with counterexample-guided abstraction
refinement (CEGAR) methods to improve verification scalability while maintaining
precision. Trace-based properties for these time-series problems will be
specified in formalisms such as metric temporal logic (MTL) and signal temporal
logic (STL), as well as extensions of these logics. NNV will also be improved
for usability and documentation, as well as evaluated for these improvements, in
part by continuing to use it within courses taught by the researchers, as well
as collaborating with industry partners. Industrial-scale benchmarks and case
studies developed with industry partners will strengthen engagement of the
broader formal-methods and machine-learning research communities through events
such as the Neural Network Verification Competition (VNN-COMP) and the Hybrid
Systems Verification (ARCH-COMP) category on Artificial Intelligence and Neural
Network Control Systems (AINNCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.