* 2220518
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Towards resilient water infrastructure in Alaska Native communities through knowledge co-production
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Bora Cetin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents and
Resilient Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change poses a major
threat to the water security of Alaska Native communities. While local, state,
and federal agencies have spent considerable funds to design and build piped
water supply systems in rural Alaskan communities, many of these systems were
built on permafrost soils assuming the ground would remain frozen year-round.
Now, rising temperatures are causing arctic permafrost to thaw, which in turn is
causing underground water supply pipes to burst and leak. These pipe bursts have
led to persistent water supply outages, to the extent that nearly 80% of
interviewed Alaska Native residents cite pipe leaks or breaks as one of the most
pressing issues affecting their quality of life. New sensing technologies have
the potential to mitigate water supply problems by enabling operators to pre-
emptively detect leaks and prevent outages. At the same time, water system
designs need to be mindful of the cultural meaning assigned to these systems and
fully include Alaska Native communities in their co-design. Integrating new
technologies requires a coordinated approach that recognizes traditional and
local knowledge and empowers Alaska Native communities in the infrastructure
design process. Towards this goal, this project bridges the environmental,
technological, and social challenges that Alaska Native communities face with
regard to their water systems. The project team will work closely with Alaska
Native communities to co-develop new climate-resilient water infrastructure
through knowledge co-production, the deployment of novel real-time water supply
monitoring systems, and characterization of Arctic soil conditions and their
effects on pipeline structural integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop
climate-resilient water supply systems for Alaska Native communities, this
research project will bring together a multidisciplinary research team of
engineers and social scientists working in coordination with village residents,
tribal council leaders, utility staff, and nonprofit organizations representing
Alaska Native communities in the Norton Sound region of western Alaska. Using a
convergent research approach, this project will address fundamental knowledge
gaps at the intersection of social, engineered and natural systems. First,
knowledge co-production methods will be applied to understand the cultural
significance of water and identify community-specific perspectives that affect
the engineering design process. Second, a novel wireless sensor network for
water supply monitoring will be deployed and paired with multiclass data-driven
and model-based leak detection techniques to understand their potential for
mitigating real-world water supply disruptions. Finally, lab and field
experiments on Arctic soils will be combined with data-driven models to
characterize the long-term performance of soil foundations and predict the
potential for future soil-induced damage to water systems. These research
objectives will be complemented by outreach efforts aimed at training community
members in the use of sensing equipment, as well as educational programs
designed to raise awareness of water supply issues and social disparities facing
Alaska Native communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.