* 2220535
* Collaborative Research: Enacting Professional Ethics and Disciplinary Transformation through the Promotion of Evidence-based Training and Education Initiatives in Archaeology
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Katherine Chiou, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 12/31/2025
* USD 171,258.00

This project will advance knowledge on a scientific ethics training intervention
known as Ethics Bowls, which employ competitive case study-based debate to
immerse participants in ethical issues, frameworks, and problem-solving
strategies in active-learning environments. Ethics Bowls, particularly the
Society for American Archaeology Ethics Bowl (SAA EB), have been used to train
students in the discipline of archaeology over the last 18 years, resulting in
the participation of hundreds of individuals and establishing a baseline dataset
for assessing long-term effects of this training activity. As archaeologists
grapple with intersecting ethical crises, the SAA EB is one of the few formal
ethics education opportunities in the field. Moreover, the SAA EB, in contrast
to other discipline-specific Ethics Bowls, is designed to target graduate
students preparing to enter archaeology professions as research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of (1) quantitative and
qualitative data from a mixed-methods survey, (2) interview data from former SAA
EB participants and archaeologists with no Ethics Bowl exposure, and (3)
consultations with diverse practitioners, relevant community partners, and
Advisory Boards with expertise in archaeological ethics and interdisciplinary
approaches to ethics and responsible conduct of research (RCR) trainings, the
research team will: identify successful aspects of Ethics Bowl training;
redesign and debut an improved Ethics Bowl model; and craft deliverables that
contribute to establishing and maintaining a disciplinary culture of ethical
research and practice within archaeology and other STEM fields. Specifically,
this project’s broader contributions include (1) creating indexes of ethics case
studies; (2) documenting challenges in disciplinary-centered, active-learning
science ethics trainings; (3) emphasizing archaeologists’ responsibilities to
the diverse publics they serve through effective, widespread ethics training;
and (4) supporting diversity, equity, and inclusion goals by funding and
mentoring early career scholars from minority-serving institutions. The research
team anticipates that this intervention will lead to an increase in the
retention and recruitment of students and early career professionals from
backgrounds that have traditionally been underrepresented both in archaeology
and other STEM fields. Overall, the transformation of ethical preparation
amongst early career researchers will benefit society by preparing scientists to
be aware of—and responsive to—changing social needs, values, and
norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.