* 2220312
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: A Formal Verification and Implementation Stack for Programmable Logic Controllers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Luis Garcia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Safety-critical industrial control systems, such as the electric power grid or
water-treatment plants, provide crucial services in modern societies. Therefore,
they must be safe at all times and on all levels, from their design to their
operation. This is especially challenging since industrial control software is
largely automated to make decisions on behalf of humans while being increasingly
targeted by adversarial cyber-physical attacks. In order to act in advance
before unsafe or undesired situations occur, models that describe the physics of
the system and the effects of potential security attacks need to become a
central element in designing industrial control systems. The project's novelties
are mathematics- and logic-based software-development methods to make industrial
control software aware of real-world effects and threats. The project's impacts
are improved support for practitioners in developing trustworthy and resilient
industrial control systems, with the aim of providing the crucial missing
verification link between industrial control software development and
execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's technical approach studies a
provably correct development stack for industrial control systems with
Programmable Logic Control (PLC) that is expected to provide a chain of fully
verified links from high-level models all the way down to the running code,
accompanied by synthesized correctness proofs. The correctness proofs entail
strong safety guarantees on the actual industrial control system implementation
through validation methods to analyze, at runtime, whether models and reality
agree and to counteract when deviations occur. To this end, the team of
researchers expects to advance techniques for verified runtime monitoring of the
operating context and for verified bi-directional translation between code and
models. The models combine differential equations with nondeterministic control
and environment models to describe physical effects and security threats. Such
predictive models, safety proofs, and validation methods are crucial elements of
every trustworthy implementation stack so that proofs from models transfer to
the running system. To address design safety at the scale of industrial control
systems, the investigators bring together complementary expertise in foundations
and practical verification for cyber-physical systems, with field expertise in
embedded systems for industrial control systems safety and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.