* 2220365
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Bubble-Mediated Gas Exchange in a Strongly Convective Ocean during the Bubble Exchange in the Labrador Sea (BELS) Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Junhong Liang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 09/30/2025
* USD 323,283.00

The Labrador Sea, part of the North Atlantic Ocean between Canada and Greenland,
is one of the few places in the world where the deep ocean is ventilated. It is
where salts and dissolved gases enter the deep ocean, thereby setting the
chemical and physical environments of the deep ocean. An earlier study using
data collected during a field campaign in the Labrador Sea from fall 2016 to
spring 2017 showed that the traditional mathematical formulas used to calculate
air-sea gas fluxes, i.e., how fast gases go in and out of the ocean, are
inaccurate for the Labrador Sea. The reason may have to do with the unique
environment there: strong wind, big waves, and chilling air. The earlier study
indicated that it is not possible to make accurate estimates of how much gases,
such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, are supplied to the deep ocean. Since oxygen
is crucial to marine animals and carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases
contributing to global warming, there is an urgent need to develop more accurate
formulas for air-sea gas fluxes that could be used in the Labrador Sea and
elsewhere. In this project, scientists will go to the Labrador Sea in fall 2023
to make detailed measurements of oceanic and atmospheric conditions near the
air-sea interface using recently developed techniques such as autonomous
vehicles. In addition, high-fidelity computer simulations, only possible using
supercomputers, will be conducted for the physical and chemical environments of
the upper ocean. By synthesizing the new data and computer solutions, more
accurate mathematical formulas for air-sea gas fluxes suitable for the world’s
oceans including the Labrador Sea will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objectives of the proposed study are to better understand bubble
processes and bubble-mediated gas transfer and to propose a revised
parameterization suitable for the world’s ocean, including strongly convective
environments typical of the high-latitude ocean. An associated objective is to
quantify the effect of solubility on bubble-mediated gas transfer. The proposed
research includes an observational program and a modeling program. The
observational component is part of the Bubble Exchange in the Labrador Sea
(BELS) experiment – an international program during the Fall of 2023 in the
Labrador Sea. The researchers will measure bubble-mediated air-sea invasion
rates of CO2/O2/N2 and evasion rates of 3He/SF6 and make detailed measurements
of gas flux forcing including bubbles and turbulent currents in the mixed layer.
They will employ various approaches including 1D- and 3D-budgets, shipboard
direct eddy covariance fluxes, as well as autonomous vehicles. These
observations will be synthesized using state-of-the-art numerical models that
concurrently simulate turbulent ocean currents, bubbles, and dissolved gases.
The project aims to improve parameterizations of air-sea gas fluxes and reduce
uncertainty in future predictions of gas uptake during ocean ventilation that
may result from global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.