* 2220363
* A long-lived deep-water continuously operating reference station for seafloor geodesy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 124,962.00

Seafloor geodesy measures motion of the earth underwater. Current technology
receives data from seafloor instruments by sending and receiving signals from
the sea surface to the seafloor and back. However, this method has a depth
limitation of ~3000 m which greatly limits where instruments can be deployed.
This project investigates using a different technique which can be used in deep
water that only requires the signals to travel from the sea surface to the
seafloor. Broader impacts include support for a graduate student and partnering
with an engineering company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seafloor geodesy remains a
frontier area of geophysics. Suboceanic measurements of position and
displacement made with high precision over long spatial and long temporal
baselines hold the key to a variety of scientific questions of first-order
importance, such as the long-term behavior of subduction zones and other areas
where earthquakes nucleate. This project tests a new approach to GNSS-Acoustic
seafloor geodesy using data from a field experiment acquired in 5225 m deep
water. The system of GNSS-Acoustic geodesy (1) directly positions a material
point (a Continuous Deep Ocean Geodetic sensor called C-DOG) on the seafloor
(rather than a virtual point), (2) uses a one-way acoustic travel-time
measurement by the seafloor beacon and (3) a non-stationary surface vessel that
can survey multiple C-DOGs in rapid succession. (4) It furthermore leverages
recent developments in GNSS processing techniques for precise point positioning
of the acoustic transducer, (5) it is capable of remaining dormant on the
seafloor for an extended time, and (6) it corrects for bias due to sound
velocity errors as part of the inversion strategy. Workforce development
includes a graduate student who will interact closely with engineering partners
to develop the necessary expertise. Educational materials for outreach developed
during this project will be widely shared to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.