* 2220410
* FMitF: Track I: Safe, Efficient Persistent Memory Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2025
* USD 749,999.00

Emerging persistent-memory technologies provide the performance of current
random-access computer memories while preserving data even in the presence of
power outages. Unfortunately, developing software that uses persistent memory is
challenging â€“ a key challenge is ensuring that software fails consistently
(called crash-consistent software) or, in other words, that software produces
correct results even when the system suffers a power failure. Crash-consistency
software errors can be difficult to find during the testing phase of software
development and may only be revealed when production systems lose important
data. Existing software tools can only find such errors that reveal themselves
during testing and cannot ensure correctness for other executions of the same
piece of software. The project's novelties are (1) the development of a
verification system that can guarantee that software is crash-consistent, (2)
the development of novel software that uses persistent memory, and (3) the
application of the verification tools to ensure the correctness of these
software. The project's broader significance and importance are: (1) the
development of tools that can protect society from the harms of software errors
in future persistent-memory systems and (2) training of a new generation of
computer scientists to build verified systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is building the RustPM verification infrastructure for persistent-memory systems
that guarantees crash-consistency. The basic approach has two components: (1)
verify that a program correctly uses flush and fence operations and (2) verify
that the data-structure operations are failure-atomic. The project is developing
case studies in the domains of fast and reliable network-attached storage and
efficient network middleboxes. A key focus of these systems is to use persistent
memory to enable them to survive and recover from power outages. These systems
have stringent performance requirements and use log-free persistent data
structures to meet these requirements. The project is using RustPM's
verification to ensure that these log-free data structures are crash-consistent.
The needs of the two systems drives the development of the RustPM verification
system and serves as a platform to evaluate the flexibility of
RustPM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.