* 2220856
* GOALI: Engineering Mechanically Stable Interfaces Through Short-Range Molecular Rearrangement Driven by Inhomogeneous Li Ion Transfer Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Stephen Hackney, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2025
* USD 535,317.00

This fundamental research project aims to fill critical knowledge gaps required
to enable the engineering of next generation high energy density solid state
batteries. Specifically, the project will address how the chemistry, composition
and physical arrangement of atoms, ions, molecules, and defects in both the
atomic structure and interface morphologies collectively control the development
of localized pressure known to causes catastrophic failure such as cracking or
short circuiting in a battery. This new knowledge will directly inform robust
strategies to engineer the safest and highest performance batteries for consumer
electronics and electric vehicles. The interdisciplinary and integrative
research approach will train and educate students in state-of-art experimental
mechanics, analytical modelling, electrochemistry and materials processing.
Moreover, these tools and techniques will be taught from unique perspectives in
academia, industry and a US national lab. In this way, the students will be well
equipped to contribute to a world-class materials science and engineering
workforce prepared to accelerate the discovery, development, and deployment of
advanced materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is
to perform targeted nanoindentation studies designed to fill critical knowledge
gaps that will directly inform strategies to optimize the chemistry, composition
and processing of solid-state electrolytes designed to stabilize critical
interfaces and maximize device performance. These outcomes will be achieved by
engineering solid-state electrolytes to provide stress directed, short range
molecular rearrangement that mitigates the deleterious strains and commensurate
stresses caused by inhomogeneous lithium-ion transfer kinetics. Moreover, this
capability will be engineered to operate as efficiently as possible over a wide
range of battery relevant operating conditions. Statistical analysis of
experimentally observed transitions in stress relaxation mechanisms will enable
the construction of novel small-scale deformation mechanism maps expressed as a
function of key operational variables, electrochemical cycling, and temperature.
These unique maps will provide much needed insight into the physical dimensions
of interface defects capable of producing catastrophic device failure by
fracture of the solid-state electrolyte. In this way, the maps will directly
inform strategies and guidelines for engineering stable interfaces capable of
supporting stress-free, planar deposition of a pure, metallic lithium
anode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.