* 2220509
* Community-Engaged Design and Implementation of a Framework for Ethical Online Communities Research
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Stevie Chancellor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports a team of researchers who will work with members and
organizers of five representative online communities to create an ethical
framework to guide future research on online spaces. The overarching goal of the
project is to repair and prevent ethical breaches, and to acknowledge and
mitigate potential community-level harms of future investigations in a way that
honors the priorities and voices of members and organizers of online
communities. To work towards this goal, the team will implement their framework
to create actionable guidelines for a variety of stakeholders, including other
researchers, IRBs and ethics boards, online communities, and educational
institutions The framework will also be used to train the next generation of
computing professionals through curricular integration, to help online
communities to develop "Terms of Research'' pages for their sites, and to inform
future research through dissemination to researchers and university ethics
review boards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will follow a three-phase
process for the development, validation, and implementation of a new framework
for guiding research on online communities. The first phase will create an
initial framework by employing participatory and community-engaged approaches to
center the voices of members and organizers of several critical online
communities (Linux, Wikipedia, InTheRooms, CaringBridge, and r/EDAnonymous) as
representative cases of diverse community structures, purposes, and priorities.
In phase two, the investigators will refine and disseminate the initial
framework through workshops with researchers in four most relevant research
communities and assess the framework based on its descriptive, rhetorical,
inferential, and application power. In the last phase, the team will focus on
implementing their new framework in a variety of ways indicated in the previous
paragraph. In each phase, outcomes will be assessed and refined through an
iterative process with online community members and organizers and by an
independent advisory committee of ethics experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.