* 2220271
* ATD: Algorithms and Geometric Methods for Community and Anomaly Detection and Robust Learning in Complex Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Feng Luo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Complex networks arise in many natural systems, such as social networks, opinion
networks, and biological networks, as well as in engineered systems like
communication networks such as the Internet. Detecting communities, that is,
clusters of nodes with dense interconnections, is a crucial problem with
numerous applications. In real-world complex networks, community structures
change over time. Dynamic networks, where nodes and network topology have
mutually dependent (co-evolving) dynamics, are actively studied in physics,
control theory, and robotics. The primary objectives of this project are to
establish mathematical tools and algorithms for community detection, using
geometric techniques, and to develop a mathematical model for dynamic networks.
The applications of this project include security and threat detection. Some of
the research will involve graduate and undergraduate students, and the software
developed will be made freely available to other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Communities in networks can be viewed as discrete counterparts of
thick-thin decompositions in Riemannian geometry. Drawing inspiration from
geometry and the success of Hamilton-Perelman's Ricci flow program, the
investigators recently proposed discrete Ricci flows for community detection in
networks. Experimental investigations have demonstrated that the proposed method
can accurately detect communities. However, several theoretical problems, such
as the long-term convergence of the flow, remain open. Resolving these issues
will be the main focus of the first project. The second project aims to find
models that explain the emergence of communities in social and opinion networks.
By considering a social network as a graph with specific attributes at nodes
(e.g., opinions) and edges (e.g., tie relations), the investigators plan to
understand how opinions influence tie relations and vice versa over an extended
period. They also seek to determine if the network will become polarized or
decomposed into communities with different opinions. For threat detection,
particular emphasis will be placed on identifying small clusters of extreme. Two
mathematical models are proposed to monitor the dynamic changes in opinion
networks. The main goals are understanding the long-term behavior of these
models and mathematically establishing the existence of the asymptotic
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.