* 2220631
* Leadership in the Equitable and Ethical Design of Science and Engineering
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Reardon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,994.00

Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research raises issues
of ethics and justice. Reviewers and funders of STEM research now often ask for
integration of ethical, legal, and social implications and diversity, equity,
and inclusion issues in the design of proposed research. This shift in
expectation means that bioethicists, social scientists, and scholars in the arts
and humanities are now asked to join science and engineering research teams.
Their inclusion in the scientific process from the ground up is important;
however, it is not clear how to integrate these scholars into the process. For
instance, it is not clear who has the relevant expertise or what counts as
successful integration. The investigators of this project are conducting a
thorough review of past integration efforts and case studies in the fields of
genomics, neuroscience, and artificial intelligence to build an evidence base
that will facilitate more ethical and just STEM research. As such, the project
will pave the way for the development of new guidelines for forming
collaborative teams in science and facilitating sustained institutional changes
that promote equitable and ethically robust research in science and engineering.
The created guidelines will be a valuable resource for researchers,
administrators, review boards, funders, and other stakeholders in STEM research.
The project also offers training opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly public and private
institutions and funders recognize the critical importance of incorporating
ethical and societal analysis into the design of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research. This research initiative evaluates
previous efforts to integrate or embed initiatives focused on ethical, legal,
and social implications (ELSI) and diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) issues
into science and engineering research projects. The evidence base is being built
up in two ways: (1) a content analysis of documents and literature that describe
“integrated” and “embedded” ELSI research and DEI objectives within it; and (2)
a case study comparison of the meaning of “integrated” and “embedded” ELSI and
DEI in the fields of genomics, neuroscience, and artificial intelligence.
Through this analysis, the project team identifies best practices that will
inform the creation of practical, conceptually engaged, and ethically robust
guidelines for ELSI and DEI in STEM research. This research supports the future
development of Leadership in the Equitable and Ethical Design for STEM research
guidelines. The goal of these guidelines will be to specify the role, points of
engagement, timeline, and possible outcomes of DEI and ELSI collaborations in a
manner that supports a more robust integration of DEI and ELSI into STEM
research. Ultimately, the research will support the creation of a cross-sectors
effort to reformulate the meaning of ethical and equitable science in a manner
that creates sustained organizational culture and policy changes that center
DEI, ELSI, and the goals of advancing equity and
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded through the ER2 program by
the BIO directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.