* 2220307
* Formation of photo-oxidants and processing of organic species in aerosol liquid water
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Cort Anastasio, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2025
* USD 816,275.00

The goal of this project is to improve the understanding of how highly reactive,
condensed phase species in the atmosphere influence the chemistry and
composition of atmospheric particles. Many reactions in particles and droplets
are driven by highly reactive photo-oxidants that are formed within the
condensed phase when certain organic and inorganic molecules absorb sunlight.
The results of this research will help to elucidate the role of these species in
the formation, transformation, and loss of particulate organics and assist with
regulatory efforts to reduce particulate matter air
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to: (1)
Measure the concentrations and kinetics (i.e., formation rates and lifetimes) of
the triplet states of light-absorbing organic compounds (3C*), singlet molecular
oxygen (1O2*), and hydroxyl radical (•OH) in relatively dilute water extracts of
fine particles collected over the course of a year in Davis, California; (2)
Develop new methods to quantify photo-oxidant concentrations under the very
concentrated aerosol liquid water conditions present in the ambient atmosphere;
(3) Explore the importance of 3C* and 1O2* in transforming organic species in
particles; and (4) Integrate the results to improve the community’s
understanding of photo-oxidants in particles and drops. The principal
investigators plan to work with a collaborator to model the particle- and gas-
phase chemistry in biomass-burning plumes and explore the role of condensed
phase photo-oxidants in the formation and evolution of organic
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort includes the mentoring of a
postdoctoral fellow and both graduate and undergraduate students, and activities
with middle and high school students to improve their understanding of
particulate matter air pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.