* 2220232
* AF: Small: Polynomials, Communication, and Query Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alexander Sherstov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Representations of computational objects by real polynomials play a central role
in theoretical computer science. This project focuses on a particularly natural
and important representation, known as pointwise approximation. Over the past
three decades, pointwise approximation has enabled breakthroughs in the study of
a broad spectrum of computational phenomena, including quantum query algorithms,
communication protocols, Boolean circuits, learning algorithms, and differential
privacy. The investigator will tackle challenging open questions in the
pointwise approximation of Boolean functions as well as related questions in
communication and quantum query complexity. Their resolution will be a
significant advance in these research areas and will have far-reaching
consequences elsewhere, including learning theory, circuit complexity, and graph
complexity. This project is an ample source of research problems at various
levels of difficulty and will be used in advising students. The investigator
will integrate this project into his graduate and undergraduate teaching,
promote theory research in the Los Angeles area, and mentor underrepresented
students in theoretical computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
component of this project takes aim at central open problems in the pointwise
approximation of Boolean functions, including proving an optimal direct sum
theorem for approximate degree, obtaining depth-optimal lower bounds on the
threshold degree and sign-rank of constant-depth circuits, and settling the
approximate degree of key functions. In the second component of the project, the
investigator plans to leverage polynomial approximation techniques to tackle
longstanding open problems in communication complexity theory. Here, the
objectives include obtaining strong lower bounds for the polynomial hierarchy
(PH) in communication and settling the randomized communication complexity of
the set disjointness problem in the notoriously difficult number-on-the-forehead
k-party model. The third component of this project is devoted to quantum query
complexity, where the investigator aims to settle the quantum query complexity
of the k-element distinctness problem and prove a fundamental conjecture of
Aaronson and Ambainis on the relation between real polynomials and decision
trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.