* 2220574
* ATD: Sparse and Localized Graph Convolutional Networks for Anomaly Detection and Active Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Feng Chen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 06/30/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Many applications produce massive quantities of data in which complex
relationships and interdependency are naturally modeled as graphs, such as road
networks, mobile networks, and public health surveillance networks. Despite
considerable attention on graph convolution networks (GCNs), the vast majority
of the existing works are limited to balanced-node classification, thus
ineffective at detecting anomalous nodes accurately. This project aims at a
sparse and localized GCN for detecting anomalous patterns. In addition, a novel
active learning framework will be developed that learns the optimal query
strategy to reduce the number of training labels. Theoretical investigations
will be performed to interpret the anomalous patterns in an attempt to align
with intuitions and clarifications from domain experts. The computational tools
developed will be applicable, specifically in the fields of remote sensing and
geospatial information. Furthermore, the investigators will incorporate the
research results into developing new interdisciplinary courses with a focus on
both theory and application. These courses will serve as a springboard for
student recruitment, such as graduate students interested in using this research
as the subject of a Ph.D. thesis and undergraduates interested in a summer
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies on real datasets
have strongly demonstrated a preference for sparse convolution filters on the
graph. It is also desirable to have joint localization in both the vertex and
graph frequency domains for computational efficiency and structural feature
extraction. By combining sparsity and localization, the project aims at a sparse
and localized GCN paradigm that efficiently detects anomalous nodes. In
particular, this project will address the following questions: (1) how to design
graph convolutions to effectively enforce sparse and localized patterns for
anomaly detection; (2) how to optimize the network architecture and algorithm
design; and (3) how to reduce the userâ€™s burden in the collection of labeled
data by active learning, which involves a sequence of dynamical query for
labeling a small number of nodes that are most effective in anomaly detection.
Overall, this project will advance the algorithmic and theoretical foundations
of GNNs and anomaly detection. The research will contribute to the areas of
time-frequency analysis, harmonic analysis, uncertainty quantification, and
nonconvex optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.