* 2220903
* RAPID: Variant Emergence and Scenario Design for the COVID-19 Scenario Modeling Hub
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 Scenario Modeling Hub collects and aggregates projections from
multiple modeling teams of US public health outcomes (cases, hospitalizations,
and deaths) over 6 months at the state and national level. The goal of long-term
projections is to compare outbreak trajectories under different scenarios,
interventions, or assumptions, as opposed to offering a specific prediction of
what will happen. This project will improve those projections by adding
information that includes potential future viral variants and by building a
network to gather, organize and synthesize information on the emerging
characteristics of any actual new variant of concern. The COVID-19 Scenario
Modeling Hub reports to the White House COVID-19 data team, the Center for
Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the World Health Organization. the Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists, and other organizations. A public webpage makes the work
accessible to public health experts, state-level stakeholders, the media, and
the general public. Our work will inform planning and response measures for
future variant surges in the coming months, both nationally and globally, and
may be adapted for outbreaks of other diseases. It will also train a
postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student in scientific expertise and
communications skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 Scenario Hub has
completed 12 rounds of scenario projections for the USA. A major source of
uncertainty that affects scenario design and projections is new genetic
variants. First, this project will improve information gain and uncertainty
reduction pertaining by engaging with scientists working on immunology,
epidemiology, and viral evolution to elicit information on plausible emergence
timing and the range of possible characteristics of potential new variants, via
expert elicitation methods. Second, for response purposes, the project will
commence to build a network to gather, organize and synthesize information on
the emerging characteristics of any actual new variant of concern that will
improve the emergency process the Hub used for the Omicron variant, streamlining
and enhancing information gain. Both information streams will be used to improve
scenario development and to provide the best possible data to participating
modeling teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in collaboration
with the CDC to support rapid-response research projects to further advance
federal infectious disease modeling capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.