* 2220201
* The causal pathways of the Indian-Atlantic interocean exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Petrus Johannes van Leeuwen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 708,182.00

A fundamental question in physical oceanography is how different oceans
interact. Answering this question is crucial for our understanding of the global
ocean circulation and the role the ocean plays in the climate system. One of
these interaction points is the ocean area south of Africa where the Indian,
South Atlantic and Southern Oceans meet. While it is now well established that
the interocean exchange in this area is of global importance, much less is known
on what the underlying processes are that determine the existence and size of
this exchange. This project will advance the understanding of which processes
are responsible for the Indian-Atlantic inter-ocean exchange and how and to what
extend they work in concert to achieve the exchange. It brings together state-
of-the-art developments in nonlinear data assimilation, ocean modeling,
observational data sets and nonlinear causal discovery to advance that
understanding. As such the project enhances our fundamental understanding of the
ocean circulation, but also further develops new tools that can be used in many
other oceanographic problems, in other geoscience areas, and beyond. The fully
nonlinear data assimilation method implemented in the JEDI system and tested on
this highly turbulent ocean area will be unique in the world and can be applied
by scientists and operational centers alike. Systematic nonlinear causal
discovery is a growing and exciting research field that deserves maturing into a
standard well- calibrated tool, beyond more traditional linear causal discovery
methodologies. The causal discovery framework can be applied to many outstanding
oceanographic and wider geoscience problems. Furthermore, it can be applied to
pure modeling studies to compare causal pathways and highlight model
deficiencies. A student will be exposed to cutting edge data assimilation, ocean
modeling and observations, and causal discovery, leading to an exceptionally
rounded budding scientist. Results of the study will be broadly communicated to
the oceanographic, climate and applied mathematical/engineering communities
through conference presentations and
publications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many processes have been put
forward as important for the interocean exchange S of Africa, such as Natal
Pulses (large cyclonic meanders of the Agulhas Current), Mozambique Eddies,
dipoles shed from the southern tip of Madagascar, mixed barotropic-baroclinic
instabilities in the retroflection area, perhaps related to Rossby-wave like
basin modes, variations in the Indonesian Throughflow and the South Equatorial
Current, large-scale variations in the thermodynamic structure, including
vorticity generation due to NADW inflow, large-scale wind perturbations, and
coupled climate modes, e.g. the Indian Ocean Dipole. This project will test the
hypothesis that the interocean exchange is controlled by the tight recirculation
gyre in the Agulhas Retroflection area, which is in turn modulated by the
physical processes mentioned. The main contribution of this research will be to
unravel and quantify these direct contributions and the contributions from
nonlinear interactions using a new fully nonlinear causal discovery methodology.
This methodology provides for a complete decomposition of these nonlinear
interactions into two-process interactions, three-process interactions etc.
Furthermore, it allows to quantify the magnitude of the contributions of any
unidentified controlling processes, directing research to hitherto unknown
important physical processes. This methodology will be applied to process time
series from a 30-year reanalysis of the ocean area around South Africa, using
fully nonlinear data assimilation, incorporating all available observations to
answer the following overarching research questions:&lt;br/&gt;• What are the
physical processes that are responsible for the interocean exchange?&lt;br/&gt;•
How do these physical processes interact to cause the interocean
exchange?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.