* 2220936
* In search for the origin of tungsten in the global komatiite-basalt systems
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Philip Piccoli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2025
* USD 308,318.00

The technology-driven research of the Earth's interior over the past two decades
resulted in major breakthroughs in our understanding of the global processes
that have been shaping our planet from the time it was born. Recent advances in
instrumentation have allowed scientists to discover small variations in the
composition of ancient and modern rocks. Some of these variations are the result
of the radioactive breakdown of elements that are now extinct. The survival of
these variations until present day indicate that there were and still are
reservoirs in the Earth's interior which must have formed within the first few
tens of millions- to hundreds of millions of years into Earth history. These
reservoirs have apparently survived the giant impact that created the Moon,
subsequent violent late accretion, and billions of years of vigorous convective
mantle mixing, suggesting that our planet may not have been as exuberant in its
early days as previously thought. Evidence for this remarkable discovery came
from observation of small variations in the element tungsten in ancient and
modern rocks. The origin of these variations, however, remains poorly
understood. This research is aimed at constraining the source of tungsten in
Earth’s rocks. The research will largely focus on the tungsten behavior in
minerals from ancient rocks that directly sampled the Earth’s interior billions
of years ago, and compare them to similar recent rocks. The work for this
project will include critical evaluation of the models for the origin of
variations of tungsten in Earth’s interior, and an assessment of the impact of
these interpretations on our understanding of Earth’s history. This research has
relevance to the long-debated question of how planets form and evolve, and will
improve our understanding of modern Earth. A significant part of the expected
scientific advances will be the result of involvement of undergraduate students
in this research, which will provide necessary training crucial for their future
scientific careers or as they transition directly into the workforce. Support
for this project will help sustain the University's mission to share and
collaborate worldwide, especially with researchers lacking access to state-of-
the-art analytical facilities. The results of this research will be published in
peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented at international conferences, and
will be made readily available to the broader scientific community for
collaborative research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
project is aimed at constraining the origin of tungsten (W) in komatiite-basalt
systems in order to critically evaluate the models for the origin of 182W
anomalies in the mantle and assess the impact of these interpretations on our
understanding of Earth's history via obtaining high-precision abundance data for
a comprehensive set of trace elements, including W, in 150 whole-rock samples,
as well as major and trace mineral phases, from 15 komatiite-basalt systems from
around the globe, using the state-of-the-art analytical techniques available at
UMD. The research objectives are to: (1) establish bulk trace element
partitioning during differentiation of the selected komatiite-basalt systems,
(2) establish the partitioning of trace elements between major and trace mineral
phases and silicate liquid in both well-preserved and variably altered
komatiite-basalt systems, (3) quantify the mineral and chemical control on the
relationships between the relative trace element abundance
enrichments/depletions in the komatiite-basalt systems and their 182W
compositions, (4) distinguish between endogenous and exogenous origins of W in
these systems, (5) critically evaluate the previously proposed models for the
origin of 182W anomalies in the mantle, and (6) evaluate how the interpretations
obtained as a result of this project impact our understanding of the Earth's
history. The komatiite-basalt systems chosen for analysis were selected because
182W, 142,143Nd, 176Hf, 186,187Os isotope, and HSE abundance data are available
for most of them. Those systems, for which 182W data are not yet available, were
selected due to the highest degrees of preservation of their primary
mineralogical and chemical features, which will aid in establishing magmatic
hosts of W in general and serve as a point of comparison in evaluating W
behavior in well-preserved versus variably altered systems. An important product
of this study will be a comprehensive new database on the partitioning behavior
of trace elements, particularly W, between different major and trace mineral
phases during magmatic and post-magmatic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.