* 2220891
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Data-Driven Lemma Synthesis for Interactive Proofs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Todd Millstein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 349,999.00

Interactive theorem provers enable programmers to prove correctness and security
properties about their software. However, today the manual proof effort required
is very high, which severely limits the usage of these powerful tools in
practice. This project develops automation to address a key challenge for
proving properties of programs: the need to identify the auxiliary lemmas that
are required in order to complete a proof. The project's novelties are a new
approach to automated synthesis of lemmas, along with techniques to filter and
rank candidate lemmas for user inspection. Software systems are critical
infrastructure in all aspects of society today. The project's impacts are to
reduce the cost required to obtain strong guarantees about software and to lower
the barriers to entry for using interactive theorem
provers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a new approach to automated
lemma synthesis that combines the strengths of existing approaches, being both
goal-directed and expressive. The key idea is to reduce the lemma synthesis
problem to a form of data-driven program synthesis, where the objective is to
synthesize an expression that meets a given set of input-output examples.
Generating examples for synthesis from the current proof state ensures that the
resulting lemmas are targeted at the user's goal. At the same time, the approach
can leverage off-the-shelf data-driven program synthesizers that produce
expressions in an arbitrary user-provided grammar. The project explores multiple
formulations of lemma synthesis as a data-driven problem, which make different
tradeoffs between expressiveness and tractability; develops forms of filtering
and ranking to help users identify the most useful candidate lemmas;
instantiates the approach as a tactic for the Coq proof assistant; and performs
both automated experiments and user studies to inform and iteratively improve
the resulting tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.