* 2220423
* Collaborative Research: Normalizing Ethical Reasoning in Mathematics as a Foundation for Ethical STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Victor Piercey, Ferris State University (Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2025
* USD 151,078.00

Mathematicians, with some exceptions, have not described what it means to
practice and use mathematics ethically. This has contributed to a culture
permissive of data-related scandals, questionable professional practices, and
decreased public trust in science. By integrating ethical reasoning (ER) into
undergraduate mathematics classes, the mathematics community can begin to alter
the perception that, if mathematics features abstract and theoretical
constructs, then the mathematics practitioner has no ethical responsibility.
Considering the ‘mathematics practitioner’ to be both the user of, and the
contributor to, mathematics, this proposal seeks to establish ER as a regular
component of mathematical practice. Rather than wait until practitioners have
committed to a career in research, this project target instructors of, and
students in, math courses (such as Calculus, Differential Equations, and Linear
Algebra) that are foundational for diverse STEM fields and seek to introduce a
learnable, improvable skill set (ER). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds
on a published, developmental model of ethical reasoning and a national survey
of mathematics practitioners’ perceptions of aspects of ethical practice that
were derived from mathematics, statistics, and computing (the results of which
we refer to as the “proto-guidelines”) Using this foundation, the project seeks
to foster integrity in both the use of, and contribution to, mathematics. The
project will invite interested participants to a workshop in Year 1 to develop
learning outcomes featuring ER in their respective mathematics course contexts
and to draft supportive teaching materials. Throughout Year 2, participants will
share their work with stakeholders, including non-instructor stakeholders
through focus groups with business, industry, and government about their
perceptions of building ER capabilities in users of, and contributors to,
mathematics. This input will be useful in formulating authentic problems that
instructors can use and refine. In Year 3, participants will attend national and
regional workshops where instructors of other foundational mathematics courses,
and at different student levels, can adapt the tested ER instruction materials
to promote implementation among a broader set of learners. Data collected will
include survey data from materials implementation, qualitative data related to
the development and implementation of the materials, and surveys and interviews
of project stakeholders. Data will be analyzed using a Qualified Change
algorithm. This project serves the national interest in the faith and trust the
public puts in the results of STEM research, including both that which is part
of mathematics and that which involves the use of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education and Ethical and Responsible Research
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.