* 2220613
* ATD: Predictive Anomaly Detection for Spatio-Temporal Data with Multidimensional Persistence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Baris Coskunuzer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

The focus of this project is pattern mining of valuable information from spatio-
temporal (ST) data, which is increasingly available through various geo-
positioning techniques and critically important for many real-life applications
including human mobility understanding, smart transportation, urban planning,
public safety, health care, and environmental management. The presence of
dependencies among measurements induced by the spatial and temporal dimensions
is the main challenge when dealing with ST data. Most modern methods deal with
such problems by splitting spatial and temporal dimensions and adding a merge
post-processing step which, in turn, leads to the loss of crucial intertwined
knowledge among variables. This project will use state-of-the-art theories from
machine learning and mathematical topology to simultaneously include spatial and
temporal variables within the mining processes, with application to modeling of
large ST datasets. Students will be involved in this cross-disciplinary
research, which lies at the interface of mathematics, computer science, and data
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop a novel approach
to model spatial and temporal interdependencies within ST data by using the most
recent techniques of topological data analysis (TDA). The central goal is
establishing a new TDA theory, Multi-Persistence, which will better capture
shape evolving patterns in ST data with respect to time, and produce a highly
expressive unique topological fingerprint of data without splitting spatial and
temporal dimensions. The reduced computational cost of calculating topological
summaries will permit development of the two-differentiable objects often needed
by machine learning (ML) methods and will increase current capabilities to
handle large ST datasets. Additional research activities include investigation
of the utility of TDA and the new methodology within the context of threat
detection tasks for large ST datasets in several settings, such as threat
detection in traffic networks, severity predictions, and wildfire
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.