* 2220801
* The Cognitive Mechanisms of Support-Giving
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Tristen Inagaki, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2027
* USD 573,810.00

Support-giving – such as giving advice or comfort to a friend, caring for a
family member, or volunteering at a local nonprofit – occurs on a daily basis,
but the cognitive mechanisms by which this relatively prevalent social behavior
occurs remains an open question for research. Filling this gap in knowledge is
necessary for understanding the origins of cooperative behavior and why people
act supportively even when there are costs to the self. Findings from the
current basic science work will help build a scientifically validated foundation
to inform future interventions aimed at increasing support-giving behavior, a
behavior that has already been linked with decreased loneliness and increased
longevity. Thus, results have the potential to address increasing societal
challenges that affect the ability to live healthy and productive lives. To
enhance the research capacity of a more diverse research workforce, students
from underrepresented backgrounds in science will receive advanced training in
neuroscience methods and data analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research combines two previously separate theoretical traditions to suggest that
the seeds of support-giving behavior are inherent to the brain’s activity at
rest, where one is undisturbed from external demands. Merging perspectives may
explain why such a large part of human sociality is supportive behavior and
clarify a social function of the brain. To test research questions, brain
activity will be measured as participants complete tasks where there will be
opportunities to rest followed by opportunities to give support to others and
control conditions where there are no opportunities to rest and where other
decisions are possible. Brain activity will also be assessed as a predictor of
real-world support-giving behavior. Hypotheses are that the brain at rest will
be related to faster decisions to give support to others, but not other
decisions, and more time spent engaged in real-world support-giving
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.