* 2220677
* NCS-FO A transformative approach for mapping spatial and temporal dynamics of anterior cingulate function in humans
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Marco Santello, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 983,730.00

This project aims to combine information and methods from neuroscience and
biomedical engineering to map brain circuits that underlie human cognition,
emotion, and decision making. Research has shown that these circuits are
compartmentalized into specific anatomical regions, which give rise to
characteristic brain activity patterns and behavioral responses to stimuli.
Advanced imaging methods have been developed to passively localize functional
brain anatomy; however, methods are lacking that allow for non-invasive mapping
at similarly high resolutions by actively modulating human brain activity. Such
methods are needed to inform the development of advanced medical treatments for
cognitive and mental health disorders, and to advance next-generation brain-
computer interface technologies. Therefore, this project has been designed to
achieve three major goals: 1) advance state-of-the-art, functional human brain
mapping and brain-computer interface methods, 2) increase the detail of
information regarding circuit mechanisms that give rise to human cognition and
emotion, and 3) demonstrate potential new approaches to treating brain disorders
and injuries. Insights gained from this project can lead to important new
insights into the mechanisms by which human deep-brain activity gives rise to
cognitive-emotional behaviors, such as social thought processes, impulsivity,
and affect.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, low-power ultrasound
will be pulsed and focused across the skull of human participants into specific
anatomical brain regions using image-guided methods to modulate local activity
at high spatial resolutions while: 1) recording learning and decision-making
outcomes under different behavioral reward and emotional conditions; 2)
recording changes in electrical brain activity; and 3) recording changes in the
anatomical distribution and concentration of neurotransmitter metabolites.
Results from analyses of these data will provide new, high-resolution
information regarding how different brain regions cooperate to account for
learning and emotion during decision making. The project includes the creation
of a national Focused Ultrasound Science and Education program to broaden
participation, expand training opportunities, improve education, and cultivate
knowledge in neuroscience, engineering, and medicine. Data collected, analytical
reports produced, and methods developed in this project will be made publicly
available in the Focused Ultrasound Science and Education data
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.