* 2220336
* Collaborative Research: Geomorphic legacy of megaflood deposits on river processes and form, Eastern Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 234,084.00

Earth and other planetary landscapes contain a record of both past and present
surface processes. During colder climate periods thousands of years ago, glacial
ice and debris episodically dammed rivers, leading to catastrophic floods of a
magnitude not seen on Earth today. Such “megafloods” left an indelible signature
on landscapes across nearly every continent, and geologists rely on rare flood
deposits to reconstruct how megafloods have shaped the landscapes we see today.
This project focuses on unique flood deposits from the eastern Himalayan
mountains, using new observations, measurements, and computer modeling to study
how catastrophic flood events contribute to the evolution of a steep, high-
relief mountain landscape. This project also uses the fascinating story of
megafloods to develop publicly accessible K-12 educational materials that
integrate scientific discovery with Indigenous Knowledge and will support
training of multiple graduate and undergraduate students. The results of this
work will help to more accurately interpret the origin of the landscapes seen on
both Earth and Mars today – as well as to better predict hazards from similarly
catastrophic anthropogenic analogues, such as flooding after the failure of a
dam. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior megaflood research has focused on the impact of
dam-burst megaflood discharges (&gt;10^6 m3/s) on bedrock channel erosion. This
project will further explore the role of megaflood deposition on the long-term
(&gt;10^3 yr) evolution of bedrock rivers. The project team will focus on a
well-documented example of megaflood deposition along the Yarlung-Siang-
Brahmaputra river system in the eastern Himalaya to: 1. determine the source,
depositional age and grain size distribution of flood deposits using cutting-
edge analytical tools, 2. develop a process-based numerical model to predict
first-order changes to a bedrock river channel following abrupt flood
aggradation, and 3. search for a unique topographic signature of megaflood
processes by comparing the morphology of eastern Himalayan river channels with
and without a history of megaflooding. These findings will illuminate how
intermontane sediment deposition by megafloods governs river valley evolution.
Ultimately, the results have the potential to change the way sediment deposition
is considered in numerical models of eroding mountainous landscapes and will
provide new insight into the role of infrequent, high-magnitude flood events in
shaping landscapes on both Earth and Mars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.