* 2220644
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment: Oceanographic Cable
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Richard Trask, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,977,097.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, on behalf of the University-National
Oceanographic&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory System (UNOLS), proposes to host the National
Science Foundation Wire Pool and undertake the procurement of electro-mechanical
oceanographic cables, torque-balanced wire, and synthetic rope to meet the needs
of UNOLS ships for a five-year period beginning 15 April
2022.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the Wire Pool maintains two storage locations to meet
the needs of the fleet. One is located on the East Coast of the United States at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the other is on the West Coast at
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography marine facility. In 1992 the procedure
of allocating the delivery of all new procurements to either the East Coast or
West Coast cable pool locations was initiated. The result is that all cables are
allocated to UNOLS vessels from the nearest storage location as the need arises.
This procedure will continue. The pool will remain under the control of the
National Science Foundation. Further, on behalf of UNOLS, the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution proposes to continue to provide coordination of the
Wire Pool by overseeing the inspection, acceptance, maintenance, testing and
associated recordkeeping of the cables and ropes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.