* 2220890
* Promoting STEM student success and career entry with an integrated achievement and mentoring model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Rakhi Agarwal, Nassau Community College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,980,847.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Nassau Community College (NCC) and Hofstra University (HU). NCC is a
public community college, part of the State University of New York, and HU is a
private, non-sectarian, liberal arts institution. Over its six-year duration,
the project will fund scholarships to 90 unique full time students pursuing
associate’s and bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Engineering, Mathematics, Physics, Psychology, and Geology, Environment, and
Sustainability. First-year HU Scholars will receive up to four years of
scholarship support. NCC/HU Scholars, selected from the underserved communities
immediately surrounding NCC and HU, will receive two years of scholarship
support at NCC and up to two additional years of support at HU. The project’s
significance lies in linking scholarships with a transformative model that
integrates existing institutional resources within an achievement and mentoring
context. Students will engage in academic and career success workshops, be
mentored by more senior peers and subsequently mentor more junior peers, engage
in research, and network with STEM professionals. The project will further
catalyze inter-institutional faculty collaboration around curriculum design and
classroom experiences. Because NCC, HU, and the surrounding communities have a
high population of students from groups underrepresented in STEM, this project
has the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields. The project will
increase the earning power of low-income students, supporting their upward
mobility and providing role models for success in our local communities. The
project’s impact on student outcomes, organization of institutional resources,
and the adaptability and transferability of the model across institutional
contexts will be examined and will add to the current knowledge base regarding
low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The specific aims of the project are to: (1)
increase identity and confidence as STEM students and professionals, (2) ensure
consistent engagement with student support services, and (3) catalyze inter-
institutional pedagogical collaborations. Built on the theoretical framework of
Legitimate Peripheral Participation with an emphasis on inclusivity, community,
and belonging, the project directly addresses challenges to STEM career entry
faced by low-income students. Based on the importance of initial math course
placement, early and continuous engagement with student support services, access
to the unspoken rules and norms associated with collegiate academic success, and
the role of mentoring in student success, the project’s activities will be
arranged to address each challenge. The project will investigate the effects of
activities both individually and collectively on student academic and career
outcomes, explore factors contributing to student success and career entry,
identify institutional structures required for sustained inter-institution
pedagogical collaboration, and assess the adaptability, transferability, and
institutionalization of the integrated achievement and mentoring model across
institutional contexts. The project will be evaluated using a mixed methods
approach using focus groups, interviews, surveys, social network analysis, and
artifacts generated by students and faculty as they participate in project
activities. Results of this project will be made available via workshops at
national meetings, peer-reviewed papers targeting an interdisciplinary audience,
and a website with resources, modules, and rubrics for institutions to use to
achieve similar goals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.