* 2220951
* MCA: Delineating molecular components and mechanisms for bacterial flagellin-induced immune responses in maize maize
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Antje Heese, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 04/30/2026
* USD 360,135.00

Plants play a vital role in our society because they serve as major food sources
for humans and are crucial in the production of medicine, textiles and biofuels.
By 2050, the world’s population is predicted to increase by 35%. To feed this
growing population, total crop production will need to double. Thus, improving
crop production is an important aspect for enhancing the economy and food
security within the US and around the world. These important goals, however, are
negatively impacted by the fact that plant pathogens greatly reduce crop yield
and nutritional values. This work focuses on corn, also called maize, which is a
crop species of high agronomical value for US farmers and a staple food around
the world. The goal of this work is to advance the limited understanding of how
cellular components that are localized at the surface of corn cells detect and
induce plant defenses when infected by bacterial pathogens during the early
growth of corn plants. The proposed study will provide new understanding that
will contribute to new strategies on how to establish resistance against diverse
pathogens, thus likely be complementary to current breeding efforts. In addition
to its biological importance, this project will provide diverse training to
better prepare early-career scientists to be successful members of the national
scientific work force. Undergraduate students will be recruited in their first
year into a lab that provides a stimulating, challenging and open environment
and allows for both scientific and personal growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
staple crop, Zea mays (maize) is of high agronomic importance worldwide; but
infection by microbial pathogens can result in substantial yield loss. Disease-
causing pathogens include bacteria whose motility and pathogenicity rely on
their flagella composed of flagellin proteins. As one means to protect
themselves against infection by flagellated bacteria, genomes of many dicots and
monocots -including maize- encode for an evolutionary ancient immune receptor
FLAGELLIN SENSING2 (FLS2), a plasma membrane-localized receptor kinase that
detects bacterial flagellin or its active peptide flg22. Flg22 perception by
FLS2 initiates many host immune responses that contribute to bacterial growth
restriction. The genetic basis and the molecular machinery underlying flagellin
perception and signaling in maize, however, remain largely elusive. This project
will advance the limited understanding of the molecular components and
mechanisms that contribute to pattern (flg22)-triggered immune responses against
flagellated bacteria in maize. The objectives are to a) delineate if ZmFLS2
functions in flg22-responses in maize using reverse genetics and ZmFLS2
expression in Arabidopsis atfls2 mutant; b) define signaling potency of flg22
peptides in leaves and in roots of maize; and c) decipher if a maize ortholog of
an Arabidopsis vesicular trafficking protein with roles in FLS2 trafficking
to/from the plasma membrane functions in development and immune responses in
maize. This grant will provide mentoring and research training for a
postdoctoral research fellow and incoming fresh(wo)men as part of the Freshmen
Research in Plants (FRIPS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.