* 2220279
* EDGE FGT: Development of functional genomics tools in cactophilic Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Luciano Matzkin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,155,403.00

The genome of organisms can have thousands to tens of thousands of genes coded
in their DNA. For each gene, organisms can also produce alternative versions of
a gene product (usually a protein) as well as being turned on in specific
tissues or at specific times during development. Therefore, just possessing
knowledge of the DNA sequence of an organismâ€™s genome is not enough to
understand the function of all its genes. To facilitate this, investigators over
the past several decades have been able to manipulate or edit the genome of
organisms using a variety of molecular tools. Unfortunately, these tools have
traditionally only been available for a very selected group of laboratory model
organisms. Although these model organisms have dramatically expanded our
understanding of the function of genes during development, in specific tissues
and sometimes all the way down to specific cell types, the limited number
laboratory model species and generalist ecology has prevented the analysis of
the function of genes in a comparative, evolutionary and ecological context.
This project will leverage the extensive ecological knowledge of several cactus-
breeding fly species in the genus Drosophila with their recently determined
genome sequences to build a set of genome-manipulable strains. Using these
modified strains of closely related species investigators will be able to assess
the function of genes (e.g. turning them on/off in specific tissues/cells).
Knowledge of this new toolkit and its application will be disseminated via
publications, a public website with detailed protocols and videos as well as an
annual workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this project is to
enhance the power of investigators to assess the relationship between genotypes
and phenotypes in an ecological and comparative context by creating a
customizable transgenic system. Here investigator Matzkin proposes to build a
transgenic toolkit for the existing diverse community utilizing the ecological
model system of cactophilic Drosophila. This system offers a unique opportunity
to integrate genomics, functional genomics, transcriptomics and phenomics in an
ecological and comparative context. Cactophilic Drosophila are endemic to the
Americas and oviposit, develop, and feed as adults in the necrotic tissues of a
variety of cactus species. The transgenic toolkit will be built using the three
most widely used cactophiles, D. mojavensis and D. arizonae from North America
and D. buzzatii from South America; using the recently generated de novo
chromosome level genome assemblies and annotations of each of the four D.
mojavensis cactus host populations, of two ecologically divergent D. arizonae
populations and a new comprehensive annotation of D. buzzatii. To build the
toolkit PI Matzkin will: 1) generate lines with attP integration sites in
several chromosomes using CRISPR; 2) use these lines to incorporate C31
integrase in the X chromosome of all three species; 3) perform detailed tissue,
developmental and environment-dependent transcriptional analysis to identify
driver loci; 4) generate tissue specific GAL4 driver lines and a UAS-GFP
reporter; 5) generate a UAS-RNAi plasmid construct; and 6) disseminate the
toolkit using the National Drosophila Species Stock Center, a dedicated online
repository for information (cactusflybase) and in-person
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.