* 2220548
* ATD: A model-assisted data-driven framework for prediction of rare extreme events from sparse measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mohammad Farazmand, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 199,961.00

Rare extreme events, such as tsunamis, oceanic rogue waves, wildfires, and
earthquakes, cause immense human, environmental, and financial damage. Yet,
their effective prediction, quantification, and mitigation remains a major
challenge. This project develops a synergistic framework for accurate and real-
time prediction of rare extreme events using both observational data and
mathematical models. The resulting methods will increase the accuracy of
predictions based on available observational data. At the same time, they will
significantly reduce the computational cost, making real-time predictions
feasible. This project will also provide research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of spatiotemporal systems,
such as fluid flows and waves, is described by partial differential equations
(PDEs). High-resolution numerical simulations of these PDE models are valuable
since they provide detailed information about the system and its dynamics.
However, their high computational cost renders them ineffective for making real-
time predictions. More importantly, the PDE models require detailed spatial
measurements of the system which are often unattainable in practice where system
observations are limited to a relatively small number of sensor locations. The
objective of this project is to determine the optimal location of the sensors in
order to enable accurate and real-time prediction of extreme events. The
framework consists of two phases: (1) First, offline PDE simulations are
leveraged to identify the optimal sensing locations and to machine learn a
reliable indicator of extreme events. (2) Optimal real-time measurements and the
pre-trained machine learning algorithm are used to predict future extreme
events. Phase 1 is computationally expensive but is carried out offline and only
once. The results are used in phase 2 in order to make fast real-time
predictions with minimal computational cost. As such, the final results will
increase the accuracy of extreme event prediction while decreasing its
computational cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.