* 2220860
* Supporting Students’ Academic and Career Success with a Sustainable Energy Focus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Li Bai, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,988.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Temple University. Temple is a public university in an urban setting,
located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, serving approximately 30,000
undergraduate and 10,000 graduate students. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 34 unique full time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Electrical Engineering. First year students will receive
four-year scholarships. The Sustainable Temple Energy and Power Scholars (STEPS)
project will provide focused peer, faculty, and industry mentoring that will
support scholars through to graduation. Of critical importance to the proposed
project is the participation of 13 local industry partners interested in
providing job placements to qualified scholars who graduate and facilitating
professional development opportunities during their academic career. While
efforts are primarily focused on enrolling and supporting S-STEM scholars, the
STEPS project will ultimately contribute to building a college-wide framework to
increase diversity and student success in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(ECE) department and the college of engineering beyond the S-STEM award. The
potential to change the perception of what is possible regarding college and
careers for the scholars' families and community provides added impact.
Additionally, STEPS' local industry contacts can be leveraged by other nearby
institutions to improve the pipeline of qualified STEM graduates into the local
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. To achieve this overall goal, the project will
work to accomplish three objectives: (1) increase enrollment into ECE of low-
income, academically talented students by implementing a holistic, targeted
recruitment plan that leverages industry partnerships and uses existing ECE
students as peer role models; (2) increase retention and graduation rates in ECE
of low-income, academically talented students by engaging them in a suite of
evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities infused with industry
collaboration, and by providing support services for learning; and (3)
systematically support student career pathways in STEM, using internships and
industry mentorship as cornerstones. STEPS will use the Social Cognitive Career
Theory (SCCT) as a conceptual framework to gain a better understanding of
factors that influence students’ academic and career choice and persistence. The
research plan intends to use mainly qualitative analysis to accomplish this to
fill a gap in the literature that is mainly based on quantitative studies. A
robust process and outcomes evaluation will be employed to monitor and document
program planning and implementation, which should aid in understanding the
relationship(s) between specific program elements and intended program outcomes
for the STEPS scholars. The analytic framework for evaluating the project
consists of planning-process-outcome analyses from start to finish.
Dissemination of the project results will include an implementation guide, a
workshop on lessons learned to be delivered locally and at national conferences,
peer reviewed conference/journal articles, and visits to other local
institutions of higher education. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. The program also
aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge
about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career
pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.