* 2220968
* Collaborative Research: Characteristics and Origins of Eddies beneath Antarctic Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrew Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 432,824.00

The world ocean is continuously in motion, and a large fraction of this motion
takes the form of "eddies", nearly-horizontal swirls of water spanning tens to
hundreds of kilometers. These eddies affect the ocean by mediating large-scale
currents, redistributing heat, and supplying nutrients to oceanic ecosystems.
Consequently, the ocean science community has historically invested substantial
effort in characterizing the properties and impact of these eddies. In polar
regions, the sea ice cover inhibits observations of eddies, and the relatively
small horizontal size of the eddies hampers computer simulations of their
behavior. Nonetheless, previous studies have identified an active population of
eddies beneath the Arctic sea ice and shown that these eddies play a crucial
role in maintaining the large-scale circulation in the Arctic seas. However,
there has been no systematic attempt to study such eddies under Antarctic sea
ice, leaving a significant gap in our understanding of eddies and their
contribution to the large-scale ocean circulation around
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines
multiple approaches to improve our understanding of the eddy dynamics.
Statistical characterizations of the sub-sea ice eddy field will be derived
using hydrographic observations under Antarctic sea ice from Argo floats and
instrumented seals. High-resolution global ocean and sea ice models will be used
to track the simulated eddies back to their formation sites to identify the eddy
formation mechanisms. Theoretical calculations will be conducted to test the
hypothesis that the eddies primarily originate from hydrodynamic instabilities
associated with subsurface density gradients. These theoretical, modeling, and
data analysis approaches will be combined to estimate the eddies' contribution
to lateral tracer transports and their impact on mean circulations of the near-
Antarctic ocean. The proposed work will facilitate future scientific endeavors
by providing publicly-available databases of detected eddy properties. This
project will support the research of several junior scientists: an undergraduate
student, two graduate students, and an early-career faculty
member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.