* 2220523
* ATD: Collaborative Research: A Geostatistical Framework for Spatiotemporal Extremes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Dan Cheng, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 175,000.00

Extreme weather events such as heat waves, drought, and intense precipitation
can cause drastic losses and disruptions to the U.S. economy and natural
systems. There is abundant evidence that the frequency and magnitude of such
extremes are increasing, making it critical to better understand the
spatiotemporal distributions of the extreme events and to develop efficient
statistical tools to model the spatiotemporal trends and the associated
uncertainties. In this research the investigators will develop a systematic,
statistical approach to study certain new and challenging directions in extremes
of random fields with applications in statistics, geography, geographic
information science (GIScience) and climate sciences. Random fields are playing
increasingly important roles in statistics and geosciences, due to their
extensive applications as spatiotemporal models, where many problems involve
dependent data at spatial and temporal locations.The project will also provide
research training to students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
investigators will develop methods to obtain the exact probability distributions
of peak heights for smooth Gaussian and related non-Gaussian random fields such
as chi-squared, t and F fields. For the nonstationary case, since the peak
height distribution varies at different locations, a new concept on regional
peak height distribution will be investigated. The investigators will also study
the spatial distribution of peaks, which characterizes the probability to
observe peaks in certain domains. This will provide valuable methods to estimate
and predict the chances of extreme events in specific regions. The developed
peak height distributions will be employed in multiple testing of local maxima
(particularly in computing p-values) for detecting peaks for signals embedding
in nonstationary Gaussian noises or non-Gaussian noises. Moreover, the
investigators will extend the proposed methods for structural change detections
of linear models by investigating the links between change points and peaks. The
project developments will be evaluated in domain applications with national
priority: characterizing and modeling of extreme heat events and land surface
changes. This proposed research will integrate interdisciplinary tools from
probability, statistics, geometry and GIScience to develop desired theoretical
results and statistical methods, and will create synergy with related
disciplines such as climate sciences, environmental sciences and social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.