* 2220811
* SBIR Phase II: Improving fleet operational metrics through service optimization with automated learning of vehicle energy performance models for zero-emission public transport
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Jacopo Guanetti, AV-CONNECT, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2025
* USD 999,339.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase (SBIR) II project will research
and validate an internet-of-things (IOT) platform to help commercial fleets
transition to zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs). The ZEV transition is the primary
solution to the decarbonization of the transportation sector, which is the
largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the US. The project focuses on transit
agencies, with the ultimate goal of lowering both operating costs and capital
costs of their ZEV fleets. Coupled with the current funding support by federal,
state and local governments to transit agencies to purchase ZEVs, this project
could accelerate the decarbonization of the US transit fleet. A 50% transition
of the US transit fleet to ZEVs will reduce nearly 200 million metric tons of
carbom dioxide (CO2) equivalent, providing cleaner air quality and reducing
urban noise pollution, particularly in low-income communities that rely more
heavily on transit services for their transportation needs. The addressable
market of Transportation Management Systems will grow from $8.8 billion in 2020
to $27.48 billion in 2028. Demonstrating success in the transit segment will
enable the replication of this approach to other fleet segments like school bus
fleets, last-mile and mid-mile delivery fleets, and long-haul trucking fleets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the design and
implementation of an artificial intelligence software platform to automatically
learn predictive vehicle models of transit ZEVs and provide recommendation
services to transit agencies. The Phase II project has three integrated goals.
The first goal is the development of energy prediction algorithms which are
scalable and highly accurate. Transit ZEV fleets have stochastic load changes,
high sensitivity to operator driving style and high variation of battery size,
weight and driving range, even for similar vehicles. These challenges will be
addressed by developing automated learning techniques built on algorithms
developed in Phase I, which use contextualized data from ZEV stops and trips.
The second goal is to validate the prediction accuracy via pilots with ZEV
fleets providing scheduled bus services. The final goal is development of real-
time, scalable, fleet optimization algorithms which optimize daily assignment
and charge management of ZEV fleets. Chance-constrained optimization will be
merged with predictive control theory to address scalability and real-time
performance of the resulting optimization algorithms. These recommendations
will, if successful, demonstrate highly accurate predictions of charge usage, a
substantial increase in ZEV fleet utilization, and a reduction of transit ZEV
fleet operating costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.