* 2220733
* EDGE FGT: Tools for host-microbiome protein-protein interaction discovery
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Ilana Brito, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,317,788.00

Host-microbe interactions are crucial for normal physiological and immune system
development and substantial evidence now links these interactions with a wide
range of host phenotypes, including promoting drought tolerance in plants,
olfactory communication linked to preening in birds, athletic ability in humans,
and mating preferences in fruit flies. Highly specific microbe-associated
molecular patterns (MAMPs), many of which involve proteins, directly signal with
pattern recognition receptors present on the host epithelium and in host immune
tissue, directly modulating host phenotypes. Although pathogen protein-protein
interactions (PPIs) have been well studied, the study of PPIs between hosts and
their endogenous microbiota is surprisingly lacking. Among the best-studied
examples are interactions with animals’ toll-like receptors or plants’
flagellin-sensitive receptor, but other intriguing examples have emerged in
recent years, such as mimicry of E3 ubiquitin ligases in the plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae and commensal-derived proteins that can degrade host
metabolic hormones. High-throughput PPI studies have generated substantial
experimental data in recent years, yet only a small fraction represents inter-
species interactions and this fraction is largely dominated by host-pathogen
interactions, with non-human species noticeably lacking. Our goal is to develop
tools for PPI discovery and to engage students in opportunities to expand their
bioinformatic skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this grant, we will establish
sequencing-compatible ultra-high-throughput experimental screening approaches
for the discovery of host-microbiome PPIs. Our platforms enable screening the
roughly 10^8 possible interactions between a complex host and its microbiome. We
will pilot and validate our methods with human and rhizome microbiomes. All
resources will be made publicly available and training will be provided. In
parallel, we will develop a set of computational tools to assign host-microbiome
PPI-based functions. We aim to expand and integrate our PPI inference methods
and build a platform that leverages inferred as well as experimentally-verified
PPIs and microbiome composition data to allow researchers to investigate the
host-microbiome interactome of any plant or animal host. Additionally, to help
broaden the overall interest and expose students to computational biology, we
will launch a series of bioinformatics hackathon centered around host-microbe
interactions. Students are drawn to hackathons and, in our experience, they have
served as a great means of exposure for students historically underrepresented
in computational biology. Our annual hackathons will center on protein
structure-inspired projects for students to engage in a low-stress, fun and
inclusive environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.