* 2220956
* NRI: Enhancing Autonomous Underwater Robot Perception for Aquatic Species Management
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Junaed Sattar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 945,291.00

The underwater domain takes up almost four-fifths of the planet and has
significant bearing on human well-being, ecological balance, and accordingly,
socio-economic prosperity. However, it poses significant challenges to
exploration by autonomous systems, particularly in perception and localization
capabilities. Many applications, e.g., in environmental monitoring and ecosystem
preservation, would benefit significantly from using autonomous underwater
vehicles (AUVs), with improved efficiency, productivity, and safety. In
particular, the preservation of the underwater ecosystem is of utmost importance
in maintaining proper ecological balance and is a significant undertaking where
autonomous underwater systems can be valuable tools. This project will integrate
expertise in robotics and marine conservation biology to create novel
capabilities for autonomous underwater robotic perception and navigation which
will make it possible for robots to identify, track, and localize aquatic
species. The research team will integrate theoretical advances in robot vision,
learning, and localization on an affordable, open-source autonomous robotic
platform using field trials, publications, software, and design and dataset
releases, in addition to tutorials and workshops in conferences. The research
team will also incorporate research results into course curricula to better
prepare students for jobs in robotics and intelligent systems while advancing
knowledge in conservation biology. The investigators will pay particular
attention to recruit students from underrepresented groups to the research team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate expertise in robotics and
marine conservation biology to create novel capabilities for autonomous
underwater robotic perception and navigation which will make it possible for
robots to identify, track, and localize aquatic species. This research will
enable AUVs to act as effective robotic assistants in littoral habitats to
manage these ecosystems. Specifically, the investigators will create methods to
(1) enhance multimodal underwater imagery specifically for robust detection of
aquatic species, (2) use zero- and/or one-shot learning for identifying aquatic
species with limited training imagery, and (3) combine acoustic and bathymetric
methods for accurate underwater robot localization. The research outcomes will
be evaluated both individually and as an integrated, coherent system onboard
underwater vehicles at appropriate field locations. Investigators have
complementary expertise in underwater robotics and aquatic ecology. The
integration of the diverse expertise possessed by the research team will lead to
major advances in underwater autonomous robotics and enable the use of AUVs in a
domain of significant ecological and economic
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.