* 2220260
* Supporting student success in Emerging Technologies through scholarships, mentoring and leadership training
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Elodie Billionniere, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,498,834.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Miami Dade College. Miami Dade College is one of the largest and most
diverse public colleges in the nation and one of the largest Hispanic-Serving
Institutions. Over its four-year duration, this project will fund scholarships
to 60 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in emerging
technology (EmTech) concentrations such as data analytics/data science,
cybersecurity, and information systems technology. Students will receive two-
year scholarships. The project will address the critical STEM workforce crisis
by graduating numbers of well-trained and experienced professionals in these
emerging technology fields. The project has the potential to serve as a
framework for evidence-based best practices to broaden participation and access
in STEM/EmTech learning experiences. This project intends to prepare low-income
students (with a focus on underrepresented populations such as women of color)
for the workforce through upskilling and reskilling in EmTech
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The objectives of the project are: 1) increasing
retention and completion of enrolled project scholars seeking Bachelor of
Science degrees in targeted EmTech fields; and 2) increasing workforce placement
of project scholars. Project activities include: recruitment and outreach;
mentorship; financial literacy education; a Summer Leadership Rotation Academy;
and a STEM seminar series. Through iterative design and evaluation efforts, the
project will develop an innovative model for workforce preparedness by
demonstrating: 1) how financial assistance and academic supports will affect
student retention and graduation; and 2) how psychosocial constructs will change
students’ outcomes over time with social cognitive career theory-based
interventions. Project results will be disseminated through internal, local, and
national presentations, a project website, social media, and publications in
peer-reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.