* 2220358
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and numerical studies of the effects of wind, wave scale, and salinity on bubble entrainment by breaking waves
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Malcolm Stokes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 757,404.00

This is a study of the role of wave scale, wave slope, wind forcing, and
salinity on the generation and dispersal of bubbles in breaking ocean waves
through scale model laboratory experiments and computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) simulations. The work is motivated by the critical role played by bubbles
in climate-related air-sea exchanges, including CO2 transfer, aerosol
production, and ocean albedo. Identification of the physical processes
controlling bubble entrainment in whitecaps and their dependence on wave scale,
wave slope, wind forcing, and salinity will fundamentally alter our ability to
model air-sea interactions. At present, there are only three oceanic data sets
of bubbles in whitecaps, which is obviously insufficient to determine any
fundamental physical connection between bubble entrainment and environmental
forcing. CFD simulations have become a powerful tool to study wave breaking but
achievable length scales are still orders of magnitude smaller than oceanic
whitecaps and important physical effects, including salinity effects on bubble
coalescence, the role of wind-forcing, and the effects of wave scale, are not
fully explored. Validating CFD simulations of wave breaking with a realistic
ocean proxy will facilitate their use to study ocean-scale exchange processes
while simultaneously identifying where the greatest effort should be directed to
scale the numerical models to relevant oceanic processes. Moreover, data from
the experiments will help improve existing models of bubble-mediated, air-sea
exchange processes. Additional activities are included to broaden the impact of
the project. The participating laboratories have a strong commitment to
supporting the integration of research and education at various academic levels
across a broad spectrum of society. SIO PIs will work with educational
professionals at the Birch Aquarium at Scripps (BAS) to increase engagement in
STEM and broaden participation in STEM careers. Staff at BAS and the CREATE STEM
Success Initiative at UC San Diego will co-design, evaluate, and implement
experiential learning programs using the resources of the Scripps Ocean
Atmosphere Research Simulator (SOARS). To address inequities in access to STEM
learning opportunities and under-representation of BIPOC students in the
geosciences, the “Exploring Ocean STEM Careers” program will engage middle and
high school students from historically marginalized groups and work with
partners to build on students’ interest and excitement with services that
include academic counseling and college application support. In addition,
funding is included to support two summer undergraduate interns to further their
education in marine science. PIs Deane and Stokes will participate in the BAS
outreach vehicle: Perspectives on Ocean Science lecture series. PI Shen will
lead the development of a portal of computer modeling of water waves for climate
and the environment applications as teaching materials to illustrate Geosciences
to students at tribal colleges and universities, community colleges, and
minority serving institutions. The portal will be disseminated through the
Geoscience Alliance, a national alliance for broadening participation of Native
Americans in Geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from experiments
in three wave channels of increasing scale and environmental complexity will be
compared with state-of-the-art CFD computations to study the fluid dynamics of
bubble entrainment and its dependence on environmental parameters. The
experiments will leverage the recently commissioned Scripps Ocean-Atmosphere
Research Simulator, which provides a realistic yet controllable proxy for the
wind-driven sea surface. The CFD simulations will take advantage of recent
algorithmic advances, including high-fidelity gas-liquid interface capturing
algorithms using the coupled level-set and volume-of-fluid methods with
consistent mass and momentum advection schemes, an optimal network bubble
identification and tracking algorithm, and adaptive mesh refinement, to provide
new insights into air entrainment processes and bubble behavior within breaking
wave crests. Reconciliation of the experiments and simulations will enable
verification of the CFD models, motivation for further algorithmic and modeling
advances, and insights into bubble-mediated exchange processes across the wind-
driven air-sea interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.