* 2220237
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Responding to Energy Insecurity in Arctic Housing Using a Community-Based Participatory Research
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* William Gallus, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,126,858.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observations, Education, Forecasting, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to address the
substantial existing and emerging housing challenges that rural Alaskan
communities currently face. Specifically, many homes in these communities are
highly energy inefficient; many others were not designed for the harsh Alaskan
climate; many are old and overcrowded. The high cost of electricity and heating
fuel combined with these housing challenges makes many rural Alaskan homes
highly energy burdened (i.e. a high percentage of household income is used for
energy costs). The most vulnerable households are estimated to spend nearly half
of their income on energy bills. These challenges are worsened by the changing
climate conditions. Government-funded programs to improve the efficiency of
homes have been ongoing for many years, however, in some cases these efficiency
improvements are not being used by households, and/or are not performing as
intended. There is currently limited research on why this occurs, and solutions
that can help to address this. Therefore, this research seeks to, in
collaboration with three rural Alaskan communities and a diversity of key non-
profits and other stakeholders, identify better, more culturally appropriate
ways to adapt rural Alaskan housing to alleviate energy burden. Many will
benefit from the results of this effort, including Alaskan homeowners, society
as a whole, and the scientific community. Specifically, current and future
homeowners in these communities will benefit from energy efficiency programs
that are better designed to fit their cultural values and interests, making the
homeowners more likely to benefit from participation. This will also improve the
wellbeing of communities by reducing stresses related to energy costs through
methods that support socio-cultural and environmental connections. Society will
benefit from programs designed to achieve the maximum long-term energy and
emissions reductions, thus maximizing the benefits of the use of public money.
The scientific community will benefit from this research through the better
understanding of key factors influencing the long-term success of energy
efficiency improvements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research effort
seeks to answer the following research questions: How can existing Alaska Native
housing be adapted to better alleviate energy insecurity? How effective are
existing energy efficiency retrofit methods, and how can they be improved to
reduce long-term energy burden? The response to these research questions is
obtained using a community-based participatory research in the villages of
Unalakleet, Nome, and Quinhagak. Through six interlinked tasks, the research
team will collaboratively develop improvement strategies that incorporate
cultural beliefs and values, field data collection, and integrated building
energy models which together address identified causes of energy burden for
existing housing. Task 1 will establish the methods for knowledge co-production
and collaboration with the communities. Task 2 will use climate model outputs
and surface weather station data along with community interviews, to construct
future climate scenarios for each community. Task 3 will assess the
characteristics, efficiency, and long-term performance of homes, including those
with and without retrofits. Through buildings validated energy models, it will
also quantify the factors driving energy burden, and the impacts energy
efficiency improvements have had on energy burden. Task 4 will assess the
cultural values and beliefs that members of rural Alaskan communities have
around energy use and energy efficient technology, resulting in an understanding
of cultural barriers and opportunities for energy efficiency improvement
implementation. Task 5 will identify retrofit strategies which both reduce
energy burden considering future climate scenarios, and fit Alaska Native
cultural values and beliefs. It will also recommend the need for improvements to
energy efficiency implementation, including design changes and/or energy
education. The final task will develop energy engineering curriculum which will
be implemented in K-12 and higher education
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.