* 2220586
* Supporting Low-Income Students Studying Biology, Chemistry, and Biochemistry from First Year to Graduation in Rural Wisconsin
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Sarah Orlofske, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,922.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income, primarily first-generation college students. The project
will take place at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point, which is a
regional public institution in rural, central Wisconsin. Over six years, the
project will fund scholarships to 30 unique, full-time students pursuing
undergraduate degrees in biology, biochemistry, or chemistry. The project will
support scholars as cohorts in multiple ways including early, structured peer-
to-peer interactions, supplemental instruction in STEM courses, career
development planning, increased advising, and paid multi-year undergraduate
research opportunities. Faculty are key in STEM students’ success and will be
engaged in professional development on evidence-based teaching, effective
research mentoring, and academic advising. This project has the potential to
broaden participation in STEM fields, especially for students from rural
regions, and generate knowledge about how to support retention and graduation in
STEM for these student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. To achieve this goal, this
project will pursue four objectives. The first objective is to increase
retention and degree attainment of low-income and first-generation students
pursuing degrees in biology, chemistry, or biochemistry between the first and
second. The second objective is to implement and study the impact of a faculty-
mentored undergraduate research experience for scholars. The third objective is
to increase the number of first-generation and low-income students in the
regional STEM workforce with the goal of having the majority of scholars pursue
a STEM-focused career. The final objective is to create more inclusive,
supportive learning environments that result in a culture of success for low-
income, first-generation college STEM students on the campus. Evaluation will be
conducted by an external evaluator who will collect on-going evidence from
students and faculty through surveys and focus groups, as well as tracking of
student success measures such as grades, GPA, retention data, and graduation
rates. Insights gained from this project will be disseminated in the university
system, regionally, and nationally to contribute to the collective understanding
of best practices to retain and graduate low-income, high-achieving students in
STEM, especially those students from rural areas. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.