* 2220274
* Discovery of new crystallization pathways in forming biominerals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Pupa Gilbert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical description &lt;br/&gt;Perfect crystals are formed when atoms
order themselves in a regular geometry. This crystallization happens all the
time in nature, resulting in gemstones, minerals, and rocks, but it is also
relevant to and widespread in industry, for example to make semiconductor
crystals for electronics, or to produce crystalline chemicals, pharmaceuticals,
or food products. Understanding crystallization, therefore, promotes the
progress of science and benefits society by improving fundamental knowledge and
applied materials production. The problem, however, is that crystallization in
all these natural and synthetic systems happens too fast, at high temperature,
and at high pressure, making it difficult or impossible to observe
crystallization as it happens. Researchers have a better chance to understand
crystallization by observing it in biominerals, such as coral skeletons and
seashells, where crystals grow at room temperature, ambient pressure, and very,
very slowly, taking a day or so to crystallize. This research will involve
talented undergraduate students who are members of underrepresented minorities
in science and academia, and make them publish peer-reviewed journal articles,
as previously done by these researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Observing crystallization as it happens reveals the
presence or absence of transient precursor phases, which can be crystalline or
amorphous minerals. Preliminary, unpublished, unconfirmed data suggest that
there are two kinds of transient precursors to biomineral formation: crystalline
and amorphous. Transient crystalline phases have only been observed once before
in only one biomineral, planktonic foraminifera, whereas transient amorphous
phases have been observed extensively and repeatedly sea urchin spicules and
spines, in mollusk shells, and in coral skeletons. The principal investigator
and her group will strive explore the existence of transient crystalline
precursors in many different biominerals, by analyzing data they already have
and new data, to be acquired on new, unexplored biominerals: brachiopods and
benthic foraminifera. They will develop software to build the energy landscapes
that determine crystallization rates for all transient and stable phases, then
use this software to analyze data new and old. They will develop machine
learning and principal component analysis to find new, unknown mineral phases in
new and old data. Even if they discover that transient crystalline phases do not
exist in most biominerals, the new energy landscapes, the new biominerals and
their formation mechanisms, and the potential new phases identified by machine
learning in new and old data will make this research produce multiple
interesting discoveries, while employing and training talented underrepresented
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.