* 2220559
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Meq unguvatkarput (water is our livelihood) - building community resilience for the future
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Emily Kumpel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,125,042.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents,
Education, Forecasting, Data and Observations, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal delta communities are among the most vulnerable to
climate change, causing most communities to wonder what their lands and
waterways will look like in decades to come. State of Alaska reports identify
villages of the Yukon-Kuskokwim (YK) Delta as underserved with respect to basic
government services and highlight areas threatened by sea level rise, coastal
erosion, flooding, and permafrost degradation. Likewise, communities and
traditional ways of life are threatened by sea level rise, salinization, and
storm surge because of the low elevation of the delta. Additionally, the
decrease in duration and extent of coastal sea ice has contributed to greater
storm impacts increasing the vulnerability of the YK Delta to coastal hazards.
These changes are forcing Alaskan Native communities to face new realities in
their day-to-day lives. Changes in the water cycle driven by climate change are
generating risks to health, sanitation, and infrastructure. Populations living
in rural villages in the YK Delta region experience challenges in the quality,
accessibility, and reliability of drinking water and sanitation services. These
effects are exacerbated by changes in climate and water budgets that are
increasingly influencing water cycles in the Arctic. As communities, like
Kongiganak and Mekoryuk navigate the changing Arctic together, it is essential
to chart a course that holistically considers the physical and human dimensions
of these new realities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will: evaluate near-
term and far-term prospects of providing safe, affordable, resilient, and
locally acceptable drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene services in the
context of environmental change (erosion, permafrost thaw, and flood hazards);
measure, quantify, and model rates of landscape change and altered hydrology
caused by rising sea level and the collapse of permafrost across the built
environment and landscapes used for traditional livelihoods; utilize new
baseline hydrographic data collected with community partners through bathymetric
surveys, water level gauges, and coastal wave buoys to develop high-resolution
3D hydrodynamic models of storm surge flooding delivering predictive flood
hazard maps and workflows for other communities; develop the first estimates of
water/sanitation-related coping costs for rural Alaskan communities and quantify
benefits/costs of various water/sanitation-service delivery models under
different landscape and climate scenarios; co-develop community-based monitoring
programs that allow for determination of how current rates of environmental
change compare to historical trends and Indigenous Knowledge observations. We
will document effective convergent workflows/co-production techniques to be
applied broadly in the YK Delta and beyond where the same challenges of rapid
climate change are playing out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.