* 2220450
* IMR:MM-1B: New directions in Privacy-Preserving Telemetry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rafail Ostrovsky, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,999.00

Almost all modern-day devices are connected to the internet. Home appliances,
smart watches, phones, cars, industrial tools, and even body weight scales are
connected. For example, Samsung Smart TV reports back to Samsung every choice
and every click that a consumer makes as well as the duration that a consumer
watches any program. Internet browsers collect user browsing data. Internet
Service Providers collect user IP access data. The torrent of data collected is
typically used to improve user experience, service, and target advertisements.
However, collection of ever more intrusive data regarding each individual
consumer or organization comes at the price of tremulous invasion of privacy,
and increases the risk that the data collected can be harvested for other
(unintended) purposes, such as counter-intelligence, political campaigns, as
well as identity theft and other criminal activity. How do we allow
organizations to collect aggregate statistics regarding streaming data without
violating individual consumer privacy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to explore novel ways to compute aggregate statistics on streaming data in a
privacy-preserving way, extending systems such as PRIO, PRIO+, and Poplar. The
framework is that users or devices send their data in a secret-shared way to two
servers which then communicate with each other to compute telemetry data while
not revealing (to each other or anyone else) users’ individual data. This
approach was adopted, for example, by the Firefox browser in a Mozilla project
titled “Origin Telemetry”. The goals of this research are to explore even more
efficient methods to privately compute telemetry data in this setting by
exploring how to generalize streaming algorithms (without privacy) that were
pioneered by Alon, Matias, and Szegedy to streaming algorithms with privacy.
More specifically, can we compute frequency moments in a privacy-preserving and
efficient manner by two servers receiving a (secret-shared) stream? While this
seems like a very specialized question, it is, in fact, generalizable, as shown
by the PI in the paper titled “Zero-One Frequency Laws”. This brings us to the
even more interesting question: how to classify all functions that can be
privately computed over streaming secret-shared data in one pass and with poly-
logarithmic memory. Our goal is to provide new tools for the questions of
privacy-preserving analysis of streaming large volume data, specifically called
out in section MM-1B of the NSF Internet Measurement Research call for
proposals. If successful, our methods will allow large-scale and efficient
computation of all aggregate statistics that can be computed in small memory in
a privacy-preserving way. This project will also advance the state-of-the-art
performance of MPC on streaming data to Internet-size streaming computations.
Lastly, our proposal calls for robust training of graduate and undergraduate
students, including actively seeking minorities and female students to enter
cryptographic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.