* 2220329
* Workshop: Building a Framework to Understand the Impact of Entrepreneurship Support Programs on the Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Sarah Zappe, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,946.00

For several decades, the development of the professional skill set, comprising
proficiency in communication, business, creativity, leadership, and other
attributes, has been emphasized to be nearly or equally as important as the
acquisition of technical skills by engineering students. While no one doubts the
importance of students’ need to acquire technical engineering knowledge,
professional skills including communication, teamwork, ethical understanding,
and considerations of economic and societal factors are critically important for
the professional formation of engineers. Entrepreneurial Support Programs [ESPs]
are one mechanism by which students can gain these professional skills, both for
students who aspire to be entrepreneurs as well as those who plan to work in
industry settings. In fact, many ESPs across the country focus on the
acquisition of skills or attributes comprising the professional skill set that
engineering students can use in varied career settings, whether that includes
venture creation, intrapreneurship, or in a leadership role in industry or even
academia. Over the past several decades, the number of entrepreneurship-focused
courses, programs, and cocurricular and other training opportunities embedded
into science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) programs across the
country has increased dramatically. However, the impact of ESPs on students’
professional formation and the acquisition of different attributes—such as
creativity, risk taking, empathy, and curiosity is largely unknown. Though the
social sciences have a strong and robust history of studying many of the
attributes typically associated with entrepreneurship, there is little
connection between this foundational research and the work of ESPs. This
proposal seeks to build a framework that serves as a liaison between social
science research and practitioners, who typically do not have the bandwidth or
background to engage in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposed project is to bridge the gap between social scientists and engineering
entrepreneurship practitioners by creating a research-based framework to guide
the development, instruction, and assessment of ESPs. This project will initiate
this process with a Delphi study and a set of three virtual workshops with
interdisciplinary experts. The outcome will be an initial framework that
identifies a clear set of antecedents, characteristics of the ESP context, and
entrepreneurship-related outcomes, including career pathways, knowledge of
entrepreneurship, and attributes that ESPs aim to influence, along with a set of
white papers that describe a) existing measurement approaches and tools with
reliability and validity evidence, and b) evidence-based instructional
strategies that will impact these entrepreneurship-related student
attributes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.