* 2220647
* Increasing Success of STEM Students through Cohort Building, Mentoring, and Career Discerning Experiences: an Interdisciplinary Collaboration
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2028
* Michael Lerner, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 11/30/2028
* USD 747,247.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Earlham College, a small liberal arts college located in predominantly
rural east central Indiana. Over its six year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 15 unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, data science, earth and
environmental science, mathematics, physics or pre-engineering. First-year
students will receive up to four years of scholarship support. This project is
designed to increase the number of students who enter the STEM workforce or
graduate programs by reducing financial barriers and providing cohort building,
career discernment, and mentoring activities. Highlights include a cohort-based
college orientation, a fully funded early research experience, extensive
advising and cohort building through Faculty and peer mentoring, and career
discernment activities integrated into required first and second year courses.
This project has the potential to generate knowledge about the effects of early
research participation on career engagement and STEM persistence of this student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Specific aims include: retain 85% of the
participants in a STEM discipline after their first year, have a graduation rate
within a STEM discipline of 75% of the Scholars, and increase the percentage of
STEM graduates who have entered the STEM workforce or graduate programs within
six months of graduation to 85%. While there are studies linking undergraduate
research to increased career planning for employment and postgraduate education,
and examples of connecting undergraduate research to workplace and career-ready
skills, these studies generally focus on upper-level undergraduates who are near
completion of a STEM program and rarely include intentional preparation for, and
post-reflection of, the research experience as career-discerning. This project
will answer the question: What is the effect of early research participation
framed by formal career education on career engagement and STEM persistence for
low-income students? This project has the potential to advance the understanding
of the use of an early research experience to jump-start students’ career
engagement, envision their future as a scientist, and work toward that career
goal both by persisting in the STEM major and pursuing further
research/internship experiences. This project will be evaluated using a mixed
methods approach to understand the efficacy of the increased focus on career
discernment support, including monitoring scholars' first and second year
retention in a STEM major, subsequent engagement in additional
research/internships, graduation rates, and career plans of graduate work or
employment in a STEM field. The project’s strategies, implementation, and
outcomes for improving the success of academically talented low-income students
will be disseminated internally and at local, regional, and national conferences
and in appropriate peer reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.