* 2220624
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Foundations for Improving Resilience in the Energy Sector against Wildfires on Alaskan Lands (FIREWALL)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Matthew Berman, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 957,057.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Forecasting, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, Alaska has witnessed high-
intensity wildfires that often grow to tens or hundreds of thousand acres within
days, both in remote, sparsely populated rural areas and close to population
centers. Wildfires are projected to increase due to climate change and present
new and emerging risks to Alaskan energy infrastructure and communities needing
electricity for daily life and health services. Alaska is especially vulnerable
to wildfires due to its isolated electricity grid, fire-prone boreal forests,
and extreme fire behavior, as well as the critical dependence of its rural
communities on electricity for health and year-round food supply. There is an
urgent need to empower Arctic communities, electric utilities, emergency
responders, and health organizations to collaboratively share resources and
exchange information for improved situational awareness and resilience against
wildfires. The FIREWALL research project will advance the knowledge on (1) how
elements of the natural environment, energy infrastructure, and social systems
interact with one another before, during, and following wildfires, and (2) how
to enable a collaborative framework for decision-making and communication among
multi-sectoral stakeholders to reduce wildfire risks faced by communities and
electric utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIREWALL project will develop a
risk-informed decision-making platform that integrates (1) formation, short-term
prediction, and spatiotemporal propagation analysis of wildfires on Alaskan
lands, (2) Alaskaâ€™s electricity network planning, preparedness, response, and
mitigation facing wildfires, and (3) community health and social vulnerability
metrics. The project will establish a shared understanding of the problem by
engaging in focus groups, listening sessions, and surveys with community
partners. The decision-making platform will be evaluated in a range of short-
term and long-term use cases for the electric utilities, forestry managers, and
emergency responders under different fire regimes, and will be tested in a
number of wildfire-prone geographical zones in Alaska. The project outcomes will
bridge the gap between social and environmental challenges with community-in-
the-loop engineering solutions for wildfire resilience, and provide Arctic
residents with numerous educational opportunities. The education activities
include outreach to K-12 teachers and students, and training the multi-sectoral
stakeholders using the FIREWALL platform products to facilitate a smooth
transition for deployment in practice. The project will have the potential to
form holistic integrated roadmaps that can enhance public safety and resilience
of the mission-critical lifeline infrastructure in Alaska and beyond when facing
future wildfire disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.