* 2220845
* Collaborative Research: Towards a Better Understanding of the Atmospheric Fate of PFAS
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shubham Vyas, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 254,618.00

Per- and Poly-fluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS), have been used in many
industrial applications (e.g., non-stick coating) as a chemically and thermally
stable compound. However, these compounds have known human health impacts, and
thus have been largely phased out. Nonetheless, PFAS compounds are still
detected in air and water, and there exists a data gap in our understanding of
the chemical degradation and environmental fate of PFAS compounds. This work
will perform laboratory experiments in order to fill this data gap and improve
out understanding of PFAS chemistry – with a focus on perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) – and the likely impact of PFAS compounds on the environment and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work has three primary research
goals: (1) to quantify the thermodynamic properties relevant for atmospheric
phase partitioning of PFAS and PFAS-replacing chemicals; (2) to estimate the
atmospheric lifetime of these chemicals against OH chemistry; and (3) to
investigate reaction mechanisms of these chemicals. Additionally, this proposed
work has an educational objective to establish an exchange to enable
undergraduate students to broaden their educational experience by conducting
summer research among the collaborative institutions. This proposed work will
conduct three primary tasks to reach these objectives. First, the team will
quantify the thermodynamic properties – namely saturation vapor pressure, Henry
volatility, and acid dissociation constants – that influence the phase
partitioning of PFAS. Second, they will conduct multiple oxidation flow reactor
experiments to constrain the impact of OH radical chemistry on PFAS. Third, they
will estimate rate constants of PFAS against OH and develop potential reaction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports one postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.