* 2220844
* Supporting Transfer Student Success Using a Multidisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Janet Loxterman, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,956.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Idaho State University. Over its 6-year duration, this project will
provide scholarships to 36-45 different full-time transfer students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Microbiology, Biochemistry, or Chemistry
(BMBC). Four cohorts of scholars will receive up to two and a half years of
scholarship support. To facilitate degree completion and transition to the STEM
workforce, scholarship support will be coupled with other supports to structure
scholars’ authentic participation in a multidisciplinary research community over
time, including a research exploration course to highlight multidisciplinary
strategies to diverse BMBC research problems, an undergraduate research
experience, faculty and peer mentoring structures to promote scholars’ sense of
belonging in the BMBC research community, and connections to post-graduation
workforce and graduate program placement. This project has the potential to
improve the STEM workforce by preparing scientist leaders for multidisciplinary
teams who can identify emerging research areas and devise innovative solutions
to problems across the biology-chemistry interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
specific objectives of this project are to provide scholarships to students
transferring to a BMBC major at Idaho State University, improve transfer student
retention and on-time graduation, and train scientist leaders of
multidisciplinary teams. Transfer students face the specific challenge of
transitioning to a new academic space with limited time to author their
identities in relation to that space, which is important for student persistence
in a discipline. To address this challenge, this project will draw on evidence-
based approaches from two frameworks: communities of science practice and
disciplinary identity. The project activities will be designed to support
transfer students to author their multidisciplinary identities through
participation in the BMBC community of science practice. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of the effectiveness of these evidence-based
approaches in this context for transfer student retention and graduation in BMBC
majors and transition to the STEM workforce or graduate programs. The project
will be evaluated based on the analysis of institutional data, scholar surveys,
scholar focus group interviews, and faculty surveys. An external evaluator will
conduct yearly formative assessment and a summative assessment at the end of the
project to assess how the project meets the objectives. Results of this project
will be disseminated through presentations at regional and national conferences,
peer-reviewed publications, a dedicated section on the university website,
university presentations, and department seminars. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.