* 2220276
* Path Sampling and Dynamic Risk Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Chemical manufacturing processes can pose serious hazards and so safety
considerations play an important role in their design. Indeed, to minimize the
risk of catastrophic accidents, which can result in loss of human life or major
environmental damage, extensive instrumentation such as control systems, alarms,
and safety interlocks, are routinely employed in chemical processes. While such
efforts are generally successful in mitigating the most common and well-
understood abnormal events, it is challenging to detect the onset and mitigate
the effects of infrequent and unexpected abnormal events in real-time.
Importantly, such rare safety events, which have not been considered in the
plant design, can lead to the most severe consequences. This project extends the
prior work of this research team in adapting computational strategies developed
to study the motion of molecules to uncover conditions leading to plant
shutdowns or accidents resulting from rare and highly abnormal safety events.
Fortunately, expensive plant shutdowns or dangerous accidents rarely occur, but
consequently, little (if any) data are available to alert plant operators in
sufficient time to take safety actions to circumvent them. This proposal seeks
to continue developing strategies for setting alarms and carrying out safety
actions more reliably in the face of unanticipated abnormal events. These
strategies have the potential to prevent large financial losses, prevent serious
injuries, and save lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance path-sampling
strategies for identifying unlikely plant shutdowns and accidents, the research
team will seek new strategies to set alarms and apply safety systems in a
rigorous manner. The research program will begin with well-established
strategies, such as dynamic risk-analysis (DRA – developed over the past 15
years by this project's PI), for estimating the failure probabilities associated
with well-known postulated abnormal events. Using noise to represent an array of
rare un-postulated abnormal events, computational experiments will be carried
out to relate committor probabilities (functions predicting the probability of
commitment to a path to failure) to process variables for which alarm thresholds
and safety systems will be created - this will enable the application of DRA,
for the first time, to evaluate online the effectiveness of the safety systems
by estimating process failure probabilities in response to un-postulated rare
events. In so doing, the researchers will undertake the design of new multi-
variable real-time alarm systems, which not only will lead to safer operation by
eliminating false-negatives, but also mitigate the nuisance of false-positive
alarms. As these strategies are developed, they will be tested on well-known
industrial processes (e.g., steam-methane reforming (SMR) to produce hydrogen)
using historical operating data provided by the PI’s long-term collaborator, Air
Liquide. These data are essential to understanding how, over several years, rare
paths to plant shutdowns and accidents are initiated – with final safety system
responses carried out in just minutes to few hours. Gradually, application of
these strategies will move from exothermic, continuous-stirred tank reactors
(CSTRs) to more complex polymerization reactors, and ultimately will scale-up to
integrated chemical processes with recycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.