* 2220425
* Endangered languages in contact: A multilingual spoken corpus for language documentation and research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Margaret Renwick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2025
* USD 449,712.00

This project documents and analyzes a group of endangered language varieties
spoken in a linguistically diverse border region, which have developed in
contact with one another for hundreds of years. It also examines the specific
situation of endangered dialects in contact with closely related varieties,
which have been unduly ignored in research on language endangerment. This
project will therefore provide us with important information that can help us
understand fundamental issues of language variation and change, and will make
theoretical contributions that are generalizable to other language-contact
situations. Documentation of understudied and endangered languages is important
for the preservation of cultural knowledge and for the advancement of scientific
theories about human language. Endangered languages need to be studied in their
broader ecological context in order to better understand the processes of
language contact, maintenance, and shift: this includes the psychological
context (the interaction of different varieties in the minds of bi- or
multilingual speakers) and the sociological context (the specific relations
among minoritized varieties and their interactions with standard languages, and
how these different varieties function within society as mediums of
communication). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates an online searchable
spoken corpus that will allow for the quantitative analysis of language
variation and code-switching practices by multilingual speakers. It leverages
existing resources to develop an open-source pipeline for processing and
annotating multilingual data from under-resourced varieties. The corpus
interface will be built as a Shiny application, which can be adapted for use
with other corpora and which allows many other possibilities for data
visualization and statistical analysis, since it uses the popular R software
environment. The web interface will also be designed to facilitate use by non-
specialists, in order to make these data accessible to members of the local
communities who are interested in the linguistic and cultural heritage of the
region or in language maintenance and revitalization. This award is made as part
of a funding partnership between the National Science Foundation and the
National Endowment for the Humanities for the NSF Dynamic Language
Infrastructure – NEH Documenting Endangered Languages
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.