* 2220417
* IMR: MM-1A: ADDRESS: Augment, Denoise and Debias cRowdsourced mEasurements for Statistical Synthesis of internet access characterization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Elizabeth Belding, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The U.S. suffers from digital inequality that stretches in multiple dimensions.
Several demographic and socioeconomic factors, such as race, ethnicity, and
income, as well as population density, are often indicators of Internet
availability and quality. To fully bridge the Internet access divide and best
allocate available funding, policymakers need to understand the state of
Internet accessibility and quality at fine-grained geographical granularity. The
goal of this project is to make the best use of crowdsourced Internet
measurement data to estimate the distribution of fixed Internet quality at
different levels of geospatial granularity with as high accuracy as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do so, the projects plans to make the
following contributions: (i) to develop a Broadband Offerings Tool that
aggregates ISP broadband plan offerings and links that data with crowdsourced
measurements and socioeconomic data to predict user subscription plans, (ii) to
develop new methodologies and algorithms that can detect noisy data points, such
as speed test measurements that report bottlenecks in WiFi access or remote
peering links, which bias the understanding of Internet quality, (iii) to
propose new statistical techniques that use the resulting dataset to output a
debiased dataset that removes the spatial, temporal, and demographic biases
inherent in crowdsourced Internet measurement data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital
inequality continues to persist in the U.S., deepened by the work-from-home and
remote schooling resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The outputs of this work
will be used to report the distribution of Internet quality in a region and
predict that of regions for which less data is available. This work will also
reveal demographic variables that most influence the U.S. digital divide. The
outcomes of this project can be used to inform local, state and federal
governments about where investments must be made to ensure all Americans have
access to high quality Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project website will be
established, which will contain information about research methodology, models
and outcomes. The likely URL is broadband.cs.ucsb.edu. The website will be
maintained for the duration of the project, and at least a year
thereafter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.