* 2220422
* FMitF Track I: Formal Methods in Software Support for Sound Experimentation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Emma Tosch, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2023
* USD 461,889.00

Experiments are a critical tool for understanding the world. Experimentation is
ubiquitous, pervasive, and often necessary to understand the relationship
between cause and effect. Every time one learns how to interact with a new phone
or try to understand why our cars will not start, one informally experiments. As
individuals, people experiment for themselves, but organizations also experiment
to understand the effects of products, policies or design decisions for many
customers, citizens and users. As the world is increasingly mediated by software
through people's phones, smart devices, and social media platforms, one's
ability to experiment is both driven and limited by software. Unfortunately,
software is not often written with support for experimentation in mind. This
severely limits one's ability to understand complex cause and effect
relationships, such as the role that a news feed algorithm play on users'
understanding of current events. This project will develop tools and techniques
for making experimentation in software easier and more transparent, without
sacrificing flexibility or correctness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present
experimentation in software has no unified framework; while there are libraries,
configuration languages, and services that can provide limited support for
experimentation, there are few end-to-end systems in the style of e.g., logging
frameworks. Instead, developers must typically write bespoke software, resulting
in systems that are (a) tailored to a specific task and (b) disconnected from
hypotheses and analyses. This project will produce a high-level domain-specific
language (DSL) for experimentation that enforces constraints on hypotheses,
analyses, and treatment assignment according to the underlying principles of
experimental design. Experiments written in this language will be correct by
construction vis a vis consistency of hypotheses and treatment assignments with
respect to their identifiable effects. The team will then integrate the
experimentation DSL into legacy socio-technical software for education,
leveraging existing support for gradual typing to implement an orthogonal type
system for experimental interventions. To evaluate these tools and promote
continued research around formal methods approaches to the experimentation-
analysis pipeline, the team will build a publicly available searchable
experiment repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Formal Methods in the Field and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.