* 2220865
* The net impact of rising CO2 versus rising vapor pressure deficit on tree mortality
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alexandria Pivovaroff, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2025
* USD 452,817.00

Human-activities are leading to multiple, concurrent global changes including
rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels, rising temperature, and an
associated drying of the atmosphere. While higher CO2 levels could potentially
have beneficial effects for trees, a drier atmosphere may outweigh those
positive impacts and instead lead to increased forest mortality. Forest
mortality has major consequences for clean air, clean water, and biodiversity.
In order to address the uncertainty of the net effect of rising CO2 and a drier
atmosphere on forests, this research will combine field experiments that
directly expose trees to different CO2 and atmospheric dryness levels, from
which plant physiological measurements will be taken. These measurements will be
combined with a global tree transpiration dataset to parameterize and validate a
model that will improve the ability to predict the effects of these impacts on
forests. In addition, this project will recruit and train scientists from
underrepresented groups in science to promote a diverse and globally competitive
workforce and support outreach activities that engage K-12 students in hands-on
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The net impact of rising CO2 levels and rising
atmospheric aridity, measured as vapor pressure deficit (VPD), on forests is one
of the largest uncertainties in model projections of the terrestrial carbon sink
and the water cycle. Current evidence suggests that the negative impacts of VPD
will outweigh the positive impacts of increased CO2, but direct tests,
physiological measurements, and a multi-scale understanding of mechanisms and
consequences are lacking. To address this, this research will use a three-
pronged approach by combining 1) the first field experiment that directly
manipulates CO2 and VPD, 2) a global-scale sapflux dataset enabling examination
of species- and ecosystem-specific variation in CO2 versus VPD impacts, and 3) a
process-based model that will be parameterized and validated using datasets from
both (1) and (2). Sensitivity analyses will be conducted on model outputs to
investigate the role of CO2 and VPD on mortality, the associated mechanisms, and
the possible role of acclimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.