* 2220286
* IMR: MM-1A: Evolutionary Modeling and Acquisition of Multidimensional 5G Internet Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jie Ding, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,932.00

Commercial 5G networks are being quickly rolled out in the U.S. The high-
throughput, low-latency natures of 5G enable numerous exciting applications,
such as cloud/edge assisted machine learning, networked virtual/augmented
reality, connected and autonomous vehicles, low-latency IoT applications, and
digital agriculture. However, despite 5Gâ€™s potential, the research community
still lacks a thorough understanding of 5G performance in the wild in the
following aspects: (1) unlike its predecessors, 5G encompasses more diverse
technologies; (2) the underlying data patterns are often time-varying at
different scales; and (3) Scientists often have limited resources to model and
acquire multidimensional 5G measurements. An overarching goal of this project is
to develop novel statistical methods for modeling complex internet measurements
and designing data collection under practical constraints. The proposed research
is expected to have a broader impact on the practice and education across
statistics, machine learning, signal processing, internet data analysis, and
data privacy. The project will integrate the materials developed by this project
into courses in statistics and computer science. In addition, the project will
actively outreach to local high schools and colleges to organize workshops or
summer camps for underrepresented minorities in STEM and engage them in hands-on
learning projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the cross-disciplinary
team aims to significantly advance the fundamental understanding of the modeling
and sampling of 5G measurements. The PI and Co-PIs will leverage their expertise
to develop learning frameworks, advanced algorithms, and analysis techniques for
internet measurements in two interconnected research thrusts. First,
evolutionary space-time modeling, an innovative and principled framework for
statistical modeling of the 5G internet measurements across space and time will
be developed. This modeling paradigm can flexibly incorporate modern
nonparametric supervised learning techniques and perform online
computation/updating of the model. Second, an influence-based approach to data
acquisition, in which system designers can address various constraints, such as
variable sparsity and data privacy, will be developed. The research outcomes
will offer valuable and practically powerful tools for scientists to understand
the 5G internet from streaming data across a large span of space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.