* 2220724
* SBP: Social Identity Threat and Motivational Direction
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kyle Ratner, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 373,108.00

People who belong to groups, statuses, or categories that have been targets of
prejudice and discrimination will experience frequent social identity threat â€“
reminders that their social grouping or identity is viewed unfavorably by
others. A common belief within social psychology is that social identity threat
increases worry, hopelessness, and anger. Although these reactions all reflect
negative emotions, these emotions do not motivate behavior in the same manner.
For instance, when someone is feeling worry and hopelessness they might want to
withdraw from the situation (flight in the classic fight/flight response
distinction). However, when someone is experiencing anger they might be
motivated to approach the situation (fight not flight). The current research
uses methods from social psychology and neuroscience to examine how incidents of
prejudice differentially influence people's emotional reactions and motivations,
such as being inclined to take action or instead withdrawing. This novel framing
of emotional reactions is significant because it suggests responses that may
protect against prejudice and discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves a series of studies that combine self-report and brain imaging methods
to assess emotional reactions when observing prejudiced behavior by others.
Across all of these studies, participants observe a person's social identity
being threatened in a way that is either blatant, such as being called a racist
name, or in a way that is more ambiguous, such as being criticized in a way that
might or might not be driven by prejudice. One study uses brain imaging (EEG)
and questionnaires to test whether perceiving a blatant form of prejudice
increases a person's anger and brain activity associated with motivations to
approach a situation, more so than when perceiving an ambiguous form of
prejudice. Another study uses fMRI brain imaging to examine whether the proposed
anger-related approach motivation linked to blatant prejudice has spillover
effects for how people process rewards, such as money, since past research has
noted that approach motivation increases sensitivity to rewards. A final study
examines whether perceiving blatant prejudice versus ambiguous prejudice
increases persistence on a task because anger increases approach motivation and
approach motivation is related to persistence. This project also provides unique
mentoring and professional networking opportunities specifically aimed at
broadening the participation of students who are underrepresented in social and
affective neuroscience and who bring important perspectives given their own
elevated risk for experiencing discrimination. This research has the potential
to shift current ways of understanding social identity threat and can inform
efforts to boost resilience in communities targeted by prejudice and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.