* 2220972
* The STEM Core Experience: Fostering STEM talent through community building and wellness support
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Amber Paulson, Flathead Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2028
* USD 749,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Flathead Valley Community College (FVCC). FVCC serves rural areas with
limited access to institutions of higher education and socio-economic
opportunity. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30
unique full-time and part-time students who are pursuing Associate’s degrees in
biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, forensic science, forestry,
geology, mathematics, and physics. First-year students will receive up to three
years of scholarship support. The project will increase student persistence and
transfer to 4-year colleges by cultivating students’ STEM identity through one-
on-one faculty mentorship and STEM learning communities. Students will also have
access to mental health and wellness coaching to help improve STEM retention and
resiliency. The project will provide immediate benefits to the scholars, FVCC,
and the region at large by fostering inclusive classroom environments,
supporting academic success, and improving STEM workforce skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. This project aims to increase the persistence, retention,
Associate’s degree graduation rate, and transfer rate of STEM students to better
prepare them for future STEM careers. This project will utilize an integrated
approach to supporting scholars with three primary components: scholarships,
STEM identity and community building, and mental health and wellness counseling.
Scholarships will increase student solvency and decrease financial stress. The
project will establish STEM learning communities with common first-year courses
and a robust STEM colloquium along with one-on-one faculty mentoring. Those
components are expected to foster STEM identity and sense of belonging, both of
which are predictors of persistence and retention. Students will also be
connected to a mental health counselor for regular wellness coaching with the
aim of increasing student resilience and sense of well-being. Through these co-
curricular offerings the project holds potential to promote understanding of the
connection between STEM identity, mental health, and persistence, retention, and
resiliency in the pursuit of a STEM degree. Results of the project may also
provide a model for local high schools and rural community colleges looking to
foster student success through mental health support. These connections will be
investigated by the project leadership team and the external evaluator using a
mixed methods design. Results of this project will be made available to all
appropriate stakeholders via local meetings, regional and national
presentations, and publication in appropriate journals. Dissemination efforts
will take place at FVCC, regional high schools, community forums, and other
settings, as appropriate. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically-talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.