* 2220835
* Multi-tiered Peer Mentoring and Experiential Learning for Academically Talented, Low-Income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2029
* Alicia Wyatt, McMurry University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2029
* USD 735,023.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at McMurry University. McMurry University, a four-year Hispanic Serving
Institution, provides a small campus environment for students who come primarily
from economically disadvantaged areas of rural West Texas. Over its 6-year
duration, this project will provide scholarship support to 15 students pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, or Computer
Science. This project will provide a comprehensive program of academic advising,
peer assisted learning support, academic coaching, leadership development,
career preparation, and access to other high impact practices. This set of
supports is designed to increase students' retention, sense of belonging,
professional identity, and college and career success. A cornerstone of the
project will be an innovative “near peer” mentoring program pairing students in
their first two years of study with peer mentors in their third and fourth years
of study, and those in their third and fourth years with peer mentors who are
recent McMurry University alumni. Another key facet is leadership development
through service projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project leverages an array
of student support programs, including “near peer” mentoring; peer assisted
learning for attrition hot spots; engagement in experiential learning through
research and/or professional internships; a first-year seminar focused on STEM
identity and career exploration; and STEM fun days and service projects.
Collectively, these support programs are intended to foster a sense of belonging
and professional identity that in turn will increase resilience and persistence.
Predicted outcomes are an increase in freshman to sophomore retention to 75%, an
increase in 4-year graduation rates to 60%, and a minimum of 90% of graduating
seniors securing employment in a STEM career or admission into graduate or
professional schools within one year of graduation. Broader impacts include:
potential expansion and institutionalization of the “near peer” mentoring
program for all McMurry STEM students; enhancement of pedagogical competencies
of McMurry STEM faculty aimed at better supporting first-generation and other
historically excluded students; and expansion of servant leadership
opportunities and STEM engagement opportunities across the McMurry campus.
Formative and summative evaluation will include collecting data related to
retention rates, graduation rates, and post-graduation behavior as well as
surveys on the effectiveness of activities on sense of identity and belonging.
Successful and promising elements of the project will be disseminated at state,
regional, and national conferences, such as meetings of the Council on
Undergraduate Research (CUR) or the Alliance of Hispanic Serving Institution
Educators (AHSIE). This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.