* 2220305
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Answering key questions in marine particle trace element biogeochemistry in the Amundsen Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Peter Morton, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2025
* USD 300,380.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. This
project will generate a dataset of 40 trace elements on suspended particles and
surface sediment samples collected on the GEOTRACES GP17-ANT cruise to the
Amundsen Sea, West Antarctica. The Amundsen Sea hosts the most productive
polynya per unit area in all of Antarctica, with biological carbon uptake ten
times higher than the average for the Southern Ocean. Over the past 30 years,
this region has become a primary locus of increased freshwater input, as the
fastest melting glaciers in West Antarctica deliver huge and increasing volumes
of freshwater to the Amundsen Sea. The major contribution of this region to
global sea level rise is well documented, but the impact of accelerated
additions of meltwater and associated chemical constituents on the
biogeochemistry of the Antarctic shelf waters, and in particular on the cycling
of trace elements, has not received comprehensive investigation. Hypotheses
addressing four key components of the biogeochemical system in the Amundsen Sea
will be tested, and results will closely mesh with complementary efforts
proposed by other GP17-ANT investigators. The project will support a graduate
student and several undergraduate interns, with a focus on broadening
participation in STEM. The investigators will also work with established
programs to create meaningful out-of-school science experiences for middle and
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to quantify
and interpret the distributions of particulate trace elements in approximately
500 samples covering a large swath of the Amundsen Sea shelf, including waters
influenced by five major ice shelves, and in the adjacent iron-limited Southern
Ocean waters bounded by 100°W and 135°W, and south of 67°S. The investigators
will use size-fractionated sample collection, total acid digestion and weak acid
leaching, and well-established mass spectrometric methods to determine
concentrations and probe the physico-chemical state of the particulate trace
elements. The team will use the new data to investigate the following issues: 1)
the role of phytoplankton, with a focus on Phaeocystis and diatoms, dominant
taxa on the Amundsen Sea shelf, in driving element cycling in the upper water
column while experiencing variable degrees of iron stress; 2) the “meltwater
pump” which generates vigorous and particle-rich outflow from ice shelf
cavities; 3) the bottom nepheloid layer of resuspended sediments as a reaction
zone that determines the composition of the sedimentary paleo-record and also
modulates of chemical fluxes at the sediment-water boundary; and 4) the rare
earth elements (REE), which the team proposes carry unique geochemical
information about terrigenous particle provenance among the geologically diverse
glacial drainage regions, and also includes a labile particulate fraction whose
magnitude and inter-element ratios may serve as a relative index of element
scavenging intensity that can be applied to predict regions of maximal
scavenging for other particle-reactive elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.