* 2220214
* Collaborative Research: EDGE FGT: Development of genetic and functional genomics resources for Ipomoea (morning glory)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Regina Baucom, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,095,056.00

Understanding how plants adapt to their environment has become more important
than ever in a time of climate change. For many decades, morning glories have
been the species of choice for studying fundamental questions in evolutionary
biology, particularly for weedy morning glories, ornamentals, and the globally
important food crop, sweetpotato. Such evolutionary studies can be aided through
the application of modern molecular and genomic tools; yet, while morning
glories are a captivating and economically important group, resources for
linking genetics and variation in form are lacking. This project combines state-
of-the-art approaches to discover how changes in DNA influence plant form and
ecological function including responses to environmental change. The development
of these approaches in model morning glory species will broaden the scope of
current evolutionary investigations. Further, the dissemination of newly
developed genetic resources and research protocols will assist the larger
research community studying the molecular basis of variation in plant traits and
adaptations. To reach a broad audience, including plant scientists and
undergraduate students, YouTube videos will be developed as will methods
designed for undergraduate laboratory courses in plant evolution, genetics, and
genomics. Additionally, student artists will capture variation in morning glory
traits from a garden display held at the Matthaei Botanical Garden, and these
artistic renditions will be displayed at the Natural History Museum in Ann
Arbor, Michigan, thus reaching the public via multiple
avenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel transformation techniques using multiple
Agrobacterium strains and the development of mutant lines via the use of fast
neutrons (FN) have expanded transformation capabilities to a wider group of
plants and have likewise allowed for the relatively rapid development of random
mutations for understanding gene function. This project will adapt these methods
to morning glory species (Ipomoea) that have been used in ecological and
evolutionary genetics applications (I. purpurea, I. hederacea, I. lacunosa),
species that are close relatives of the important crop sweetpotato (I. trifida
and I. lacunosa), or phylogenetically useful outgroups (I. obscura). Genetic
mapping populations for I. lacunosa and I. purpurea will be generated,
genotyped, and disseminated for use by scientists that seek to interrogate a
number of evolutionary and applied questions. Gene expression profiles for these
populations will likewise be generated. Education of the plant science community
in transformation protocols and the distribution of resources are significant
foci of this work. An Ipomoea Wiki will be developed to integrate and
disseminate protocols, videos, and sequence data links to allow researchers and
educators to reconstruct the process of genetic transformation and to easily
locate project data. Sequences will be deposited to public databases as
generated, following initial cleaning steps. This project will support 1)
training opportunities for undergraduate researchers along with members of the
plant science community including graduate students, postdoctoral researchers,
and professors, 2) public displays and artistic renditions that capture the
remarkable and memorable variation found within and between species belonging to
the Ipomoea genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.