* 2220953
* Preparing Central Oregon Community College Students for Careers in Information Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Patrick Kennelly, Central Oregon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2028
* USD 749,757.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Central Oregon Community College. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 15 unique full- or part-time students pursuing
an associate degree in Computer Information Systems (CIS) or Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). First-year students will receive up to three years of
scholarships. This project focuses on developing both technological and soft
skills during the degree programs. Technological learning will be enhanced with
focused mentoring from faculty and peers as well as cohort building beginning
with a first-year course sequence. Soft career skills relate to communication
and collaboration and will be enhanced using career counselors and workshops
with local employers. As a result of project activities, the project will
increase the number of students graduating in these fields and entering the
information technology (IT) workforce who are low-income and from groups
currently underrepresented in their pursuit of careers in IT. Additionally, the
project will investigate best practices for helping academically talented
students from these groups to succeed in college and transition to the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The main objective of the project is to help low-
income students complete their associates degrees in either CIS or GIS and move
on to a career in Information Systems. This project will enhance hard
technological skills while also building soft skills, which were identified as
commonly missing skills for recent graduates by the the institution's CIS
employer Advisory Board. The project’s main research question for evaluation
will be whether filling these skill gaps can improve college retention and
graduation and increase the number of graduates qualified for employment in the
Information Systems industry. The project will target hard and soft skill gaps
with individualized faculty and peer mentoring, student cohorts, a first-year
course sequence, career counseling sessions, and workshops with professionals
from the industry. Project evaluation takes an applied social science research
approach that will: use data to improve decision making, determine if the
project has met its objectives, measure the project’s impact, and disseminate
the results. The results will be disseminated at the college, regional, and
national levels and will help fill the knowledge gap on how building soft skills
in community college students can lead to increased academic performance and job
placement in the Information Systems industry. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.