* 2220917
* Unlimited Pathways to Biology &amp; Mathematics in Southcentral Kentucky
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2029
* Scott Dillery, Lindsey Wilson College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2029
* USD 749,407.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Lindsey Wilson College. This private college located in a small, rural
town in south central Kentucky serves economically distressed and at-risk
counties in Appalachia. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 15 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in biology or mathematics. Three cohorts of five first-year students will
receive scholarships for four-years. The project aims to build student ownership
of learning with the supports of peer mentors, faculty mentors, supplemental
instruction, and internship or research experiences. Low-income and first-
generation students who could benefit from additional preparation make up more
than half of the student population at Lindsey Wilson College. This project has
the potential to assess the impact of supports designed to overcome shortfalls
in pre-college preparation for promising, rural STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Student ownership of learning is known to be a key
component of college and career readiness and success. Self-directed, lifelong
learners are advantageous to the STEM workforce. The project will investigate
the impacts of a summer bridge program, peer and faculty mentorship,
supplemental instruction, and cohort experiences such as field trips and a
lecture series, as measured by retention and graduation rates as well as other
data. The project will seek to identify the various factors that contribute to
student ownership of learning and improved self-direction. Through the
evaluation of collected data, and dissemination of key elements and lessons
learned, the project has the potential to advance the understanding of how high-
potential, rural, low-income, underprepared students can become life-long
learners in STEM fields. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.