* 2220820
* Collaborative Research: EDGE CMT: Predicting the evolution of disease resistance across heterogeneous landscapes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Palmer Netongo, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2027
* USD 148,875.00

Wildlife infectious diseases can cause extinctions and populations declines in
animals, often also impacting public health. Sylvatic (better known as bubonic)
plague was introduced to North America in 1900 and is now maintained in native
mammals in the western U.S., periodically eliciting disease outbreaks. Although
some species seem to have natural resistance, others—such as prairie dogs—are
highly susceptible. Despite the detection of plague resistance in a small number
of prairie dogs, the disease still decimates populations throughout their range.
The continued susceptibility of prairie dogs suggests there is some constraint
inhibiting the widespread evolution of resistance to plague. This project uses
whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing of resistant and susceptible prairie
dogs to determine the genomic basis of recently evolved plague resistance.
Mutations associated with resistance in natural populations and experiments will
then be mapped in nature to determine the spatial distribution of resistance
alleles and predict the location of potential resistance hotspots. Museum
specimens of prairie dogs will also be genotyped to determine the rate of
evolution of plague resistance. Given the increasing rate of novel pathogens
emerging around the globe, this research will have broad implications for
understanding when and where adaptation in naïve hosts is likely to persist.
This project will use research to enhance education by building capacity in
universities serving Native American and Hispanic students. Traveling genomics
workshops will be delivered to students and faculty, and students will be
mentored at their own institutions as they conduct independent research in the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptation to pathogens should be heavily favored
by selection: Once immunity evolves, it should sweep to fixation across a
species’ range. Paradoxically, a more commonly observed pattern is variable
immunity. Because there are multiple explanations for incomplete resistance, the
ecological and evolutionary conditions under which resistance to novel pathogens
is maintained are still poorly understood. For instance, to what extent does the
habitat matrix influence the maintenance of resistance through processes such as
gene dilution? Does the de novo evolution of resistance independently across
populations lead to epistatic interactions preventing widespread resistance?
Resistance to sylvatic plague (caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis) has been
observed in prairie dogs (genus Cynomys) in six western states, but resistance
is still rare. This project integrates genomic and transcriptomic analysis of
experimentally infected animals with rangewide spatiotemporal sampling to
elucidate how, when and where resistance evolves, and what prevents this
adaptive trait from sweeping to fixation. Previous experimental infections and a
natural epizootic will be used to determine the genomic basis of resistance in
two species. Alleles associated with resistance, along with neutral alleles
serving as a null model, will be genotyped in latitudinal transects spanning
populations with different plague introduction times, and in museum specimens
from at least three distinct time ranges. These data will enable estimates of
the rate of evolution of resistance alleles and inferences of the landscape
spatial structure and genomic characteristics facilitating resistance.
Understanding how adaptation persists across space and time can enable
facilitated adaptation in imperiled systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.