* 2220546
* Putting B-vitamins on the map: to what extent do they shape phytoplankton dynamics and biogeography in the global ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,571.00

B-vitamins (thiamin, B1; biotin B7; cobalamin, B12) are organic molecules
necessary for all the biological transformations of the chemical elements that
support life on Earth. Without the activity of those molecules, the chemistry of
life on Earth—as we know it—would end. In marine systems, the availability of
B-vitamins also affects food web dynamics by controlling both bacterial and
phytoplankton growth and species diversity. Because many organisms that can make
several B-vitamins lack the ability to synthesize others, their vitamin needs
and environmental accessibility could define which, when, and where specific
phytoplankton species flourish. As a result, planktonic communities in nature
need to constantly share B-vitamins in a complex mosaic of interdependencies.
Despite the early discovery of their relevance in the 1940s, most current marine
vitamin research is still based on laboratory experiments or studies focusing on
the biological responses of B-vitamin additions on algae and bacteria. Yet,
vitamin distributions in the world ocean are mostly unknown, as they have only
been measured in a few marine basins. Thus, the actual effect of their natural
distributions in phytoplankton communities is still a mystery today. The main
goal of this project is to elucidate the effects of B-vitamins availability on
the spatial distributions of different phytoplankton species in surface waters
of the world ocean. These data are needed to start untangling the rules by which
members of the microbial plankton are interconnected through vitamin exchange
and to determine how these essential interrelations may control surface ocean
ecosystem functioning, such as phytoplankton and bacterial growth. Ultimately
understanding these controls and their dynamics is critical to predicting future
changes in the marine environment. In the future greenhouse world, the ocean is
expected to be of paramount importance, providing the required protein to
nurture future human populations and to reduce the levels of human-produced
atmospheric CO2 through its uptake by photosynthetic organisms with different
vitamin requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study is to establish the first
global map of B-vitamin distributions in surface waters of the world ocean
collected during the Malaspina circumnavigation expedition. This global map of
vitamins is being used to determine their importance on phytoplankton species
biogeography, a still unresolved ecological riddle. Another objective of the
study is to establish how ambient vitamin concentrations, combined with
bioactive trace elements and macronutrients, promote changes in the relative
abundance of different eukaryotic and prokaryotic plankton species on the
surface ocean. Overall, this is the first global study on the role of B-vitamins
on ecosystem functioning and species composition in subtropical and tropical
open ocean environments including the ocean gyres. The investigators are
carrying out targeted metagenomic analyses to identify B-vitamins synthesizers
and consumers within the planktonic community at several globally distributed
stations across the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. The extensive datasets
already generated by the hundreds of participants of the Malaspina expedition is
fully available to interpret the vitamin results. This study allows us to expand
our understanding of B-vitamin distributions on a global scale and further
investigate how surface ocean’s plankton community dynamics are intertwined with
ambient B-vitamin pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.