* 2220567
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Rapid Arctic change and its implications for fisheries and fishing communities of the western North Atlantic
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xiaobiao Xu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2025
* USD 293,977.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems and the natural
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Data and Observation, Education,
Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid Arctic warming is altering
circulation in the North Atlantic Ocean. Resulting changes in marine ecosystems
could potentially undermine regional fisheries along the coasts of New England
and Atlantic Canada. These changes will present new challenges and opportunities
to coastal communities. This NNA Research project focuses on links between
Arctic change and the iconic American lobster (Homarus americanus) fishery. The
lobster fishery is the most valuable single-species fishery in North America. It
is also a well-studied socio-ecological system, making it a good subject for
convergence research. The project builds a NNA Lobster Network based on cross-
sector and cross-border partnerships. The project develops a climate
vulnerability assessment focused on the northward geographic range shifts of
lobsters in a warming ocean. This project is producing new knowledge to
understand the links among climate-induced Arctic change, lower latitude marine
ecosystems, and an iconic fishery in the Northwest Atlantic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project tests two overarching
hypotheses: (1) climate-driven Arctic change will affect the distribution and
abundance of American lobster stocks, and (2) the resilience of the fishing
industry and coastal communities will depend on accurate information to make
decisions. The natural environment is studied by oceanographers and ecologists
developing a coupled atmosphere-ice-ocean-ecosystem model. This model evaluates
how changes in the Arctic cryosphere and ocean circulation affect ecosystem and
fishery productivity at the lower latitudes of the Northwest Atlantic. Model
outputs are validated using existing field datasets, some of which are co-
produced by the fishing industry. Improved predictive models resulting from this
effort are used for forecasts and scenario analysis of lobster population
distribution. Social systems are studied through development of a bio-economic
model of the fishing fleet and evaluation of the economic reliance of the
fishery. The NNA Lobster Network leads to a broadened understanding of physical,
biological and socio-economic conditions at varying scales of interest under
past and future climate and management scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.