* 2220589
* RAPID: Can Big Ideas About Resilience Survive the Reality of a Disaster? Built Environment Policy and Recovery After the Marshall Fire
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Deserai Crow, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,416.00

On December 30, 2021, the climate-enabled and weather-driven Marshall Fire
destroyed 1,084 homes and damaged 149 more in the communities of Louisville,
Superior, and unincorporated Boulder County, becoming the most destructive fire
in Colorado’s history. For these and the growing number of communities facing a
new set of risks due to climate change, key questions now emerge: Will these
events strengthen communities’ resolve to build climate resilience, or erode
public support for such policies in favor of reducing short-term recovery costs?
And do community members who live through rebuilding and recovery shift their
opinions of and support for resilience policies? This Grant for Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project focuses on local-level regulations that contribute to
disaster and climate resilience of communities but that can make development
more costly, particularly in the short-term. Prior work has shown that public
support and the availability and requirements of external resources and programs
shape these local government decisions, but it is unclear whether and to what
extent this support changes after a shock such as a disaster. This study seeks
to understand how these policy decisions are affected by and affect individual
preferences and decisions by collecting perishable data after the Marshall
Fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is guided by theories of post-disaster
recovery and resilience that describe how local government policies succeed or
fail after catastrophic events. The post-disaster planning and policy
environment is characterized by time compression, when urban development
processes occur within shortened timeframes. Some plans and policies are more
compatible with time compression than others; in particular, time compression is
challenging for bureaucratic activities like planning and regulation that
ordinarily rely on lengthy stakeholder and public engagement processes to help
balance short- and long-term policy considerations. Meanwhile, a substantial
body of research shows that the process of government-led recovery – how
policies are formulated and the nature, quality, and coordination of stakeholder
and resident engagement – has significant influence on the breadth and scope of
policy changes that local governments are likely to make after a disaster. The
focusing events scholarship suggests that this relationship may be especially
important after disaster when trust in government, policy preferences, and
public involvement in decision making can vary significantly, sometimes being
led by technocrats rather than through open consultative processes. Trust in
government – influenced by communication from government officials and staff to
residents and also by the two-way consultative nature of disaster recovery
processes established in a community – is also an important determinant of
whether policy changes to bolster resilience are made. What is unclear is
whether previously established resilience policies can survive in the time-
compressed recovery process after an unanticipated and un-planned-for disaster
like the Marshall Fire. To investigate these questions, the research team will
(1) administer a longitudinal survey of individuals who lived in three affected
jurisdictions at the time of the Marshall Fire to assess their intent to rebuild
or relocate, their engagement in the recovery process, their support for
resilience policies, and their attitudes towards and trust in government over
time. They will also (2) interview local government elected officials, (3)
observe disaster recovery meetings, and (4) analyze recovery-related plans and
documents during the first year after the catastrophic fire. The research team
will analyze these data to seek a clearer understanding of local-level
resilience policy preferences and processes during time-compressed disaster
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.