* 2220345
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: A Principled Approach to Modeling and Analysis of Hardware Fault Attacks on Embedded Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Chao Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 374,999.00

In a hardware fault attack on embedded software, an attacker can temporarily
change the meaning of instructions in the embedded software or the value of its
data. The consequences of unmitigated fault attacks are significant. They may
lead to privilege escalation of an attacker's code over victim code or
information leakage from a victim process to an attacker. However, the software
community does not yet have a deep understanding of fault attacks. The effects
of fault injection on a digital system are only understood at the hardware
level. The gap is due to the lack of models that adequately capture the effects
of fault injection on complex, layered systems, leading to the lack of clear
guarantees about the non-exploitability of software. The project's novelties are
to develop a principled understanding of these hardware attacks and to create
novel formal analysis tools and methodologies for secure embedded software
verification. The project's impacts are to help the software community
understand the importance and relevance of hardware fault attacks and to help
mitigate the security risks. The expected outcomes are formal tools and
techniques for improved fault detection and fault countermeasures that would
address malicious hardware fault attacks and faults related to the rapidly
growing problem of silicon reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates a unified framework capable of modeling and analyzing the impact of
hardware faults on embedded software in a principled and systematic fashion. The
framework combines open-source simulation and compilation technologies to show
exploitability, or to prove non-exploitability, in the presence of hardware
fault attacks. Three research tasks lead to the framework's development. First,
the design of a fault model captures the impact of hardware faults at the
instruction-set architecture (ISA) level. Second, hardware-software co-
simulation characterizes the fault model. Third, formal analysis and
verification tools integrate the fault model to efficiently and accurately
investigate the faults' impact on software code. Finally, the investigators
create and extend graduate-level educational content on the use of formal
technologies in the field of embedded software. The investigators also direct
senior theses to include undergraduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.