* 2221112
* Expanding Financial and Support Systems for Scholars in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2029
* Adriane Jones, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 01/31/2029
* USD 1,495,612.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Mount Saint Mary's University (MSMU), an all-women's Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI) located in Los Angeles, California. Over its six-year
duration, the "Expanding Financial and Support Systems for Scholars in STEM"
(S4X) project will fund scholarships to 25 full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, and mathematics. Three
cohorts of first-year, transfer, and sophomore students will receive
scholarships of $10,000 per year for up to four years at MSMU. The project is
designed to recruit, retain, and support scholarship recipients through co-
curricular programming such as peer and faculty mentoring, career exploration
and preparation, and assistance securing internships and/or research
opportunities. These efforts are supported by a concerted effort to nurture and
leverage family engagement to support scholarship recipients in their pursuit of
baccalaureate degrees. The S4X principal investigators will establish pathways
for MSMU low-income, high-achieving students and prepare scholars for STEM-
related careers in lucrative fields. This effort will directly contribute to the
national development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce and meet
the immediate needs of California's STEM labor market. The focus on family
engagement will contribute to the understanding of how to leverage family
involvement to support STEM scholars, especially those from underrepresented
populations and diverse cultural backgrounds. This project will also add to the
knowledge base of how various cohort-building and support activities contribute
to STEM student retention and success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. S4X will recruit, enroll,
retain, and graduate scholars, with the ultimate aim of placing graduates in
STEM careers or graduate programs within six months of graduation. This project
will also develop cohort-building and family engagement activities to support
the needs of S4X scholars. Three critical issues that influence retention will
be addressed. First, due to academic disparities among local high schools many
MSMU STEM majors enter college under-prepared for rigorous introductory science
and math courses, and so require more comprehensive academic support services.
Second, many students do not have a family background preparing them to navigate
the higher education system and require more transition-to-university support.
Third, many low-income students must work while attending school and face the
stress of worrying about finances. S4X will address these issues through
scholarships and a comprehensive evidence-based set of activities designed to
increase academic efficacy, retention, graduation, and career placement. The
project team hypothesizes that having families engaged throughout the student's
academic life will be beneficial to scholars in persistence and completion. A
series of family-oriented activities will be implemented through S4X and their
effect on retention will be evaluated to further strengthen the project and to
inform the design of others like it. Other measures will be evaluated through
surveys and analysis, including the project's impact on 1) participant feelings
of self-efficacy with regard to STEM careers and science-related careers; 2)
scholars' STEM graduation rates; 3) understanding of career options in STEM; 4)
intention to pursue higher education or a STEM-related career. Project results
will be disseminated widely to MSMU internal stakeholders and community members,
as well as the broader, scholarly community through publication and venues
focusing on STEM and HSI education. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.