* 2221039
* MCA: Genomic algorithms and statistical models for gene transfer in naturally transformable bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Briana Burton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 409,923.00

Bacteria, which often live in complex multi-species communities, are not limited
to acquiring&lt;br/&gt;their genes from prior generations. Using a process
called natural transformation, bacteria can&lt;br/&gt;also acquire new genetic
elements from neighbors and even from free DNA in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;It
is currently unknown which genetic sequences are most readily transferred via
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding natural transformation at the genome and
community scale requires development&lt;br/&gt;and application of novel
algorithms to address this previously unexplored space. This project
will&lt;br/&gt;develop computational methods to identify and predict which
genetic functions are likely to spread&lt;br/&gt;through bacterial populations
by natural transformation. Application of these computational&lt;br/&gt;methods
will help fill a void in understanding genetic evolution in bacterial
communities which may&lt;br/&gt;be overlooked by taxonomic identification. This
in turn can lead to better assessment of risks or&lt;br/&gt;benefits associated
with bacterial community members and improved planning of
synthetic&lt;br/&gt;bacterial communities. The project workflow will enable new
capstone research experiences for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates from multiple STEM
majors on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connections between molecular and
biological parameters that drive genome-wide gene&lt;br/&gt;transfer preferences
during bacterial natural transformation have been unexplored due to lack
of&lt;br/&gt;genome level experimental and computational analyses. The PIâ€™s
laboratory has developed&lt;br/&gt;experimental molecular genetic tools to
collect and map natural transformation gene transfer sites&lt;br/&gt;across
diverse pairs of donor and recipient bacteria. However, the computational
methods to&lt;br/&gt;quantify the driving functional parameters and ultimately
to predict gene transfer dynamics&lt;br/&gt;associated with natural
transformation do not yet exist. Collaboration with the partner will use
the&lt;br/&gt;experimental data to generate genome scale statistical algorithms
and computational tools for (i)&lt;br/&gt;global analysis of molecular and
biological parameters governing gene transfer events, and
(ii)&lt;br/&gt;prediction of gene transfer events that result specifically from
natural transformation. This project&lt;br/&gt;will enable expansion of the work
beyond current molecular genetic analysis of natural&lt;br/&gt;transformation to
the genome and community scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.