* 2221602
* Expanding the Nation’s STEM Talent Pool by Accelerating Graduate Degree Completion in Computer, Software, and Cybersecurity Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Debarati Basu, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,354.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by fostering student success and
supporting the retention and graduation of domestic, high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need at the Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University, a non-profit private institution. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 25 undergraduate students to pursue four-year
bachelor’s degrees in Computer Science, Software Engineering, or Computer
Engineering. Subsequently the scholars will pursue a one-year accelerated
master’s degree in one of the following areas: Software Engineering, Electrical,
and Computer Engineering, or Cybersecurity Engineering. First-year students will
receive up to five years of scholarship support. The project will increase
student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with a newly created
effective ecosystem that combines evidence-based practices such as faculty
mentoring, academic advising, participation in the learning community,
professional development activities, guidance in acquiring internships and
research opportunities. With the help of mentors, the scholars will create
individual development plans outlining their career goals and steps toward
achieving those goals. The project will also include the evaluation of the
impact of the ecosystem on supporting the academic success of scholars and the
identification of best practices and lessons learned. This project will
significantly contribute towards creating a model that actively engages students
from groups underrepresented in STEM fields of study, broadens participation in
STEM, and infuses 25 talented and diverse engineers with advanced degrees in
engineering into the American workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase undergraduate and graduate STEM degree completion
of domestic, low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need in STEM field. Three specific aims guide the project. First is to
deliver financial support to domestic, low-income, high-achieving students who
will pursue an undergraduate and accelerated master’s degree in engineering.
Second is to leverage evidence-based practices to foster student success,
increase retention and degree attainment. Third, and finally, is to evaluate the
impact of the newly created ecosystem in supporting the academic success of
scholars in engineering, and disseminate best practices and lessons learned.
Little is known about the factors that affect the academic success of domestic,
low-income, high-achieving undergraduate students in engineering fields at a
private institution, and how factors such as gender, ethnic background and
discipline impact their success, which is the focus of this project. Two
research questions will be investigated in this project: (a) Does the academic
success of scholars improve across the years by being part of this project? (b)
What were the factors effecting the academic success of the scholars, and what
are the accomplishments, best practices, and lessons learned from implementing
the ecosystem for the scholars? This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.