* 2221369
* Chesapeake Scholars in the Physical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Jason Kahn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,492,555.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need at the University of Maryland, College
Park. Over its five year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 28
unique undergraduate students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in
six physical science disciplines: Astronomy, Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, Geology, and Physics. Incoming first year students will
receive four years of scholarship support, while transfer students will receive
up to three years of support. The project will also provide three years of
support for students who declare a physical science major during their freshman
year. Scholar participants in the program will be supported by both a faculty
mentoring program and a peer mentoring program. Students will have access to
research experiences in university lab, and will have the opportunity to present
the results of their research at professional conferences. Due to the University
of Maryland’s location in the national capital region, scholars will have the
opportunity to visit national labs and other federal science facilities. Other
student support services are available, including career advising and
preparation for graduate school. The project leadership will study how well the
programmatic activities engender a sense of belonging towards the disciplines
and the Chesapeake Scholars cohort, and whether the program increases engagement
in the academic programs and decreases attrition. The project will support an
increase in the domestically trained STEM workforce in the region and
nationally. It will also seek to transform the educational experience of
undergraduates in the university more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The four
specific goals of the program are to: (1) increase retention among academically
talented bachelor’s degree candidates who matriculate at the university with a
declared physical science major; (2) increase retention among academically
talented students who declare a physical science major during or after their
freshman year; (3) increase retention among academically talented transfer
students who declare a physical science major; and (4) increase students’ self-
reported sense of belonging to their disciplines and their cohort. Two prior
S-STEM programs at the University of Maryland have demonstrated the successful
retention of academically talented low-income students studying engineering and
physics. The Chesapeake Scholars program will investigate whether this retention
success can be extended to a larger cohort of students studying a wider range of
physical science disciplines. More generally, the project will seek to advance
the understanding of student persistence in undergraduate STEM education. Using
typical four-year plans for each physical science degree, the project leadership
has identified key course sequences (in math, physics, and chemistry) within
which to track retention from semester-to-semester. Student retention rates from
semester to semester will be tracked in these course sequences with flow
diagrams, specifically for the Chesapeake Scholars and for the general student
body. Student retention in the physical science degree programs will be compared
in relation to the one-year and two-year retention goals, including retention
in-major, in the physical sciences, and within the college broadly. The results
of internal and external evaluations will be disseminated so that scholars and
the public have access to the findings. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.