* 2221441
* Scholarships to Support a Co-Op Based Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Catherine Spence, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,808.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Minnesota State University, Mankato. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 120 unique full-time students who are pursuing
Bachelor of Science degrees in engineering. First-semester junior, primarily
transfer, students will receive scholarships for one semester. The Iron Range
Engineering (IRE) STEM Scholars Program provides a financially sustainable
pathway for students across the nation to graduate with an engineering degree
and up to two years of industry experience. Students typically complete their
first two years of engineering coursework at community colleges across the
country. Students then join IRE and spend one transitional semester gaining
training and experience to equip them with the technical, design, and
professional skills needed to succeed in the engineering workforce. During the
last two years of their education, IRE students work in industry, earning an
engineering intern salary, while being supported in their technical and
professional development by professors, learning facilitators, and their own
peers. The IRE STEM Scholars project will provide access to a financially
responsible engineering degree for low-income students by financially supporting
them during the transitional semester, which has two financial challenges:
university tuition costs are higher than their previous community college costs,
and the semester occurs before they are able to earn an engineering co-op
income. In addition, the project will provide personalized mentorship throughout
students’ pathway to graduation, such as weekly conversations with a mentor. By
providing these supports, the IRE STEM Scholars project aims to prepare students
to be competitive applicants for the engineering workforce with career
development and engineering co-op experience. Because community colleges draw
relatively representative proportions of students from a variety of backgrounds,
this project has the potential to learn how transfer pathways and co-op
education can support financially sustainable pathways to engineering degrees
for a more diverse group of students and contribute to the development of a
diverse, competitive engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. As part of the scope
of this project, a concurrent mixed-methods research study will be done on
engineering students’ thriving, specifically their identity, belonging,
motivation, and overall wellbeing (or mental and physical health). Student
outcomes have previously been measured primarily through academic markers such
as graduation rates and GPA. In addition to these outcomes, this project
explores ways to better support overall student thriving. This study will
address the following research questions: How do undergraduate students’
engineering identity and belongingness develop over time in a co-op-based
engineering program? How do undergraduate students’ motivation and identity
connect to overall wellbeing in a co-op-based engineering program? The results
of this work will be available in conference and journal publications and
workshops focused on applications for other engineering co-op programs to better
support high achieving low-income students. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.