* 2221472
* Increasing Retention and Success of Computing Students through Curriculum Development, Community Support, and Service Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Vanessa Klein, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,918.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Maine, a university with a high percentage of students
who are first-generation and come from rural regions. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer science. First- year students
will receive up to four years of scholarship support and transfer students will
receive up to three years of support. This project aims to increase student
persistence in computer science by linking scholarships with effective
supporting activities, including a summer bridge program; faculty, peer, and
industry mentoring; academic and professional development activities; a living-
learning community; and seminars on first-year success, professional skills, and
leadership. Curriculum changes will be made to improve first-year student
retention and students’ overall career-readiness. Participating students will
have the opportunity to use their computing skills to improve local communities
through service learning activities. This project will develop and evaluate a
student success infrastructure that can serve as a model for programs at other
University of Maine System universities, as well as universities in rural states
across the nation. Computing graduates with the ability to solve important and
complex problems will benefit the regional and national
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The first project objective is to establish a
support structure and community-building scholar model for computing majors to
help them succeed. A second objective is to provide academic and professional
development information and opportunities for the scholars. The third and final
objective is to strengthen relationships with community organizations to expand
the pipeline of students pursuing computing majors, especially women, students
from group underrepresented in their study of computing, first-generation
students, and those from rural backgrounds. This project will examine the
barriers to student success and effective strategies to reduce them. However,
there is a lack of sufficient research about how programs combining academic
supports, mentoring, professional skill development, and service learning can
successfully help such students in overcoming these barriers. The specific
research aims are to: (1) contribute to understanding of low-income students in
computer science fields by examining student perceptions of barriers to pursuing
computing degrees; (2) determine student perceptions about whether the project
activities can mitigate these barriers; and (3) generate evidence about the
impact of support services and community support on student success. A
naturalistic inquiry research design will be used to collect and analyze data
from focus groups, interviews, and surveys. This project will be evaluated using
a participatory approach to gather information from administrative data, focus
groups, interviews with key institutional supports, and surveys of students,
graduates, and institutional partners. Results of this project will be made
available through national professional conferences on computing education,
regional meetings of technology educators, a project website, and regional
media. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.