* 2221603
* 2D Material Programming for 3D Manufacturing of Soft Conductive Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kyungsuk Yum, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2025
* USD 432,461.00

This grant supports research that creates new knowledge to program the shape of
polymeric materials for scalable and customizable 3D manufacturing of soft
conductive materials. The manufacturing process will print 2D materials encoded
with spatially controlled information allowing the structure to later transform
into predetermined 3D structures. This 2D printable 3D manufacturing technology
provides new ways to design and fabricate soft engineering systems, including
those based on environment-responsive, shape-morphing 3D materials. The concept
is applicable to other material systems over a range of length scales for broad
applications, including soft electronic devices, soft machines, deployable
systems, wearable devices, human–machine interfaces, and energy storage devices.
This research contributes to sustaining global leadership of the United States
in advanced manufacturing and benefit the United States economy and society. The
research project provides opportunities for the development of developing the
next generation of multidisciplinary researchers with expertise in additive
manufacturing, soft materials, and computer science, enhance research-oriented
multidisciplinary education through integration of research and education, and
engage K-12 students and the general public in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics through museum and summer camp outreach programs. These
activities will also broaden participation of underrepresented minority students
in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morphing 2D materials into
programmed 3D structures presents a new approach to the additive manufacturing
of programmable soft materials. Despite its potential as a scalable,
customizable, and deployable manufacturing technology, lack of programmable
materials and how to design them remain a key challenge. Such 3D shaping
approaches have mostly been limited to soft tissue-like hydrogels directed at
bioinspired and biomedical applications in aqueous environments. This research
investigates approaches to electrically conductive structures through the design
and programming of the dual network polymer system consisting of hydrogels and
ionoelastomers enabling scalable and customizable manufacturing of 3D structures
of soft conductive materials. The research investigates and develops approaches
for the formation of structures with non-Gaussian curvature through the
determination of the formation process using an inverse design strategy based on
algorithm development. The research team will explore how to program 2D ionic
liquid-based polymers for their 3D manufacturing, investigate how to control and
thus enhance the mechanical properties of ionic liquid-based polymers to
manufacture 3D structures of soft conductive materials with enhanced mechanical
properties, and develop environment-responsive shape-morphing 3D structures of
soft conductive materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.