* 2221190
* Collaborative Research: NRI: Smart Skins for Robotic Prosthetic Hand
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chenglin Wu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 243,000.00

In the U.S., there are over 41,000 registered persons who had an amputation of
hand or complete arm, and approximately 10,000 new amputation cases in the upper
limb each year. Prosthetic hands that can significantly improve the quality of
amputees’ life are highly desired to restore many activities of daily living,
particularly in hand grasping and object manipulation. However, being able to
use the hand accurately remains a grand and fundamental challenge in robotic
prosthetic hands, especially in the desired trait of slip prevention for
reliable and stable grasping in real life environments. The challenge resides in
integrating fast sensing of slip detection and rapid movement in the small-area
in the fingertips to prevent slippage through the use of sensors and controls of
the prosthetic hands. This project proposes to meet this challenge by exploring
a new concept of a skin that can change its shape for prosthetic hands in real-
time. For this research project, the investigators will explore how to adjust
the skin friction automatically. This project seeks to significantly advance the
current state-of-the-art prosthetic hands to achieve the similar functionality
of human hands, as well as enhance the ability of upper limb amputees for
performing activities of daily living. Through both collaborative and individual
efforts of the interdisciplinary team with distributed geographical location
across the country (Raleigh, Philadelphia, and Rolla), this NSF project offers a
unique opportunity to integrate insights from robotics, mechanics, design,
advanced manufacturing to generate an intriguing and visually appealing broad
participation plan. Through existing programs, such as senior design projects,
Society of Women Engineering, honor program, and UNC Working on Women in
Science, the investigators will encourage underrepresented groups of
undergraduate students in research activities, including female and African
American students. With the help of established similar summer programs and
other educational programs in each institution, the investigators aim to improve
the STEM education of K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to fundamentally understand the adaptive tactile interactions between
the smart shape-morphing robotic skins and grasped objects for autonomous slip
prevention in robotic prosthetic hands. Three thrusts will be pursued ranging
from fundamental understanding of contact behaviors in smart morphing skins-
objects through design, fabrication, actuation, and modeling in Thrust 1, to
integrate flexible tactile and spatial sensing on the smart skins in Thrust 2,
and to interactive integrated human-robotic system for anti-slip evaluation in
Thrust 3. This project will examine and demonstrate the integration of multi-
scale manufacturing technologies to achieve complex functional systems at human-
object interface, as well as the innovative reflex-like control of a robotic
prosthesis hand. This project will generate new knowledge on the active role of
actuated shape-morphing surface morphologies in tuning the friction. The
translational research on upper limb amputees will provide new insight on human-
prosthesis interactions and effectiveness of shared prosthesis control paradigm
on amputees’ motor function and cognitive load. This project will also advance
the knowledge in the multidisciplinary field of mechanics, sensing,
manufacturing, robotic prosthesis controls, and human-robot
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.