* 2221138
* Maximizing Success of Low-Income Students through Personal Relationships and Evidence-Based Instructional Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Lawrence Funke, Ohio Northern University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 748,839.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Ohio Northern University (ONU). ONU is a private institution primarily
serving students from the rural Midwest. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 15 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in civil engineering, computer engineering, computer science,
electrical engineering, or mechanical engineering. First-year students will
receive four years of scholarships. Additionally, scholars will participate in
cohort-building activities, including one lunch-and-learn workshop each
semester. Topics for these workshops will include: academic success strategies,
strengths perspective, mental health, and reflection exercises. Each student
will be paired with a faculty mentor from their department. Mentors will
participate in long-term professional development to help them better support
scholars. Every scholar will be encouraged to supplement their education with
experiential learning through internships or research. This project will provide
valuable insight into how evidence-based interventions impact first-generation
and rural students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This project has three student-centric goals:
1) Increase graduation and job placement rates, 2) Increase the sense of
belonging in the College of Engineering and at ONU, and 3) Increase students’
self-efficacy as engineers. These goals will be achieved through scholarships
and the implementation of evidence-based interventions that will engage students
through personal relationships and high-impact educational experiences, such as
undergraduate research. A novel aspect of the project is its attention to
strengths-based education, which enables students to focus on their strengths
and manage their weaknesses. Formative and summative evaluation will use
institutional data, surveys, and interviews to track students' sense of
belonging, identity, GPA, etc. The evaluator will also conduct interviews with
faculty to assess the knowledge and implementation of inclusive pedagogies and
evidence-based mentoring practices. The results of this assessment and the
program in general will be disseminated with the broader community through
presenting at the Ohio Engineering Deans Council, and by seeking publications in
appropriate venues. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.