* 2221473
* Improving the Retention and Success of High Performing, Low Income Undergraduates in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2026
* Theodore Brown, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,474,954.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Queens College (QC), City University of New York (CUNY), a Hispanic
Serving Institution (HSI) and an Asian American and Native American Pacific
Islander Serving Institution (AANAPISI). Over its four year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to at least 45 unique full-time students who are
pursuing a bachelor’s degree in computer science during their junior and senior
years. Both students who start at QC and those that transfer from one of the two
community colleges (CC) in Queens County will be funded. The project includes
enhanced mentoring, a summer bridge program, and career development
opportunities. Support provided to Scholars includes: an advisory group
including faculty those from the CC’s; a project director assigned to work with
Career Counseling and help students navigate the system and find a job within
the discipline; and a bridge course, held the summer before beginning at QC
intended to strengthen content knowledge and ease transfer shock for transfer
students as they adjust to QC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The broader impacts include the
potential to benefit society and contribute to the achievement of: (1) full
participation of students from groups underrepresented in STEM, with a specific
effort to support the diverse population of QC community college transfers; (2)
improved STEM education, by empowering CS departments to collaborate across
institutions to better align curricula, improving the transfer experience; (3)
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce, by providing
career placement services to scholars, empowering them to land jobs, and
improving the quality of life of their families and communities; and (4)
increased partnerships between academia and industry. The intellectual merit of
this project is to advance knowledge building upon the findings of the 2016
study, “A Longitudinal Analysis of Community College Pathways to Computer
Science Bachelor’s Degrees.” The key findings and recommendations are expected
to be put into practice within the established consortium, and the study is
expected to identify what practices within those recommendations are best in
supporting QC computer science high achieving, low-income students successfully
transfer, graduate with an undergraduate degree, and move into the STEM
workforce or into a STEM Master’s or PhD program after graduation. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.