* 2221875
* CNS Core: Small: Robust and Decentralized Mobility and Connectivity Management in UAV-Enabled Aerial Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mustafa Gursoy, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With the advances in the technology, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have become
lighter, cheaper, and easier to deploy. Combined with their mobility, autonomy
and flexibility, UAVs are now poised to be used in a variety of real-world
scenarios (such as delivery of medical supplies, disaster relief, emergency
search and rescue, environment monitoring, and remote sensing), and are expected
to be an integral part of next-generation wireless networks. At the same time,
integration of autonomous UAVs into next-generation wireless networks while
maintaining the reliability, safety, and connectivity is a critical undertaking,
and many challenges and questions remain. Several key questions in this context
are the following. How would airspace constraints (e.g., safety and collision
avoidance) interact with network connectivity requirements? As the number of
UAVs grows and centralized control becomes prohibitive, can decentralized
autonomous decision-making be achieved for mobility and connectivity management
in aerial networks? Can decentralized/distributed resource allocation policies
be developed and how would these policies impact mobility and connectivity
management? What is the sensitivity of decision-making policies to adversarial
attacks? Can robust learning and secure decision-making be achieved in aerial
networks in the presence of adversarial attacks? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hence,
there exists a critical knowledge gap, and this project addresses this gap via
interconnected thrusts. Specifically, the primary objective in this project is
to design and analyze robust, intelligent, and decentralized decision-making
policies in UAV-enabled wireless networks. To realize the vision of autonomous
aerial networks, the critical considerations of mobility and connectivity
management are addressed jointly with dynamic resource allocation in the
challenging but practically more relevant setting of decentralized operation. In
this setting, both connectivity and control constraints such as collision
avoidance requirements and kinematic limitations in UAV path planning are taken
into account. Decentralized and autonomous decision-making strategies are to be
developed via distributed learning with only local observation/sensing.
Robustness in decision-making is to be established via sensitivity analysis to
adversarial attacks and the development of defensive mechanisms. Overall, the
project seeks to establish a strong analytical and algorithmic framework by
combining tools from wireless networking, optimization, control, deep
reinforcement learning, and adversarial learning. The outcomes of this research
will support applications such as disaster relief and remote sensing.
Integration of this research project with education will be accomplished through
newly introduced courses, and involving undergraduates in the PIs' research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.