* 2221635
* Strengthening the Skill and Will to Succeed in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Frank van Breukelen, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,136.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Nevada Las Vegas. The University of Nevada Las Vegas
is a Hispanic Serving Institution and an Asian American and Native American
Pacific Islander-Serving Institution. Over its six-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 43 unique full time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biological sciences. Fifteen first year students will
receive up to 4 years of scholarship support, and 28 upperclassmen will receive
scholarships for up to 2.5 years. This project aims to foster increased
retention of students within the degree program through incorporation of
learning skill development and motivational activities into the introductory
biology courses. The project aims to foster increased graduation rates through
peer and faculty mentorship, engagement in undergraduate research experiences
and internships, exposure to career opportunities, and development of career
readiness and professional identity through monthly professional development
workshops. In addition to providing scholarship support for the focal cohort,
project activities will impact the learning experience of more than 4,000
biology students across the duration of the project and approximately 1,000
students per semester thereafter. Because the University of Nevada Las Vegas has
a large population of first-generation college students and of historically
underrepresented students, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields. A central aim of the project is to advance
understanding of how learning skill training materials can be integrated into
courses and scaled to support diverse students in large enrollment
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Specific goals of the project include increasing
first-year retention of students through incorporation of learning skill
development and motivational activities into introductory biology courses,
increasing graduation rates through exposure to career opportunities and
participation in undergraduate research and internship opportunities, and
studying the effectiveness of combinations of learning skill training materials
delivered in different formats (i.e., multimedia or personalized versions). This
project has the potential to advance understanding of how embedding brief
digital learning skill trainings and motivational writing activities might
benefit students’ motivations, learning behaviors, performance, and academic
success in their science programs. Evidence generated can be used to guide the
broader adoption of these scalable, sustainable, and easily shared resources to
broaden their impact by delivering them to the large audiences of STEM
undergraduates that may benefit from enhanced skill and will to learn. This
project will be evaluated using a culturally responsive evaluation framework. A
mixed-methods convergent and objectives-based approach will be used to evaluate
how effective the project is in meeting established goals and outcomes, using
information from student participation in the embedded learning skill training
and motivational support modules, scholar responses on scholarship program
evaluation surveys, course retention rates, on-track graduation progress status,
graduation rates, and documented information from students’ research and
internship engagement. Results of the project will be made available across a
local to national scale through participation in regional teaching and learning
conferences, national educational research conferences, and publication in
journals focused on collegiate science education. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.