* 2221826
* NSFDEB-NERC: Testing effects of resources and competitors at multiple spatial and temporal scales in multiple populations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Matthew Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 496,482.00

Almost all species are affected by competition with other species. In most
cases, one species (the subordinate competitor) is more affected than the other
(the dominant competitor), and competition can limit the population size or even
cause local extinction of subordinate species. This happens in two ways. Most
obviously, there are direct interactions such as the dominant competitor
stealing food from the subordinate. Less obviously, there are costs to
subordinates of avoiding direct interactions, for example, by moving away from
an area with abundant food but where the dominant competitor is likely to be
encountered. This research will use cutting edge technology to test how direct
and indirect effects of competition affect the movements, energy gain and loss,
survival, and reproduction of African wild dogs (Lycaon pictus) in areas with
high and low numbers of their dominant competitor, the lion (Panthera leo), and
with high and low numbers of prey. Because prey populations are declining in
many areas of the world, understanding how changes in prey abundance alter the
effect of competition is essential for conservation and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely recognized that prey populations
can be limited not only by direct predation, but also by the costs of avoiding
predation (‘risk effects’). Logic suggests that risk effects might also exist in
competitive interactions. This project will test whether the avoidance of risk
carries energetic costs that translate into effects on survival, reproduction,
population dynamics, and gene flow in a subordinate competitor, the African wild
dog. The project will incorporate new methods into long-term studies of African
wild dog, lion, and prey populations in three ecosystems. Specifically, direct
observation of wild dogs will be coupled to data from GPS collars, high
frequency triaxial accelerometers, and magnetic field intensity sensors to
obtain very fine-scaled data on movement, dynamic body acceleration, energy
expenditure, and energy gain for wild dogs hunting in areas with known densities
and distributions of lions and prey. Triaxial accelerometers will provide
detailed and precise measurements of vectorial dynamic body acceleration (VeDBA)
and energy expenditure at time scales ranging from seconds to days or months.
GPS collars will provide inferences on space use and movement from dynamic
Brownian bridge movement models (dBBMMs) at time scales from hours to years.
dBBMMs or other movement models fit to trajectories derived from a combination
of VeDBA, magnetic field intensity, and GPS locations will test for effects on
movement down to the scale of seconds. Direct observation of the same
individuals in continuous three-day ‘follows’ will provide spatiotemporally
matched data on encounters with prey, hunts, and kills to quantify energy gain
at time scales from hours to years, and will provide critical context for the
interpretation of other data. By pairing these data with intensive, long-term
monitoring of known individuals, relationships with survival, reproduction, and
population dynamics can be tested using a Bayesian integrated population model,
and effects on gene flow understood by using a SNP chip already developed and
validated. Data for a range of ecological conditions will be collected through
replication of the study across three ecosystems with well-measured variation in
the densities of competitors and prey. This research is co-funded in part by the
Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded between the
Division of Environmental Biology and the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.