* 2221242
* Promoting Student Success by Establishing a Community of Learners at a Two-year Commuter College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Mobin Rastgar Agah, Norwalk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,044,480.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Norwalk Community College (NCC), a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI).
Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 21 unique
students enrolled at least half-time and pursuing associate’s degrees in
Engineering Science. Eligible students will receive up to three years of
support. This project intends to include support services to increase the social
integration of students. The project team plans to study the effectiveness of
student support services at a two-year commuter college serving non-traditional
students. The project has the potential to advance our understanding of how
scholarships and supporting activities will promote to create a community of
learners at an HSI. As NCC is an HSI, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need and to answer the need for a diverse, quality
STEM workforce. There are three objectives: (1) enhancing the gender diversity
of the pool of applicants by implementing high-impact outreach strategies; (2)
easing the financial hardship of students by providing scholarships; (3)
promoting a community of learners by implementing evidence-based support
services. The project will support scholars through evidence-based activities
such as study groups, faculty and peer mentoring, academic advising,
undergraduate research experiences, and special events that involve students,
the faculty, and students’ families to increase social interaction. This project
will investigate the effectiveness of these support services in a commuter
college. The results can inform other community colleges with transfer programs
in identifying best practices to achieve student success. The project will be
evaluated using a mixed-method design that includes qualitative and quantitative
methods. The evaluation will consist of rigorous formative, summative, and
process components guided by evaluation standards that include measures for
project utility, feasibility propriety, accuracy, and evaluation accountability.
The project results will be disseminated on STEM-Central, presented at
Connecticut State Colleges and University's Annual Conference as well as the
American Society for Engineering Education annual conference, and submitted for
publication in a peer-reviewed journal with an open access option. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.