* 2221241
* Cultivating Academic Success in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2029
* Christopher League, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2029
* USD 749,765.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Long Island University (LIU) in Brooklyn, New York. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 13 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Computer Science. Three cohorts of
students will receive up to four years of scholarships. Scholarship recipients,
along with other students in their cohort, will be offered comprehensive
mentoring and experiential learning plans involving industry partners, all with
the aim of helping students build a STEM identity and improve their cohesion to
the discipline and within professional networks. The project will help LIU and
similar urban educational institutions better understand and implement effective
support strategies for talented, low-income Computer Science students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. It aims to build and improve the capacity of the LIU Brooklyn
department of Computer Science to serve low-income students in its computing
programs, and specifically to increase retention and graduation rates among
students who qualify for Pell grants. Challenges leading to low Computer Science
graduation rates in this population include financial strain, but also the lack
of cohesion that first-generation students and students from under-represented
groups often feel with the institution, the discipline, and professional
networks. The project will provide comprehensive, multidimensional mentoring
involving traditional campus advising, computer science faculty, industry
partners, and near-peer mentors. It aims to help students develop their STEM
identity, access experiential learning and research opportunities, and
ultimately achieve meaningful placement in the computing industry or graduate
school. The project expects to improve the four-year graduation rate for all
Pell-eligible computer science majors (not just those receiving NSF
scholarships), and to build and sustain LIU’s capacity to support future
students. The project includes a comprehensive evaluation plan that builds on
LIU’s assessment tools and expertise, and will advance knowledge about how LIU
Brooklyn and similar urban educational institutions can more effectively support
academically talented, low-income STEM students. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.