* 2221671
* Empowering Low-Income Students through High Impact Practices to Achieve Academic and Professional Success in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Jaclyn Duerr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of California San Diego, Imperial Valley College, and
Southwestern College. University of California San Diego is a public research
university and an emerging Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). Imperial Valley
College and Southwestern College are 2-year community colleges and fully
recognized HSIs. Over its 5 year duration, this project will fund 370 student-
years of full-time scholarships to approximately 185 unique students who are
pursuing associate’s and bachelor’s degrees in engineering. Transfer-track
students at their host institution will receive 2-year scholarships. This
project focuses evidence-based high-impact practices on the transition
experience endured by transfer students before, during, and after their
engagements with 2-year and 4-year institutions. The major significance of this
work, beyond financially supporting these students in need, will be
implementing, assessing, and ultimately sharing a model educational framework
grounded in Schlossberg’s Transition Theory. The transfer students, who undergo
frequent and challenging transitions, will be supported with enrichment
activities including mentorship, summer programming, research opportunities, and
academic year technical and professional workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase Engineering degree completion of
low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
challenges faced by transfer students on their journey toward a STEM degree must
be better understood. Each transitional step, in, through, and out of their
respective institutions requires well-directed support and guidance. This
project aims to evaluate the diverse transitions experienced by transfer
students and to intervene appropriately, using planned academic year and summer
programming as vehicles to deliver the necessary support. Methodologies and
results derived from this project will be shared through conference
presentations and journal publications. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.