* 2221720
* Collaborative Research: Comparison between In-situ and Polarimetric Radar Hail Observations in Convective Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* V. Chandrasekar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The system of operational weather radars in the United States makes use of
polarimetric observations, where radar beams are sent out in vertical and
horizontal configurations to retrieve an estimate of the shapes of precipitation
particles. This award will make use of existing polarimetric radar data and
observations from a Storm Penetrating Aircraft (SPA) to improve estimates of the
properties of hail from radar data. Hail is a public safety and economic hazard,
and improved radar information about hail could provide operational forecasters
with an additional tool to provide early warnings. Multiple students will be
trained under this project and software used by the scientific community will be
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to revisit existing
observations of hail that were made concurrently with a research aircraft and
polarimetric radars to provide insight into how hail shapes, orientation, sizes,
and concentrations influence radar signatures. The South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology operated a T-28 storm penetrating aircraft under NSF support from
1987-2003. During that time, the aircraft was involved in 18 projects, many of
which included measurements of hail using a hail spectrometer and cloud probes.
These campaigns were often conducted within a close distance of a dual-
polarimetric radar, including the CSU-CHILL and NCAR SPOL radars. In this
project, existing analyses of these data will be augmented by the addition of
new flights and flight periods, the inclusion of data from cloud and
precipitation probes (2D-C, HVPS), and a unique source of data from a microphone
that recorded the sound of hail hitting the aircraft windshield. The main tasks
include: 1) Processing hydrometeor images from spectrometer probes, including
the calculation of polarimetric radar signatures using discrete dipole and
T-matrix software, 2) Analyzing radar data to identify the time the radar swept
through the storm volume with the hail encounter and extraction of polarimetric
parameters, and 3) Synthesis of the data, with objectives of comparing
characteristics of conditions leading to better or worse agreement of computed
and observed radar signatures, and evaluation of hail physical characteristics
to which each computed polarimetric parameter is most
sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.