* 2221959
* I-Corps: Bioengineered Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) Chips for Screening CAR T-Cell Immunotherapy
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Weiqiang Chen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T-cell Chip technology to improve
the success rate of cancer treatment and shorten the cycle of CAR T-cell
immunotherapy, making the entire approach cost-effective and ultimately
improving patient welfare. This technology may be especially impactful in low
resource communities where current CAR T-cell treatments are unaffordable.
Moreover, the CAR-T Chip technology may provide a paradigm shift in drug
development: reducing development costs and improving the overall pass rate of
newly developed CAR T-cell products in clinical trials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
improved CAR T-cell therapy with a holistic analysis of the diverse,
evolutionary immunosuppressive milieus in the bone marrow and a robust system to
probe the interactions between CAR-T cells and the tumor immune
microenvironment. Currently, conventional in vitro cell culture and animal
models are used to study B-cell acute lymphoblastic lymphoma (B-ALL)
pathophysiology and test CAR T-cell functionality. These methods fail to
recapitulate the human immune system and thus their clinical full-flanged usage.
The new microfluidics-based CAR-T Chip platform may provide a new avenue for
screening and improving CAR T-cell therapy by recapitulating patient-specific
leukemic bone marrow microenvironment on a chip. The proposed technology may
enable a rapid, cost-effective, and high-throughput evaluation of patient-
specific response to CAR T-cell immunotherapy, as well as alternative
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.