* 2221731
* Planning: Measuring Wind Direction Change on St. Lawrence Island, Alaska, Using Traditional Ecological Knowledge
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jon Rosales, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 78,872.00

This planning award lays the foundation for a participatory project to assess
climate change impacts on prevailing wind direction on a Bering Sea island.
Observation and interpretation of wind direction are components of traditional
ecological knowledge in the Bering Strait region. For Indigenous St. Lawrence
Islanders, wind direction is relevant to terrestrial wayfinding and sea ice
navigation. Although there is little scientific data on prevailing wind
direction on St. Lawrence, residents possess knowledge of wind patterns and
construct shelters with prevailing winds in mind. This work asks whether wind
direction has changed recently and will test whether wind direction can be
reconstructed in the absence of instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning award supports travel to St. Lawrence Island to develop collaborative
relationships with Savoonga residents and to conduct initial assessment of
Indigenous knowledge about wind direction. The PI will assess level of interest
in and knowledge of wind direction while training a local student on qualitative
research methods. Two focus groups will be held in the village, facilitated by a
local coordinator. These focus groups will include elders and hunters
knowledgeable about wayfinding and wind conditions. Should planning activities
prove successful, the PI plans to develop a standard research proposal to
explore whether wind direction can be reconstructed through study of structure
orientation and grass lay direction complemented by Indigenous
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.