* 2221007
* 14th Workshop on Cyanobacteria: Promoting collaborative science and early career scientists in the field of cyanobacterial physiology and applications
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Daniel Ducat, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 04/30/2023
* USD 11,050.00

This award will support early career researcher attendance at the 14th Workshop
on Cyanobacteria. The conference will be held at the main campus of Michigan
State University in East Lansing, Michigan June 16-19 of 2022. The conference
aims to promote collaborative, interdisciplinary research by bringing engineers
and life science researchers together at the same venue. The conference is
designed to be highly interactive, with talks, poster sessions and informal
meetings. Conference sessions will include topics such as cell biology,
synthetic biology, photosynthesis and metabolism, and microbial ecology. There
will be ample opportunity for sharing the latest research results and for
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on Cyanobacteria series is a long-
standing conference that brings together an international team of research
scientists in the area of cyanobacterial biology and biotechnology. The Workshop
presents a unique opportunity to facilitate intense and productive communication
between researchers from multiple disciplines, all sharing a common interest in
cyanobacteria either as the direct subject of their research or as experimental
models to investigate fundamental scientific questions. Keeping with the
traditions of the Workshop on Cyanobacteria series, a main focus is placed on
the training and inclusion of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.