* 2221491
* Joint Applied Mathematics and Statistics Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Sneh Gulati, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Florida International University (FIU). FIU is an R1 public research
university located in Miami and is one of the largest universities in the
country with over 54,000 students. FIU is also a Hispanic-Serving Institution
(HSI) and awards over 60% of bachelor and master degrees to Hispanic students.
Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund renewable scholarships to about
80 unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor and graduate degrees in
Mathematics and Statistics. Beyond monetary support for financially needy,
academically talented students, the project aims to ensure their timely and
successful degree completion and advancement to the next degree or successful
career placement in STEM fields. To that end, cohorts of students ranging from
undergraduate freshmen to first- and second-year graduate students will be
invited to participate in a variety of academic and social activities, with a
specific focus on vertical integration and future career skills and
opportunities. The significance of this project is that it will offer a unique
opportunity to increase the success of historically underrepresented groups in
mathematics and statistics, and to develop deeper understanding of practices
that support these groups. Educating the next generation of mathematical and
statistical problem-solvers as well as disseminating novel educational and
research ideas and results obtained from this project will be the outcomes of
this project. The student cohorts will be integrated into an academic community
by a novel approach that consists of undergraduate and graduate student teams
continuously working or studying on the same research project or in the same
area. This approach will promote camaraderie and cohesiveness that will make
students own the success of a team endeavor. As a spark for this engine,
scholars will be encouraged to participate in seminars, which will include
vertical integration of students in cohorts and will consist of several high-
impact educational and research practices organized and lead by the project
team. Complementing their academic program will be a series of social
engagements as well as guidance and participation in research summer programs,
such as the local REU or other summer schools, all of which would further
integrate them into the learning community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Students’ academic
and social integration into the institution is vital to student retention,
particularly, for first generation and low-income students. The success of
educational programming is linked to university resources but more importantly
the educational environment. The goal is to create an optimal learning
environment for students with a hybrid approach that integrates more
personalized mentoring with vertical integration that challenges students and
provides the educational resources and opportunities of a large state
university. By comparing the results of this project with approaches that are
more traditional or approaches that require less engagement, the knowledge and
understanding of how various factors and activities contribute to retention and
student success will gauge project effectiveness. The effectiveness of project
procedures and activities will be externally evaluated. Comparison of groups in
longitudinal studies will be done with non-scholarship cohort Mathematics and
Statistics majors matching similar characteristics to scholar cohort students
(e.g., GPA prior to the S-STEM participation). Assessment measures will include
graduation rates, time and credits to degree, upper division GPA, graduate
school acceptance or employment within three months of graduation for both
groups. Measurement of possible determining factors such as sense of community,
project engagement, mentor rapport, relief from financial burden &amp; time
constraints will be explored for degree of influence. Results from this project
will be disseminated across the university and at national academic conferences.
Results will be submitted to appropriate journals and preprint servers when
appropriate. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.