* 2221163
* Foundations for Success: Empowering Transfer Student Scholars for Graduation and STEM Career Readiness
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2029
* Melissa Langston, Delaware Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2029
* USD 748,577.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Delaware Valley University. Delaware Valley University is a small
private university with a special emphasis on the natural sciences and
experiential education. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 21 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in Biology, Chemistry, Conservation Wildlife Management, Environmental Science,
and Plant Science. Students will receive 2-year scholarships. The goals of the
project are to increase the retention and graduation rate of STEM transfer
students and prepare students for the STEM workforce and graduate education
through discipline-specific experiential learning opportunities. The project
will provide targeted new student orientation, career pathway mentoring, and
faculty and peer mentoring. This project will also facilitate the on-time
graduation of students with less debt load. This project will deepen the
understanding of interventions designed specifically for transfer STEM
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project will provide curricular road maps for
transfer students to decrease time to graduation. Advising of current community
college students will ensure they complete foundational courses in their major
prior to transfer. A goal is to advance the understanding of how to provide
students with a sense of belonging and increase their likelihood of graduating.
The effectiveness of STEM-focused experiential learning opportunities on
retention and graduation will be determined via The College Persistence
Questionnaire and a measure of “sense of belonging.” The expectation of the
project is that retention, graduation rates, and sense of belonging will be
positively impacted. Project evaluation will investigate which interventions
were the most effective at increasing persistence and graduation rates of the
scholars. Results will be presented at the regional Transfer Admissions and
Advising Committee, with a mission of bridging the knowledge gap between two-
year and four-year schools. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.