* 2221149
* Pathways to STEM Degrees through Integrated Academic Support, Career Enhancement, and Personal Development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Sundeep Rayat, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Ball State University. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 16 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in chemistry and biology. First year students will receive four-years of
scholarship support. The project aims to increase student retention and
graduation rates by combining scholarships with evidence-based practices
targeting students’ academic preparation, career development and personal
awareness. With the assistance of faculty and peer mentors, scholars will
cultivate effective study habits. Interactive industry seminars by top Indiana
employers and career coaches will create pathways for the professional
preparation of the scholars. Tailored workshops will promote scholars’ mental
health, personal wellness, and self-awareness. The project will facilitate
cohort-building through Photovoice (reflection through storytelling using
photographs) activities. By producing well-qualified physical and life
scientists, this project will expand the STEM labor pool. Scholars will be able
to transform their socioeconomic landscape by obtaining high-paying jobs upon
degree completion. The project will advance knowledge on the extent to which the
interventions for student success affect academic performance, career readiness,
personal growth, and mental health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will incorporate
integrated interventions involving multiple partners across campus that focus on
scholars’ academic, personal, professional, and career development.
Specifically, this project will employ the following high-impact practices:
living learning communities, a Bridge program, First-year Seminar, undergraduate
research, faculty/peer mentoring, internships, and interactive industry
seminars. A needs-analysis survey conducted in chemistry and biology gateway
courses revealed that students struggle with time-management, lack of motivation
and focus, lack of effective study skills, test anxiety, mental stress, absence
of adequate support systems, and finances. This project addresses student needs
and suggestions identified in that survey. Investigating the impact of these
measures on scholars’ academic performance, time management, self-confidence,
wellness/career readiness, and mental health will provide knowledge on the
effectiveness of the proposed interventions. The project will also generate
evidence of whether Photovoice aids cohort building. The anticipated outcomes
include scholars’ (a) increased retention and graduation rates; (b) development
of professional skills and knowledge of workforce expectations; (c)
personal/mental awareness and increased sense of belonging. The project will be
evaluated by a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods to provide
formative and summative assessment data. Results of the project will be widely
disseminated to university administrators and internal partners, high-school
counselors, and corporate partners. They will also be shared with the STEM
community via website postings, social media, publications, and conference
presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.