* 2221741
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT): Theory, Architecture, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xiaoyong Yuan, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 409,355.00

The fusion of AI and IoT creates Artificial-Intelligence-of-Things (AIoT), which
is expected to not only boost the intelligence on end devices, but also unleash
the power of IoT data better and faster. Given the presence of confidential and
distributed IoT data in many fields, federated learning has been one promising
approach to unlock the potential of AIoT by enabling collaborative intelligence
without migrating private end-device data to a central server. However, the
heavy burden of state-of-the-art AI on storage and computing resources stands at
odds with most IoT hardware platforms that are resource-constrained, which
raises daunting challenges when deploying federated intelligence in AIoT. The
research team explores hardware-efficient AI techniques to support federated
knowledge transfer across diverse IoT hardware platforms to expand the scope of
AIoT from theory, architecture, and algorithm perspectives. The proposed
research brings tangible benefits to a broad range of disciplines that employ AI
and IoT technologies, promoting the fusion of AI and IoT. The project provides
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups. The outreach efforts on AIoT topics and research
findings are directed towards K-12 audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides the theoretical and empirical evidence to facilitate the deployment of
hardware-efficient AI techniques in federated IoT environments, which fills a
critical void - the existing approaches fail to address the widespread resource,
efficiency, and privacy challenges in AIoT. This project consists of four
aspects: (1) enabling hardware-efficient AI from microscope operations, neural
quantization, to theoretically guide specialized quantization for federated
intelligence across various IoT hardware platforms, (2) exploring another
ground-breaking hardware-efficient AI technique, neural architecture pruning, to
seek optimal sub-network architectures in a data-agnostic manner, (3)
identifying new privacy vulnerabilities and developing defensive mechanisms for
the AIoT designs to encourage broad participation, (4) establishing a general-
purpose AIoT testbed. Through the architecture-algorithm-hardware co-design, the
research intends to unleash the utmost potential of various IoT hardware
platforms and federated intelligence to expand the scope of AIoT
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.