* 2221125
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Robot-Rooms: Giving Form to Domestic Activity, On the Go
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Keith Green, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 342,787.00

This project’s goal is to explore how robotic systems could become deeply
integrated into people’s living and working spaces via “robot-rooms”. People are
increasingly using technologies such as voice assistants and intelligent
thermostats to customize and interact with spaces; the project team’s vision is
to use robotic surface technologies they have developed to allow the room itself
to change configuration and physically interact with occupants. This scenario
may have benefits in a number of contexts: houses that adapt to facilitate
family and individual interaction; workspaces that automatically adjust to an
individual’s abilities and tasks to make work more comfortable and efficient;
hotels and apartments that can adapt to many different visitors in a short time;
museum exhibits that provide a wide variety of immersive experiences; and many
others. The team plans to implement multiple prototypes to both explore these
possibilities and to support outreach activities aimed at encouraging youth to
enter robotics-related careers and to raise public awareness of the
possibilities of robots in everyday life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project,
the team will develop: (a) a design space of possibilities for what
characterizes a robot-room, informed by human needs and wants; (b) a working
prototype, and (c) a deep understanding of how inhabitants are supported and
augmented by a robot-room, following real-world scenarios. Specifically, the
investigators will conduct a user-experience study to investigate the
experiences of participants interacting with prototypes representing two robot-
room concepts using rapid prototyping techniques. The results of this study will
form the basis for the development of a full-scale robot-room prototype. Ongoing
interaction studies will iterate the robot-room prototype through cycles of
evaluation with respect to its usability, performance, and efficacy. Ultimately,
the robot-rooms investigated in this project will prove an impactful form of
robotics as we enter a extend beyond current conceptions of productivity and
play, defined by intimate collaborations between people and machines, and a
novel paradigm for human-computer interaction in which the interaction is with a
machine that physically envelops people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.