* 2221262
* Increasing Undergraduate Success in Science through Learning Cohorts Focused on Career Readiness
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Astrid Rosario, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2028
* USD 749,998.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of South Carolina Upstate, a regional comprehensive
university. Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 14
unique students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology and chemistry.
First-year students will receive 4-year scholarships. The project is centered on
the theme of career readiness, emphasizing the National Association of Colleges
and Employers’ career management competencies. Students will enter a learning
cohort of fellow biology and chemistry majors; be co-enrolled in the same
sections of introductory courses; and participate in a five-day pre-college
summer orientation, a course on how to build social, cultural, and psychological
capital relevant to STEM careers, and a career readiness workshop series.
Students will also receive multi-level mentoring by faculty and industry
mentors, as well as facilitation of research and internship experiences. The
project will customize and integrate the existing array of evidence-based high
impact practices at the university into the activities for the scholar cohorts.
The broader significance of the project will be felt across Upstate South
Carolina, where biologists and chemists are needed by the many life sciences,
advanced materials, and chemical companies in the region. The project will
positively affect the students’ lives by increasing their social mobility and
confidence in STEM careers. Successful elements of the project will be
incorporated into the general curriculum after project completion to maintain
gains in student career preparedness, retention, and workforce placement for
STEM students. The project will advance knowledge of the impact of a STEM
learning cohort focused on career preparedness in four key areas: STEM
motivation, academic experience, graduation rate, and workforce
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
recruit, retain, and graduate academically talented and low-income students who
are interested in biology and chemistry. The project will introduce the
undergraduate scholars to STEM career options, facilitate development of career
management skills, and address attrition of biology and chemistry major from the
university. The scope of the project’s aims are to recruit seven scholars during
each of the first two years of the project, increase the retention and
graduation rates of biology and chemistry majors, and ensure that scholars have
the necessary career skills to make valuable contributions to the STEM
workforce. A research question will examine to what extent do career-relevant,
high-impact activities contribute to student retention, gains in STEM
motivation, social, cultural, and psychological capital development, and
workforce preparedness for low-income, academically talented students. New
knowledge will be generated that describes the role of program components and a
concerted focus on career readiness on success in STEM retention, degree
completion, and career readiness. Evaluation will be based on mixed methods,
including tallies of touchpoints with programming and interactions with mentors;
participant surveys measuring engagement, program satisfaction and career
readiness; and qualitative data, including responses to open ended survey
questions and interviews. Project results will be disseminated at
interdisciplinary meetings at the university, across the University of South
Carolina system, and through other regional and national conferences.
Dissemination will highlight the program’s strategies, effectiveness of program
elements, progress achieved with modified and new interventions, and how
evaluation and research findings could be applied to other STEM majors. Findings
will be disseminated through articles in peer-reviewed journals and in scholarly
educational media. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of academically talented low-income students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.