* 2221549
* Providing Academic, Co-curricular and Scholarship Supports for Talented Students Pursuing Associate's, Bachelor's and Master's Degrees in the Physical Sciences.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2028
* Stacey York, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2028
* USD 4,344,774.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at University of
Oregon, Umpqua Community College, Lane Community College and Central Oregon
Community College. Over its six-year duration, S-STEM scholarships will support
64 unique individuals pursuing degrees in chemistry, biochemistry, and physics
during their final year at community college, as transfer students attaining a
bachelor’s degree at the University of Oregon, and then through the Knight
Campus Graduate Internship Program, a master’s degree program at University of
Oregon that includes a 9-month paid internship. This project will examine the
impacts of faculty and near-peer mentorship, cohort-building activities at all
levels, and internship programs on the development of students’ perception of
their future selves as they progress along pathways to industrial research
careers. The project develops a model that establishes and enhances a cross-
institutional culture of student mentorship with the aim of increasing retention
of low-income students in science while providing a trajectory for alumni to
enter high-wage careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Project research builds upon
models used in K-12 settings and centers on the longitudinal study of
relationships between students’ imagining of their futures and their academic
engagement and persistence. Through surveys, short journal assignments, and
responses to open-ended questions, this research will examine students' choices
as they navigate educational transitions and evaluate how mentorship and
internship support systems shape their development as future scientists. This
project has the potential to advance understanding of effective tools and
frameworks to support retention of low socioeconomic students in STEM. Project
results will be disseminated to other institutions, state officials, and
industry leaders through journal articles, talks, and a video that captures
student experiences and highlights student outcomes. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.