* 2221174
* Power-Efficient Long Short-term Memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kofi Odame, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 440,000.00

If artificial intelligence could be embedded into small, self-powered sensors,
it would be useful in the following scenarios. In precision agriculture, such
sensors could forecast frost to avoid crop damage; monitor the local bird
population for harmful versus beneficial species; and assess soil conditions for
efficient irrigation. In smart factories, such sensors could be used for
predictive maintenance, thus minimizing the costly downtime that is caused both
by undetected equipment failure and by overly-frequent, scheduled servicing. In
consumer healthcare, such sensors could be worn on the body to detect sleep
apnea, track mental health state or measure blood pressure, all without bulky,
obtrusive batteries or the disruption of frequent recharging. Unfortunately,
even in moderately complex applications, artificial intelligence requires more
power than a self-powered sensor can provide. To address this problem, we
propose to develop a new type of artificial intelligence that requires no more
power to run than is available in a self-powered
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to design, implement
and evaluate an analog long short-term memory (LSTM) that is 16 times more
power-efficient than the state-of-the-art. We will achieve this power efficiency
with the following methods: we will use (1) fewer inputs and (2) fewer
operations than the state-of-the-art. Our approach is compatible with
conventional power reduction strategies like compute-in-memory, weight
quantization, knowledge distillation or network pruning. Further, our approach
is robust to analog mismatch. We will demonstrate our approach in a keyword
spotting task, although the same principles can be extended to other
applications. The intellectual significance of the proposed activity is that it
will advance the field of ubiquitous sensors by developing a new LSTM paradigm
that is 16 times more power efficient than the state-of-the-art. The resulting
energy-efficient ubiquitous sensors will increase capabilities across different
fields, from industrial to agricultural and consumer healthcare
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.