* 2221153
* Improving Engineering Student Success for a Diverse Student Population
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2029
* Jeffrey La Belle, Grand Canyon University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/28/2029
* USD 748,773.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Grand Canyon University. To realize this goal the institution will rely
on its strong and trusted presence as a community leader among nearby local
school districts that serve high-potential, low-income students. Over its 6-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 12 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Engineering or Engineering Technology.
These first-year students will receive 4-year scholarships. This project aims to
increase student retention and persistence in engineering by linking
scholarships with mentoring and community-building activities to support
students from different cultural backgrounds. The goal is to create learning
communities that meet the needs of all populations and help diverse populations
to thrive in engineering. Faculty mentors will be trained in the application of
mentoring approaches that will support students coming from different cultural
backgrounds. Further, the scholars will have a dedicated collaborative space on
campus in which scholars can mingle, socialize, study, and hold seminars. This
space will be located close to classrooms and faculty so that students can find
community and social supports, build relationships with peers and faculty, and
receive more structured mentoring and training. Because Grand Canyon University
enrolls a highly diverse student population, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in the engineering workforce and advance knowledge about
the impact of mentoring approaches on student success in engineering for a
diverse student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project will assess the
effectiveness of multicontextuality-centered mentoring, co-curricular
experiences, and the collaborative space on student performance, retention, and
learning outcomes. The multicontext intervention model used in this project can
help address issues within academic cultures that affect student enrollment and
completion to improve student success in engineering. This model has specific
contextual components for both guiding and measuring change in academic units.
Historically, this model has been applied successfully for underrepresented
minority and female scholars but its applicability for socioeconomic diversity
warrants further study. This project will investigate whether multicontextual
approaches can support low-income students and which components are most
effective in helping students succeed. A concurrent mixed-methods approach will
be used to evaluate project outcomes including qualitative assessments of
project meetings, focus groups, and surveys as well as quantitative data for
activities such as collaborative space utilization, courses taken, and GPAs.
Project results will be made available to university stakeholders via faculty
and staff development seminars. The project team will disseminate project
outcomes to the engineering education community through presentations at
national conferences such as the American Society for Engineering Education and
peer-reviewed journal publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.