* 2221921
* NSF-BSF: Circular RNAs as a primate-specific mechanism to create proteome diversity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Stefan Stamm, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2025
* USD 708,083.00

Although proteins that make up the body are almost identical between mice and
humans, humans have a superior brain. This conundrum raises the question: What
is the molecular basis that makes human brains superior to the brains of other
species? The major genomic differences between humans and other species are
outside the DNA sequences containing the instructions to make proteins. Human
DNA has been ‘invaded’ by short fragments, called Alu-elements that now comprise
about 10% of our genome. Alu-elements do not contain instructions to make
proteins. The Alu element invasion started in primitive monkeys and is most
pronounced in humans, chimpanzees and gorillas. The number of Alu elements
correlates with brain function via an unclear molecular mechanism. To make
proteins, DNA is made into RNA, which is made into proteins. Alu elements
promote the formation of a new class of RNAs, called circular RNAs, where the
RNA is not linear with a beginning and an end, but circular like a record.
Unexpectedly, circular RNAs can be made into proteins. Thus, by promoting
circular RNAs, Alu elements could generate new human-specific proteins. These
proteins will be identified and their effect on human nerve cells will be
tested. The project is a collaboration with an Israeli group. To train the next
generation of molecular biologists, undergraduate students will be taught in a
two-week RNA biology course that involves theoretical lessons and hands-on
experiments at Hebrew University in Jerusalem. The theoretical lessons will be
published as free internet videos and as a book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circular
RNAs are a novel class of RNA generated through backsplicing from pre-mRNAs that
are strongly expressed in brain. Despite their lack of a cap or ribosomal entry
sites, circRNAs can be translated after adenosine to inosine editing in cell
culture. Backsplicing is promoted by Alu elements that expanded in the primate
lineage. It is possible that the observed correlation between Alu elements and
cognitive abilities is due to the formation of Alu-element dependent, primate-
specific circular RNAs. The project will test the overall hypothesis that Alu-
dependent circular RNAs are translated after A&gt;I editing emanating from ADAR
enzymes and that the circRNAs encode novel, undiscovered proteins. The project
will (a) investigate the molecular mechanism of circRNA translation after
adenosine to inosine editing, hypothesizing that inosines promote ribosomal
entry. The formation of circRNAs will be (b) mechanistically characterized by
determining the factors that influence the competition between linear and
circular RNA splicing in the endogenous spliceosome, and by characterizing
associated proteins. The functionality of selected circRNAs will be (c) tested
in biochemical and cell-based assays, postulating that proteins made from
circular RNAs interfere with the multimerization of their linear counterparts.
For broader impacts, the USA-Israeli team will organize annual RNA summer
schools with theoretical lectures and practical courses at Hebrew University in
Jerusalem. The graduate level English RNA lectures will be recorded, subtitled
with Spanish, Hebrew and Arabic and posted on YouTube. They will be accompanied
by a book: ‘RNA biology: A practical approach’ to train the next generation of
RNA biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.