* 2221757
* CAS-Climate: Ion and Interfacial Dynamics in Polymerized Ionic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Joshua Sangoro, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rising energy needs of our
society cannot be met without development of novel, high-performance, clean-
energy conversion and storage devices. Electrolytes are a critical component of
these devices, as these materials are the media for selective transport of the
target electroactive species. However, safety, stability, and selectivity issues
are an on-going concern in many state-of-the-art electrolytes. A unique focus of
the current project is the investigation of novel approaches to enhance charge
transport in polymerized ionic liquids by taking advantage of confinement and
interfacial interactions, which would make them suitable as electrolytes. The
fundamental understanding obtained from the planned research will provide a
basis for deliberate and optimal design of polymers for many sustainability-
relevant technological applications, such as batteries, fuel cells, and
supercapacitors, where interfaces play a significant role in determining the
overall functionality. In addition, the knowledge gained from this project
concerning the impact of the chemistry of solid surfaces in contact with
polymers, the type of polymer, extent of confinement and sample preparative
conditions will be of benefit to the polymer science and engineering
communities. An important component of this project also involves several
integrated educational activities. The project will contribute to training and
education of specialists in polymer nanotechnology and materials science through
active involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in this research. The
proposed program emphasizes work with underrepresented groups and research
experiences for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymerized ionic liquids are a class of novel
functional polymer electrolytes that combines the unique physicochemical
properties of molecular ionic liquids (e.g. non-flammability, wide
electrochemical windows, negligible vapor pressures, and ionic conduction) with
the outstanding mechanical characteristics of polymers. These materials are
promising for a variety of clean-energy applications including dye-sensitized
solar cells, portable batteries, actuators, field-effect transistors and
electrochromic devices. However, their ionic conductivity, which is one of the
most critical properties in the context of electrochemical energy applications,
drops by many orders of magnitude in comparison to their low molecular weight
counterparts upon polymerization. In the proposed project, a new approach to
developing fundamental understanding for rational design of polymerized ionic
liquids with high ionic conductivity and other desirable electrochemical
properties will be investigated. The overall goal of the planned research is to
employ nanoscale confinement and interfacial forces to develop a fundamental
framework for designing polymerized ionic liquids with enhanced ionic
conduction. The major objectives of the planned work are to: (i) develop a
fundamental understanding of the impact of the extent of nanoscale confinement
(as reflected by the mean pore diameters and polymer film thicknesses) on
polymerization kinetics, ion transport and dynamics in confined polymerized
ionic liquids, (ii) unravel the role of polymer/pore-wall interactions on
polymerization kinetics, ion dynamics and charge transport, (iii) investigate
the effect of molecular structure (chemistry) of polymerized ionic liquids on
their ion dynamics and charge transport in nanopores, and (iv) elucidate the
impact of the dimensionality (type) of confinement on polymerization kinetics,
ion transport and dynamics in confined polymerized ionic liquids. The detailed
fundamental understanding of the impact of nanoscale confinement gained from
this project will provide a scientific framework for the design of functional
polymers with relevance to sustainability and unique properties for numerous
technologies, including polymer electrolytes suitable for use in electrochemical
power sources and devices.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.