* 2221772
* Collaborative Research: Single-molecule in vivo analysis of mechanosensitive channels in bacteria using force spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeff Eldredge, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2025
* USD 380,500.00

The objective of this research project is to discover how the mechanical safety
valves, so called “mechanosensitive channels”, embedded in the tough outer
shells of bacteria function and how they help to protect bacteria against
rupture due to excessive internal pressure during sudden changes in their
environment. An understanding of this essential bacterial function could impact
human health and the control of bacterial disease. Multiple drug resistance is
an immense health threat. A detailed understanding of bacterial protective
functions may lead to new pharmacological approaches to overcoming these
protections. Furthermore, bacteria play crucial roles in commercial agriculture,
environmental remediation, and alternative energy production. In all these
situations, understanding of growth regulation and reactions to changing
environmental conditions is critical. The work of this collaborative research
program lies at the intersection of biology, experimental biophysics, and
mechanical engineering, and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in
the team will be trained to work at this intersection. Undergraduate students at
Duke and UCLA will also participate in this research project. Undergraduates
from underrepresented minority groups will participate in summer research
experiences at UCLA that focus on computational modeling. Middle and high school
students from diverse backgrounds will participate in afterschool and camp
experiences at Duke that introduce participants to state-of-the-art cell imaging
technologies. Through the educational outreach, this work will increase and
diversify the group of undergraduates interested in STEM-based careers,
including those from community colleges and Minority Serving Institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria are enclosed by a complex multi-layered cell
envelope that enables them to maintain a high internal turgor pressure of one or
more atmospheres. When external osmolarity drops significantly, excessive turgor
can cause cells to burst. To prevent this, mechano-sensitive channels (MSCs)
embedded in the inner lipid membrane act as safety valves and release solutes to
decrease turgor. It remains unknown if MSCs in the living cell open only when
the lateral tension in the inner cell membrane increases, or if they also react
to other mechanical stimuli transmitted through their complex mechanical
microenvironments. It also remains unknown how biochemical regulation affects
force transmission leading to channel gating. This project will utilize a new
approach to observe the opening of single MSCs in live bacteria in response to
mechanical compression, essentially between flat plates in an atomic force
microscope (AFM). This method can precisely quantify turgor pressure and, at the
same time, resolve cell volume changes as small as 0.01 femtoliters, produced by
the gating of individual MSCs. The project will study gram-negative E. coli and
gram-positive B. subtilis bacteria and compare the behavior of wildtype strains
with strains expressing only specific MSCs. Experiments will be combined with
analytical and numerical coarse-grained modeling to understand force
transmission to MSCs through the complex cell wall structures, including the
lipid membrane(s), the proteoglycan layer, and the periplasmic polyelectrolyte
layer, with a focus on the role of cell wall defects. The new approach to in
vivo characterization of MSCs will help to solve fundamental puzzles about MSC
function in their native physiological environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.