* 2221691
* Student Supports Organized to Achieve Results
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Sanaa Saykali, Citrus Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2028
* USD 749,983.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated computer
scientists, mathematicians, engineers and physicists by supporting the retention
and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need at Citrus College, a two-year designated Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI). Over its 6-year duration, this project will provide
scholarships to 60 full- and part-time students who are pursuing associate’s
degrees in computer science, engineering, physics, and mathematics. Full-time
scholars are eligible to receive two years of support and part-time scholars
will receive three years of support. All scholars will have access to
comprehensive co-curricular activities and student support services including
mentoring, cohort activities, and experiential learning. The project will
leverage existing evidence-based campus programs to strengthen and expand wrap-
around services to increase retention, course success, program completion, and
importantly, transfer to a baccalaureate degree-granting
institution. Simultaneously, the project will increase success rates in calculus
with a goal of mitigating outcome discrepancies between low-income students and
their more economically privileged peers through an instructional redesign. The
activities outlined in this project, including the calculus redesign, have the
potential to broaden participation in STEM both at Citrus College and, through
the dissemination of results, across the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields with demonstrated financial
need. To ensure that low-income, high-potential STEM students are fully engaged
and successful with coursework and campus activities, this project will address
both cognitive and non-cognitive needs of students. Evidence-based interventions
include mentoring, cohort activities and workshops, wrap-around support
services, experiential learning modules, internships, and research experiences.
Additionally, the project team recognizes that completion of calculus in the
first year of post-secondary education contributes to student persistence in
STEM. Yet, the research shows that a large percentage of students nationwide,
particularly low-income students, are unsuccessful in calculus. The project will
support faculty as they reassess the calculus curriculum, adopt active learning
pedagogies, and develop in-class modules and materials for each of the three
Citrus College calculus classes (I, II, and III). Rigorous independent
evaluation and research, coupled with broad dissemination via the project
website, journal articles, and conference presentations, have the potential to
advance knowledge and understanding of two-year college student engagement and
support as well as the type of curricular and pedagogical transformations needed
to improve the retention and persistence of low-income STEM majors. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.