* 2221418
* Maximizing Truck Platooning Participation with Preferences, Inclusion, and Privacy Preservation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bo Zou, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 290,358.00

This project will create novel approaches to maximizing participation of trucks
in platooning, which refers to trucks traveling in groups with small inter-truck
separation to reduce aerodynamic drag. The trucking sector has been heavily
investing in platooning technologies in recent years, driven primarily by the
significant benefits of truck energy use reduction. This project will
investigate the fundamental issue of promoting widespread truck platooning while
accounting for 1) individual truck preferences, given the high fragmentation of
the US trucking sector; 2) inclusion of trucks of different origins,
destinations, and planned departure time in forming platoons; and 3)
preservation of truck information privacy. Results from the research, which will
be produced in collaboration with the industry, will help inform truck
platooning implementation in the US toward reaping the maximum benefits. The
research also aligns with the growing societal emphasis on individual member
well-being, inclusiveness, privacy, and cybersecurity. Diverse student groups
will be exposed to the subject of truck platooning and technology-empowered
smart mobility in general through systematic education and outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a theoretical
foundation for maximizing truck platooning participation taking into
consideration truck preferences, inclusion, and privacy preservation. An
interactive process between trucks and a platooning platform is first devised to
facilitate construction of the preference list of platooning partners for each
truck. The research then investigates two approaches for platooning
participation maximization: one centers on stably partitioning trucks into
parties of cycled preferences; the other resorts to integer programming with
exploration of half-integrality of the extreme points for efficient solution
methods. Multiple inclusion measures are further developed and integrated into
the platooning participation maximization. To preserve privacy while seeking
platooning opportunities, an encrypted computing design is conceived and
examined for constructing truck preference lists. The core of the design is a
two-cloud architecture with secret key splitting, ciphertext re-encryption, and
obfuscation which leverages the additive homomorphic property of the chosen
cryptosystem. Disaggregate truck flows based on real-world freight data will be
constructed and used to test and evaluate the different research components at
varying geographical scales. The results from this project will not only
contribute to enriching the truck platooning literature but lend insights to
several other emerging mobility systems that bear operational
similarities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.