* 2221099
* Preparing Future Leaders and Movers in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Patricia Mead, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,883.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Norfolk State University, a Historically Black College and University
(HBCU). Over its 4 year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 29
unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in computer
science and engineering. The Future Leaders and Movers in Engineering and
Computer Science (FLAME) program seeks to establish a learning community of
academically talented and financially eligible students. FLAME Scholars will be
first year and transfer students and will receive funding for up to four years.
FLAME will expose these scholars to a comprehensive set of activities to enhance
their preparation for successful careers in business and industrial settings.
The program design integrates formal and informal experiences and emphasizes
leadership, experiential learning, and self-identification as a scientist or
engineer. A thoughtful plan for assessment and review will ensure effective
course adjustment and overall evaluation of the program components. FLAME seeks
to integrate program features, such as a Leadership Seminar Series, Technical
Workshops, Distinguished Lecture Series, and social bonding events. Successful
completion is expected to demonstrate effective pathways of broadened
opportunity and participation in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. A key project outcome
is that the proposed program should exceed NSU's overall retention to graduation
rate. In addition, to ensure scholars' persistence, FLAME aims to provide role
model mentoring (from faculty, community, and industry partners) and
professional development for the scholars to enter the computing-related
workforce or advanced study. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.