* 2221821
* Methane Venting from Forearc Faults in the Puget Sound Estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 544,624.00

Methane Venting from the Puget Sound Estuary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shallow
coastal waters found on the margins of continents are areas of active methane
emissions to the air. These areas supply a major part of the greenhouse effect
responsible for modern climate warming. Recent studies have shown that methane
from shallow coastal waters supply half of all methane emissions to the air that
in turn produce global warming. Puget Sound is the largest of these inland seas
in North America and is a large source of methane to the air. Gas from newly-
discovered bubble plumes from the seafloor increases the amount of methane in
the Puget Sound seawater. This gas from the seafloor escapes to the air from the
sea surface where it becomes a greenhouse gas. Showing the location of the sub-
surface deposits of methane in the newly discovered vents is the primary goal of
this research project. The amount of methane gas coming from the seafloor will
be measured using a robotic instrument called a Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV).
This robotic device will place measuring instruments directly in the path of the
methane bubble stream to show the flow speed and capture fluid from the vents.
Five students from under-represented communities of color in the university’s
Engineering Department will be invited as members of the science party on the
ship. This experience will substantially broaden their education experience in
marine sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To find the source of methane gas recently
discovered venting into Puget Sound seawater, this project will carefully
measure changes in the rate of methane gas flowing from the seafloor. The
changes in gas and fluid coming from seafloor vents over a six month period will
be compared to environmental events that could be causing the flow changes.
Examples of events that could cause vent flow changes include unusual water
tides, temperature changes due to seasons, passing waves from earthquakes, and
unusually large rainfall events in the nearby land. The two research cruises in
the program will occur in late Fall 2022 and in Spring of 2023 to see changes in
vent flow as the temperature and rainfall vary with the seasons. The shipboard
part of the research will use a camera system towed near the seafloor to map the
details of the vent field. A small Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) will also
capture gas and fluid that is flowing from the seafloor vents using specially
constructed sample bottles. The ROV will then place instruments on the seafloor
to see variations in the gas flow rate for a six-month period. These captured
fluid samples will show whether the methane is coming from deep within the earth
or if it is coming as runoff of rain from the nearby land. Data from the
research program will be freely available to the public through publication on
university websites and placed in the federal archives. University of Washington
undergraduates from the Engineering Department’s program for under-represented
students of color will take part in both ocean field programs on the ship and
during the processing of the data in the laboratory. This firsthand experience
at sea and in the laboratory will increase the student’s awareness of marine
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.