* 2221379
* CIF: Small: Generic Building Blocks of Communication-efficient Computation Networks - Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the number of connected devices projected to reach nearly 60 times the
human population within the next 10 years, communication networks will
increasingly be used for computation tasks. Along with the computing
capabilities of the connected devices, a key determinant of the potential of
these "computation networks" will be the fundamental limit of their
communication efficiency. This lends a sense of urgency to the study of the
capacity of computation networks, the prime motivation of this project. What
makes these networks particularly intriguing is that machine communication,
because of its algorithmic character, creates predictable structures of
dependencies and side information, which may be exploited in principled ways
towards improvements in communication efficiency. The capacity limits of
computation networks are largely unknown. This is the case even for the basic
building blocks — computational broadcast and multiple-access networks — that
are essential to many of the applications driving interest in computation
networks, such as coded caching, private information retrieval, distributed
storage repair, federated learning, and shared virtual reality. By studying the
capacity of these building blocks, this project lays the foundation for a
cohesive information theory of computation networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is organized into three thrusts. Starting with linear finite-field
settings, the capacity of linear computation broadcast networks is studied first
in Thrust 1. This is followed by the study of the linear computation multiple-
access networks in Thrust 2. Thrust 2 also explores how these building blocks
may be combined into many-to-many/multihop computation networks. The scope is
expanded in Thrust 3 to linear computations over integers and to certain classes
of non-linear computations. A key obstacle to overcome is that these building
blocks contain well recognized hard problems as special cases, e.g., index
coding is a special case of computation broadcast. Insights from degrees-of-
freedom studies of wireless networks and parallels in the field of generic-case
complexity suggest that while the general problem (which includes all cases) is
necessarily at least as hard as its hardest instances, the generic problem
(which includes almost-all cases) is much more tractable. In search of a
cohesive theory, the project therefore focuses on the generic settings as its
starting points, with subsequent expansion towards the harder instances guided
by the improved understanding of generic cases. The cohesive theory builds upon
connections to ideas that have been useful in prior studies of wireless
networks, like subspace-alignment chains, duality, spatial scale invariance,
sumset inequalities, dimensional analysis, and a variety of interference
alignment schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.