* 2221030
* Strengthening the STEM High School-to-Workforce Pipeline for Urban, Low-Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Gaia Bistulfi, D'Youville College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 748,250.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at D'Youville College. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 13 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in biology. First-year biology majors will receive four-year scholarships. The
project aims to increase persistence and foster students' STEM identity through
faculty mentoring, cohort-building, ePortfolios, and gamification curriculum
embedded into biology courses. Internships and research experiences will benefit
scholars, faculty, and local industries. This project will contribute new
knowledge to the field of biology education and will help to address a pressing
need in the Western New York region for highly qualified biologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase biology
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. D’Youville University, though this project, will achieve the
following objectives: (1) Recruit a diverse applicant pool and provide
scholarships for 13 low-income, academically talented students with unmet
financial need; (2) Achieve first-year retention rates of 80% and a four-year
graduation rate of 70% for the cohort; (3) Provide 100% of scholars with career-
development activities to enhance their post-graduation success in obtaining
STEM employment or acceptance into a graduate-degree program; and (4)
Investigate how an innovative gamification approach in the biology pedagogy and
the use of ePortfolios impact student engagement, success, and STEM identity for
low-income biology majors in STEM. Gamification is a high-impact practice shown
to increase student engagement in computer science, and ePortfolios are a
demonstrated high-impact practice to build STEM identity broadly. However, there
are gaps in the literature for the use of gamification and ePortfolios in
biology; the data collected for this project will help to fill those gaps. In
addition to educational research, the mixed-methods, culturally informed
evaluation will explore potential impacts of the program on desired metrics
(i.e., participant sense of belonging, self-efficacy, persistence, and retention
in STEM). Dissemination activities will target the D’Youville community, the
local K-12 community, and area STEM industry as well as broad national
stakeholders. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.