* 2221739
* MCA: Crossing Disciplines to Link Nutrients in Tree Canopy, Soils, and Stream Water to Mineral Weathering in a Tropical Forest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amanda Olsen, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 311,135.00

Although forested tropical watersheds cover just 13 percent of Earth’s ice-free
land mass, they contain approximately half of the carbon that is stored in
plants on Earth’s surface, making them disproportionately important in storing
carbon. Increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has been shown to increase
plant biomass, thereby removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and
sequestering it in the biosphere. However, plant growth can be limited by
nutrient limitation, preventing plants from converting higher carbon dioxide
levels into biomass through photosynthesis. One way to increase nutrient
availability to ecosystems is to mobilize nutrients from bedrock through
weathering, or the breaking down of rocks and minerals at Earth’s surface. This
research activity will directly address these issues, while contributing to the
career development of a mid-career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased
atmospheric CO2 can increase photosynthesis, but other factors, including
nutrient limitation, drought, and changes to carbon dynamics in soils may affect
tropical forests’ abilities to take up CO2, thereby turning tropical forests
from a carbon sink to a carbon source. This study will address one potential
limiting factor (nutrient limitation) and assess whether increased weathering
can provide bedrock-derived nutrients at a fast enough rate to affect forest
productivity. The researchers will test the hypothesis “Do plants growing on
nutrient-poor serpentinite rely on rapid mineral weathering to offset the low
nutrient content of the bedrock?,” at four sampling sites at two NEON
observatories in southwestern Puerto Rico. Sampling locations across a climate
gradient at Rio Cupeyes will test the effect of increasing temperature and
rainfall on nutrient acquisition via chemical weathering in a low nutrient
ecosystem on serpentinite bedrock. The fourth site at Rio Guilarte will serve as
a control as well as allow predictions about bedrock chemistry and nutrient
release. The researchers will address this hypothesis through three tasks: (i)
measure the nutrient, major element, and trace element chemistry of all relevant
reservoirs including bedrock, soil, soil water, leaves, leaf litter, atmospheric
deposition, and stream water at three sites along a climate gradient at Rio
Cupeyes as well as a control site at Rio Guilarte; (ii) quantify chemical
weathering rates at Rio Cupeyes and Rio Guilarte using soil pits, soil water
samples, and total export via streams; and (iii) model total aboveground biomass
at all three Rio Cupeyes sites and one Rio Guilarte site using remote sensing
imagery and compare these across the climate gradient to test the effect of
increasing temperature and precipitation on ecosystem productivity. By
calculating nutrient release via weathering using whole ecosystem fluxes
calculated from stream chemistry and time-integrated, long term weathering
profiles from forest soils, the researchers will compare nutrient release and
chemical weathering occurring over two temporal and spatial scales. These
weathering models will then be compared to landscape productivity estimates from
remote sensing data to examine whether weathering rate is correlated to biomass
production by trees. This project is jointly funded by the Geobiology and Low-
Temperature Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.