* 2221136
* Leveraging Data Science to Promote the Successful Participation of Talented, Low–Income, Undergraduate Students from Rural Alabama in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Mohammed Alam, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well–educated scientists,
technicians, engineers, and mathematicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high–achieving, low–income undergraduate students with
demonstrated unmet financial need at Jacksonville State University, a
comprehensive, regional four–year university in rural, northeast Alabama. Over a
six–year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 20 selected
undergraduate students each year who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Computer Information Sciences or Mathematics.
Selected student applicants who are First Year, Sophomores, Juniors or Seniors
will receive an annual scholarship to cover two semesters. At least 10, $10,000
scholarships will be awarded each year together with 10 or more $5,000
scholarships. An estimated 120 scholarships will be awarded overall. The project
aims to increase student persistence in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields by linking scholarships with proven and effective
supporting activities, including faculty advising, faculty mentoring, faculty
support, faculty–guided undergraduate research experiences, graduate school
preparation, travel to research universities and high–tech organizations and
STEM private businesses and appropriate science–focused summer internships.
Project staff, together with faculty mentors, will assist scholarship recipients
in developing Individual Development Plans outlining the scholarship recipient’s
career goals and progression to achieving such goals. The project will also
engage in improving student retention in STEM majors and programs. By
establishing a system to support scholarship recipients, the project will test
new approaches to prepare and provide STEM career-ready professionals for the
STEM industry. Project findings will also generate new knowledge for actionable
integration to impact rural institutions targeting high–achieving, low–income
undergraduate students for enrollment into NSF approved STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's primary outcome is that within six
years, each scholarship recipient will graduate with a JSU data science minor or
data science concentration and a STEM bachelor’s degree and enter the STEM
workforce within an occupation of regional, statewide, or national need for STEM
professionals or pursue a graduate program in STEM. The specific aim of the
project is to positively address several gaps reported by STEM industry which
are affecting the STEM workforce. (1) A fundamental skills gap is the ability to
adapt, critically think, and conduct complex creative problem-solving. (2) The
belief gap is the incorrect beliefs regarding what traits are needed to be
successful in STEM. (3) The postsecondary education gap occurs because colleges
are producing fewer STEM graduates than are needed in the workforce. This
project is designed to address each of these gaps through the provision of
scholarships and intervention services to support the STEM degree pursuits of
diverse students. In addition, the project will also investigate the role of
psycho-social factors and the efficacy of targeted intervention for addressing
the identified critical gaps in skills and beliefs among scholarship recipients.
The project will explore if positively addressing critical gaps in access,
participation, skill development, and beliefs will result in scholarship
recipients' successful completion of a program of study in data science and
STEM, and in being fully prepared for postgraduate STEM study and/or entry into
the STEM workforce. The project will advance knowledge and understanding about
the effectiveness of recruiting and supporting undergraduate students with
academic ability, talent, or potential, who are low–income and with a
demonstrated unmet financial need to complete a data science minor or data
science concentration and pursue an NSF approved STEM discipline. The project
will be evaluated internally, by a project staff member with a lens on
identifying generalizable knowledge, and formatively and summatively by an
external evaluation team. Results of the project will be shared by the project
team and external evaluation team at regional conferences, in journal articles,
in local and regional newspapers, through social media, and via a project
website. The project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics Program, which seeks to increase the number of
low–income, academically talented students with demonstrated unmet financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low–income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.