* 2221346
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Chemoenzymatic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Karl Scheidt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Center for ChemoEnzymatic Synthesis (C-CES) is supported by the Centers for
Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the Division of Chemistry. Enzymes are
proteins that control and catalyze chemical reactions essential for life.
Nature’s ability to employ these highly evolved biological catalysts to generate
diverse and complex molecules through selective reactions has inspired chemists
for decades and has led to the field of biocatalysis. The potential societal
impacts of biocatalysis are significant, yet chemists have only recently begun
to leverage these efficient and selective natural processes. C-CES seeks to
develop unprecedented transformations and achieve new selectivity strategies by
applying novel concepts in biocatalysis to sustainable making of chemicals,
which are referred to as chemoenzymatic synthesis. These advances will allow the
scientific community to address 21st-century challenges in the production of new
medicines and materials. The broader impacts of the Center will focus on
convergent, interdisciplinary education of early career scientists in
chemoenzymatic synthesis, team building, and communication, all which will build
the foundation for their independent careers. The Center will be at the
forefront of developing and disseminating resources to integrate biocatalysis
into broad practice across university and industrial settings, as well as in
chemistry courses and laboratories. Finally, the Center will build up existing
institutional resources of each team member to recruit, engage, and educate
individuals from underrepresented groups, thereby broadening the impact of
chemoenzymatic synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-CES will drive an unexplored
frontier of organic synthesis by enabling new discoveries in biocatalysis and
chemoenzymatic synthesis. The Center will focus on the grand challenge of
creating new selective reactions for carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bond
formation in a sustainable manner by combining biocatalytic and bioinspired
transformations with established chemical synthesis methodologies. Center
activities will integrate fundamental concepts and past success of small
molecule catalysis with the unique advantages of efficiency and selectivity
control available through supramolecular protein-based catalysts. The Center
will bring together internationally recognized scientists with complementary
areas of expertise in catalysis, organic synthesis, chemoenzymatic synthesis,
machine learning, high-throughput experimentation, protein engineering and
biocatalysis. The two initial goals of the Center are the biocatalytic formation
of high value C–C and C–X bonds and controlling selectivity outcomes currently
unobtainable through conventional strategies. The realization of these efforts
will be driven by a collaborative and convergent approach to experimental
research and student training that combines state-of-the-art strategies for
reaction development and biocatalyst design with machine learning and
retrosynthesis planning. The Center will oversee coordinated training activities
to ensure C-CES participants acquire diverse knowledge and techniques needed to
master and then utilize biocatalysis in synthesis. The main broader impacts of
this award include: a) the development of biocatalysis workshops to train future
scientists on practical strategies and approach to chemoenzymatic synthesis; b)
curriculum development around biocatalysis concepts for the broader chemical
community; and c) public engagement regarding the sustainable applications of
chemoenzymatic synthesis to access innovative materials that impact our everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.