* 2221827
* NSF-BSF: Ion Transport in Composite Electrolytes: Breaking the Interfacial Energy Barriers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electrical energy storage is at the heart of
everyday life. It is required for cell phones, laptops, standby power systems,
electric vehicles, and other applications. Solid-state batteries, batteries that
do not contain any liquid like most of todayâ€™s battery systems, have emerged as
particularly promising solution. Ion conducting polymers combined with
superionic ceramics are considered as the most promising materials for the solid
electrolytes. With this project, funded by the Ceramics program in the Division
of Materials Research, Professor Sokolov at the University of Tennessee, in
collaboration with colleagues from Israel, studies fundamental mechanisms
controlling ion transport in such composite polymer-ceramic materials. These two
classes of materials have complimentary properties that up to now were not
realized due to poor understanding of ion transport in disparate systems. The
proposed research deepens our understanding of the mechanisms of ion
conductivity and enables the design of composite electrolytes with required
properties for solid state batteries and other energy storage devices. New
energy storage systems are critical for many current and future technologies
from electric vehicles to efficient renewable energy sources and could lead to a
substantial decrease of the carbon emission. Additionally, this project allows
postdoctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate students to gain valuable
experience in sophisticated experimental research and international
collaborations. Outreach to K-12 students at and around the University of
Tennessee is aimed at attracting more students to STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The interfacial
resistance between the ceramic and polymer phases strongly suppresses the ionic
conductivity and presents the main obstacle for this type of solid-state
electrolytes. The US-Israel international collaborative research, supported by
the Ceramics program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on
developing a fundamental understanding of mechanisms controlling ion transport
in polymer-ceramic composites, specifically on unraveling parameters controlling
interfacial barriers for ion transport between ceramic and polymer electrolytes.
A combination of dielectric spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance and neutron
scattering spectroscopy, complemented by microscopy is used to elucidate the
fundamentals of the transport mechanism. The experimental research will deepen
fundamental understanding of microscopic parameters controlling ion transport in
composite electrolytes. Insights gained from studying layered ceramic-polymer
electrolyte model systems have the potential to be instrumental for a rational
design of novel solid-state electrolytes with required conductivity, flexibility
and stability, as well as reframing the electrical energy storage technology by
developing new materials. The knowledge gained might also have strong impact on
other fields of materials science, including applied physics and chemistry,
airspace composites and environmental sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.