* 2221709
* AMS Community Synthesis for Convergence of Health and the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Keith Seitter, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,951.00

Due to climate change and the increasing concentration of human beings, human
health is becoming increasing impacted by environmental changes such as extreme
heat and cold snaps, flooding, wildfires, the northward migration of tropical
insect-borne diseases, the urban heat island effect, the increasing occurrence
of harmful algal blooms, and environmental degradation due to release and/or
burial of anthropogenically-generated pollutants originating from waste,
manufacturing, and mining. Many of the above phenomena, whether related to
climate change or the impact of people on the natural environment, especially
those related to atmospheric transport and other air-borne physical and chemical
processes, have imposed significant and serious impacts on human health. These
impacts are being felt not only in the US, but worldwide. To inform the public
of these risks and explore the feasibility of possible solutions, the American
Meteorological Society (AMS), a professional society of 13,000 atmospheric
scientists; companies; and enthusiasts, will carry out an information gathering
activity to collect input from its constituents on issues in climate and
atmospheric processes that have impacts on human health and that are primed to
be quickly addressed/resolved. A report, summarizing the outcome of this survey,
will be generated and made available to the public via publication on the
American Meteorological Society website and presented to the National Science
Foundation Directorate of Geosciences. Key outcomes will be the identification
of atmospheric changes and processes with the highest human-health impacts
resulting from pollution and climate change that are primed for immediate
resolution and/or intervention. Broader Impacts of the activity will a focus on
improving our understanding and mitigation of atmospherically related
environmental changes on human health. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The American
Meteorological Society (AMS) will conduct a broad, inclusive, results-driven
survey of its constituents which consist of scientists and students as well as
industry professionals in the atmospheric sciences and weather/climate
prediction. This information collection exercise will gather ideas and target
areas where geoscientists, communities, toxicologists, and medical professionals
can come together to accelerate our nation's ability to mitigate and minimize
human health impacts of changes in our environment due to climate and
anthropogenic activities. Results of the survey will be summarized to provide a
roadmap for the creation of potential workable solutions to help ameliorate the
impacts of the environment on human health and society. In the final report
targets will be identified that can be addressed in a significant way within a 2
to 3-year timeframe. Information gathering will include online survey vehicles,
virtual gatherings, one-on-one discussions with experts, and broad outreach
across the atmospheric sciences. An important aspect of the survey effort will
be engagement of early career scientists and members of groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.