* 2221749
* At-sea testing and final development of the Hadal Water Column Profiler
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Mariko Hatta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,831.00

Very little is known about the mixing, circulation, chemical properties, and
biological communities in the hadal water column, i.e., waters deeper than 6500
m. The handful of measurements that have been made show that rather than being
quiescent and isolated from the ocean above, the water in the hadal zone is
renewed on surprisingly short time scales. More multidisciplinary observations
are needed to advance hadal water column science. To that end the researchers,
using private foundation money, developed a 11 km depth rated (capable of
getting to the deepest point in the ocean) Hadal Water Column Profiler which
allows repeated vertical profiles of temperature, conductivity, dissolved
oxygen, turbulent mixing, current velocity, acoustic backscatter, and video, and
it has a small 11-bottle water sampler. The researchers conducted two days of
at-sea testing which showed that the development had successfully produced a
functioning profiler, but also that more at-sea testing is needed for the Hadal
Water Column Profiler to reach its potential as a cutting-edge scientific
instrument ready for oceanographic research expeditions. Once operational the
Hadal Water Column Profiler will provide the means to substantially increase
understanding of one of the most undersampled regions in the global ocean. It
will enable the first direct measurements of turbulent mixing in the deep ocean
trenches, allow for exploration of flow, trench ventilation mechanisms, and
midwater biological communities shedding light on biological connectivity, and
enable the identification of nepheloid layers created by turbidity flows that
are likely common and important biogeochemically and biologically in
trenches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide additional ship time
for the final development of this unique instrument. During three 4-day periods
of at-sea testing, the researchers will undertake six tasks identified from the
prior at-sea testing. These tasks include optimizing the ‘flight’
characteristics for data quality and using contemporaneous traditional
Conductivity-Temperature-Depth and Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler
measurements to evaluate the data. During the previous at-sea testing a half
size prototype water sampler was used. This project will allow a full-size water
sampler to be tested. Finally, due to the unique capabilities of the Hadal Water
Column Profiler, both in terms of depth rating and suite of sensors, future
research expeditions are likely to rely heavily on this instrument so it is
important to build up a documented history of performance in terms of
reliability, data quality, and operational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.