* 2221896
* Collaborative Research: How faithfully are melt embayments wedded to magma ascent?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Black, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 105,746.00

Explosive eruptions can cause wide-ranging societal impacts. The explosivity of
a volcanic eruption is controlled in part by how fast magma rises in the
conduit. Directly measuring magma ascent is challenging because it takes place
underground and in a dangerous environment. Small blebs of frozen magma trapped
in crystals, called embayments, may preserve a record of ascent rate in the form
of chemical diffusion gradients that scientists can apply as a kind of magma
speedometer. This embayment technique has been increasingly used to understand
the dynamics of ancient volcanic eruptions. As this speedometer technique grows
in popularity, validating its accuracy is important. Here, a series of
laboratory experiments conducted using real magma at magmatic temperatures and
pressures will recreate magma ascent under controlled conditions to test how
well embayments record this process. Careful comparison between the controlled
lab conditions and the diffusion gradients in the experimental embayments will
clarify “if” and “how?” embayments faithfully record magmatic ascent. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in research methods at CUNY and
Baylor. In addition, public outreach will be performed at the National Museum of
Natural History and the NY Virtual Volcano Observatory in the form of
“Scientist-is-In” sessions and short-format educational videos on magma ascent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the rate of magma ascent in the volcanic
conduit is critical to understanding the timing, magnitude, and behavior of
eruptions. Quenched pockets of melt preserved within embayments are thought to
preserve such rates as compositional gradients controlled by diffusive
equilibration. Past studies using embayments to determine magma ascent rates
have used a few, carefully selected samples and have made reasonable, but
untested, assumptions involving diffusion and decompression pathway. The key
assumptions underlying embayment geospeedometry must be experimentally validated
before it can be confidently used to advance the understanding of volcanic
eruption dynamics. Here, the theoretical basis for embayment geospeedometry will
be systematically tested against focused suites of natural samples and a series
of decompression experiments using natural and synthetic embayments. Important
tests include (1) discovering how well a single embayment represents a batch of
magma, and (2) whether observed diffusion profiles match those predicted from
experimental conditions and key assumptions. If the experimental embayments are
shown to be robust, then embayment geospeedometry will become a valuable tool
for understanding the conditions in volcanic conduits during eruption. If
experimental diffusion profiles are instead shown to not match those predicted
by experimental conditions then the experiments will provide an empirical
framework for exploring the complexities recorded by
embayments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.