* 2221498
* Supporting Talented, Financially Challenged Mechanical Engineering Students Studying Robotics, Autonomous Systems, Machine Intelligence and Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Louis Everett, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), a Minority Servicing
Institution with a student body that is 83% Hispanic. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships for 23 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering.
First-year students will receive scholarships for up to four years. This project
will engage students in Robotics, Autonomous Systems, Machine Intelligence, and
Advanced Manufacturing (RAMIAM), opening up new career possibilities. The
project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking
scholarships with effective supporting activities, including mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, outreach projects, and participation in
discipline-specific conferences. With the help of mentors, the scholars will
create Individual Development Plans outlining their career goals and steps
toward achieving those goals. As a result, the project will provide highly-
skilled and well-rounded engineers in emerging technology areas, helping to
maintain U.S. global advantages in an emerging multidisciplinary area.
Furthermore, the project will contribute to a more diverse and inclusive U.S.
STEM workforce, which is important to fill the current and predicted human
capital vacancies and maintain the economic competitiveness of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields. Three
specific aims guide the project. First is to create awareness among current and
future UTEP students about the importance of developing skills in the different
areas of RAMIAM. Second is to use the well-established outreach mechanisms of
the UTEP’s College of Engineering to identify and recruit talented students with
unmet financial needs and support those students through a mentoring and
engagement program led by faculty and graduate students. Third is to use data
analytics and machine learning to examine patterns in institutional data,
predict student performance, and provide feedback. The project will also design,
implement, and evaluate a new rotational mentoring model that leverages diverse
faculty backgrounds to provide students with multiple perspectives on their
career paths. Results of this project will be made available through a project
website, outreach activities, local and national conferences, and archive
engineering and education journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.