* 2221345
* EAGER:Stochastic Thermodynamics of Distributed Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* David Wolpert, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,888.00

Society is witnessing explosive growth in the deployment of distributed
computational systems, especially in networked system architectures, and their
accompanying software protocols. One of the main performance challenges in these
systems is poor energy efficiency; they dissipate too much heat. Similarly, a
major goal of chip design has been to minimize the heat dissipation of
individual nanoscale components and/or to apply phenomenological laws to reduce
the heat dissipation of the global architecture. However, theoretical computer
science research has focused on the design of algorithms that minimize time and
memory costs per computation. To date there has been little use of first
principles of physics to analyze how the global structural organization of
computers affects their heat dissipation. Thus, the goal of the proposed
research is to develop an understanding of how the physical features of a
distributed computational system (e.g., communication rates, network topology,
and heterogeneity) affect its performance, specifically the relationship between
its heat dissipation, space and time resource costs, robustness, speed, and
computational power. Besides the technical work the project will also undertake:
(i) outreach via new coursework in the context of this project, (ii) support of
mentoring students/postdocs thereby increasing the pool of technically trained
workforce, and (iii) public and media outreach for increasing public
understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project will aim
to start to fill this gap in scientific understanding by exploiting the recently
developed tools of stochastic thermodynamics. The PI will use investigate how
the following features of the global physical architecture of a computer affect
its cost: (1) communication rate and accuracy of information transmission
between subsystems, (2) characteristics of the network topology of the
architecture, particularly hierarchy and modularity, (3) heterogeneity among the
individual subsystems. Specifically, the project will investigate how these
design features affect trade-offs between time, memory, and heat costs; desired
computational capabilities; and robustness against environmental fluctuations or
faulty subsystems. The investigations will involve computer simulations, which
will help reveal patterns and trends in these trade-offs, as well as theoretical
analyses, which will help uncover the mathematical basis of the observed
pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.