* 2221392
* Improved Support for Undergraduates at Community College Engaged in STEM Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Sean Tvelia, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,296.00

Improved Support for Undergraduates at Community College Engaged in STEM
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the national need
for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low- income students
with demonstrated financial need at Suﬀolk County Community
College.&lt;br/&gt;Suﬀolk County Community College is the largest community
college in New York State’s SUNY system, and recently designated a Hispanic-
serving institution. Over its six-year duration, the project will fund
scholarships to 90 unique full- and part-time students pursuing associate
degrees in biology, physical science, computer science, cyber security,
engineering, and mathematics. First-year entering students, as well as
continuing sophomores, will receive scholarships for up to two years. The
project will develop college-wide and campus-based cohorts of interdisciplinary
STEM students to foster the development of peer networks and increase the
persistence and success of high-achieving, low-income students while also
increasing career awareness. Studies have shown that learning communities,
academic coaching, and opportunities for students to engage meaningfully within
their discipline have direct positive impacts on student success, retention, and
completion among under-represented, first- generation, and low-income college
students. This project will also implement intrusive advising techniques to
better identify and address the obstacles faced by students as they proceed
through their chosen degree path. A new career and internship coordinator will
connect individual students with local and regional employers and internship
opportunities. Ancillary oﬀerings provided by the project and open to the
college community will increase awareness of STEM careers and regional workforce
needs while ensuring participating students have the opportunity and resources
to meet or exceed those regional needs and support the vitality and growth of
the nation’s critical STEM industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion among low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. In addition to
scholarships, awardees will benefit from 1) Professional educational and career
advising, academic mentoring, and tutoring; 2) Improved peer and professional
networks; and 3) Authentic research, presentation, and publication
opportunities. The project will reduce the academic isolation that exists within
the commuter student population and which influences student persistence,
success, and completion. The program will provide up to 18 new and 16 continuing
awards annually resulting in up to 90 unique students supported. It is expected
that 85% of scholarship recipients will be retained and 75% will graduate and/or
transfer within 150% of their degree time, which would exceed their non-
participating counterparts by more than 30%. I-SUCCESS will advance
understanding of the factors and activities associated with retention, transfer,
academic and career pathways, and degree attainment. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.