* 2221315
* NRI: Adaptive Wearable Robots for Movement Assistance via Bio-Inspired Sensorimotor Integration
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Terence Sanger, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,474,497.00

This grant will beneficially impact human health and quality of life by enabling
new functionality and improving the state of the art in assistive upper-limb
wearable robots to amplify the functional independence of people with movement
disorders. Upper-limb wearable robots use body-mounted sensors and actuators to
monitor the human user and predict intention to dynamically adapt and provide
physical assistance. These devices are envisioned for long-term daily
assistance, and could therefore become a primary treatment for a variety of
mobility impairments, including cerebral palsy, the most common cause of serious
physical disability in childhood. However, the advancement of wearable robots
has been limited by critical knowledge gaps in the areas of actuator and control
technologies, and such devices are not widely available. This award supports
research to develop novel bio-inspired soft robotic actuators and human-robot
control algorithms to enable comfortable, low-cost, high-power wearable robots
that seamlessly interface with human users. The technologies developed will be
adaptable to general use, including providing physical assistance to the
elderly, and for deployment in manufacturing, nursing, and other industrial
sectors. Through collaborations among academics and clinicians, this project
will form linkages between science and engineering and technology development to
enhance human health. The project integrates K-12 outreach events at the
University of California, Riverside, a Hispanic Serving Institution, to broaden
the participation of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most tasks
in daily life involve physical interaction with the environment, facilitated by
direct modulation of joint impedances. Upper-limb wearable robots arranged
parallel to the joints therefore require impedance modulation capabilities.
However, constraints on the morphology prohibit the use of sophisticated
controllers for physical interaction, including impedance control with high
bandwidth motors. This research will harness biological principles to design
novel wearable robots with direct impedance modulation capabilities, including
leveraging muscle topology, sensorimotor coupling, and exploiting the passive
properties of actuators for stability. The research team will develop novel soft
actuators with impedance modulation capabilities, proprioceptive reflex loops
for actively modulating impedance, and human-in-the-loop controllers to regulate
robot impedance through a non-invasive neural interface. A series of human
experiments will evaluate the efficacy of the prototype devices. This project
will contribute methods and theories in the area of assistive wearable robots
with a focus on pediatric movement impairments, resulting in insight into muscle
coordination, skill acquisitions, and object manipulation in individuals with
motor impairments and neurotypical participants, with and without robotic
assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.