* 2221067
* Supporting Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry and Forensic Science Majors through a Mentorship Network and Career Exploration in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2028
* Susan Yochum, Seton Hill University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 11/30/2028
* USD 749,966.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Seton Hill University, a 4-year liberal arts school located in
Southwestern Pennsylvania. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 15 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, and Forensic Science. First-year students
will receive up to four-years of scholarship support. The project aims to
recruit students from economically-disadvantaged and historically
underrepresented backgrounds from Pittsburgh area high schools during an
outreach event. Once scholars are recruited, the project will use a combination
of group-based and one-on-one mentorship activities along with a social media
connection. Supplemental instruction with a peer mentor will be incorporated in
an organic chemistry course that is known to be a barrier for students in these
majors. A career exploration and opportunities seminar will increase awareness
about research and internship opportunities and about possible career pathways.
Participants will develop an individual development plan (IDP) which includes an
assessment of each scholar’s unique skills, their short- and long-term goals,
and action steps to achieve those goals. The proposed project activities will
benefit society by increasing the number of STEM students from historically
underrepresented populations and generating knowledge about how the combination
of mentorship strategies, including a social media connection, support retention
and graduation of this student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Three specific aims
of the project are to: (1) increase the percentage of students from
underrepresented backgrounds majoring in biology, chemistry, biochemistry, and
forensic science; (2) retain students by increasing the scholars’ sense of
belonging in their major using an innovative mentorship model and providing peer
tutoring for organic chemistry; and (3) increase the graduation rate of biology,
chemistry, biochemistry, and forensic science majors to support the growing
regional STEM workforce. The proposed project will be assessed to better
understand what strategies impact the recruitment, retention, and academic
success of high-achieving, economically disadvantaged STEM majors. In
particular, evaluation will focus on the effectiveness of a single-day outreach
and recruitment activity, the novel mentorship and social media model, and peer-
led team learning in organic chemistry. The project also aims to generate
knowledge about the success of a career-focused seminar series and goal-
orientated IDP for increasing graduation rates and preparedness for the STEM
workforce. Results of the project will be presented at national conferences and
local workshops to build upon the already existing research on impactful STEM
education practices. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.