* 2221965
* CAS-Climate: RUI: Systematic trends of structure-property relations of metal-organic frameworks built from mixed transition metal ions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bangbo Yan, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,966.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The need for alternative
energy sources becomes essential for the growing global population with the
dwindling fossil deposits on earth. Moreover, severe environmental problems
caused by pollutants from fossil fuels are also imperative driving forces for
seeking renewable green energy sources. It is well known that carbon dioxide
reductions under sunlight and appropriate photocatalysts are a tremendous
potential technology for solving the problem. With the support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
Bangbo Yan and Pauline Norris of Western Kentucky University, a predominantly
undergraduate institution, develop new metal-organic framework (MOF) materials,
which contain new metal complexes with two different types of transition metal
ions that are connected by an organic ligand. These materials possess an
essential feature: they can absorb visible light through one type of metal
center and by electron transfer, for example, catalyze carbon dioxide reduction
reactions through the other type of metal center using this light energy. The
principal investigators and their students study how the identity of the
transition metal ions and ligands could affect the photocatalytic properties of
the new MOFs. These new MOFs and fundamental materials chemistry insights gained
from this study can help control climate change and carbon footprint if they are
integrated into devices for harvesting solar energy and catalyzing carbon
dioxide reduction in the future. Beyond these scientific and potentially
technological impacts, this project also provides valuable research
opportunities in STEM to undergraduates at WKU and to local high school
students, including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For
this project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the principal investigators
synthesize and study novel MOFs consisting of metal-complex sensitizers and
reactive centers. They hypothesize that it is possible to design MOFs that
absorb visible light through one type of metal center and by electron transfer,
for example, catalyze carbon dioxide reduction reactions through another type of
metal center with an open metal site using this light energy. To this end they
pursue three distinct objectives aimed at studying the synthesis and structure-
property correlations at the fundamental materials chemistry level: The first
objective is to design and study the role and effect of the identity of 3d
transition metal ions in hetero-metal MOFs; the second objective is to determine
the effect of changing the identity of metal ions (3d, 4d, or 5d) as a
sensitizer in hetero-metal MOFs; and the third is to identify the ligand effects
for hetero-metal MOFs as photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide. The
discoveries are expected to provide an essential theory for the design and
construction of new MOFs with potential applications as photocatalysts and
beyond. Such new materials for solar energy harvesting and carbon dioxide
reduction can potentially help control climate change and control the carbon
footprint. In addition, research students (including undergraduate and high
school students) receive training and education in chemistry through this
research project. Through their scientific research experience, scientific
writing, and presentation at regional/national conferences, students gain
valuable training in critical thinking, scientific methods, writing skills, and
communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.