* 2221890
* WORKSHOP: A Transformational Africa-US STEM University Partnership: A Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Daniel Placht, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,977.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) will hold
a 3-day workshop on â€œA Transformational Africa-US STEM University Partnership".
The workshop will bring together 30-40 senior public officials, and leaders from
university, and the private sector from both Africa and the US. The Workshop
will review experiences, achievements, and best practices of recent large-scale
initiatives to build STEM research and education capacity in materials research
and other related fields such as food security; energy; mining, minerals, and
climate change on the continent and to promote collaboration with US
counterparts. The workshop will also identify priorities for joint work and
innovative modalities for collaboration between US and African universities. The
proceedings will be published by the National Academies Press and disseminated.
The workshop will include a diverse group of attendees, including
underrepresented minorities and early career professionals. The Workshop is
supported by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, the Directorate for Geosciences, and the Office of
International Sciences and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.