* 2221538
* Increase the STEM Pipeline: Investing to Prepare Talented, Low Income Rural Students for Vital STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Laura Berry, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2027
* USD 747,759.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at North Arkansas College, a two-year college serving a rural six-county
area in North Central Arkansas. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 28 unique full- and part-time students who are pursuing
associate’s degrees in Cybersecurity; Data Science; Information Technologies;
and Science, Engineering, and Math. Full-time students will receive two years of
scholarship support. Each S-STEM scholar will be placed in a cohort of students
in the same or a related field of study. Cohorts will share a pair of faculty
and staff mentors, and will have access to a broader Mentoring Network. This
project will also provide career development activities. The target population
for this project are students who may otherwise have to prioritize basic needs
over education. By alleviating financial and other obstacles, these students
will have the opportunity for a rewarding career and social mobility and will
contribute to a more diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific goals
are to (1) provide financial support that will reduce the need for students to
seek outside employment or increase their debt, (2) implement evidence-based
curricular and co-curricular interventions to support students in the targeted
programs, (3) increase the college GPA and graduation rate of students in the
project, and (4) define and disseminate an effective model for student success
in rural STEM programs. Central aspects of the project are the Mentoring Network
and career development. The Mentoring Network, including STEM and non-STEM
faculty, student support personnel, external academic and industry partners, and
academic support staff, will develop and maintain resources and activities to
assist with academic and social needs. Career training activities, with
involvement from committed employer partners, include resume and cover letter
writing, e-Portfolio development, mock interviews, and STEM career talks. An
external evaluator will assess the effectiveness of project components and
outline a model S-STEM program for implementation in rural areas. North Arkansas
College will disseminate results of this project using print, broadcast, web,
and social media, as well as local, regional, and national presentations. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.