* 2221468
* Challenging Problems and Sustainable Solutions - Training a community of Interdisciplinary Sustainability Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Paul Robbins, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
technicians, engineers and mathematicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (UW-Madison). Over its 6-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to at least 26 full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees fields such as engineering, biology,
chemistry, environmental science, and mathematics. It will also support at least
6 junior STEM transfer students. The supported students will enroll in one of
the multiple sustainability-focused certificates available, meet regularly as a
cohort, and will have opportunities to be part of additional professional
development experiences. A distinguishing feature of this project is an
opportunity for paid summer internships at the Office of Sustainability between
the freshman and sophomore year to gain professional experience in
sustainability early in the students’ academic careers. In their junior and
senior years, students will be part of a Community Environmental Scholars
Program seminar, which will help them explore how their STEM discipline and
their sustainability focus can connect to community service. The broader impacts
of the project will improve access to STEM education for low-income students and
ensure their successful degree completion. The project also explicitly connects
STEM students with the broad issues of sustainability and community engagement,
which can help to create well-rounded graduates while also promoting retention
of students in STEM. The intellectual merit of the project involves the
development of methods to educate STEM professionals to meet the strategic
sustainability needs of the United States. The project meets this challenge by
offering cohort-based sustainability training to STEM students from a wide range
of disciplines, and explicitly training those students to work in teams as parts
of a broader community of sustainability professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
project goals and specific aims include increasing the number of low-income STEM
students who are sustainability experts. Sustainability has been suggested as an
attractive theme with which to recruit and retain students. The project will be
evaluated using surveys and interviews to see if it results in better retention
and persistence in challenging STEM disciplines. The project results will be
shared internally, through teaching and learning networks at UW–Madison, and
externally through disciplinary conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.