* 2221895
* I-Corps: A novel gene assay for accurate prognosis and prediction of clinical benefits of chemotherapy for early-stage non-small cell lung cancer
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Nancy Guo, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an assay that addresses the high incidence of tumor recurrence in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) at the time of primary tumor
surgical resection. The product may become part of the standard of care for
stage 1 NSCLC patients at the time of surgical resection of the primary tumor,
and be used to identify those at high-risk who would benefit from early
implementation of chemotherapy to prevent tumor progression and recurrence.
Clinical application of the proposed 7-gene assay may improve patient care and
outcomes for those with lung cancer and reduce healthcare costs for the payers
resulting from the failure of initial treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a 7-gene marker panel that
accurately predicts the risk of recurrence in early-stage NSCLC patients for all
histological subtypes. Employing novel artificial intelligence (AI) methods, the
assay also predicts the clinical benefits of receiving adjuvant chemotherapy in
both proof-of-concept training and validation sample sets. This 7-gene assay may
identify high-risk early-stage NSCLC patients following primary tumor resection
for cancer recurrence, inform oncologists of the risk of recurrence to improve
patient management, and recommend early implementation of platinum-based
chemotherapy for high-risk stage 1 NSCLC patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.