* 2221576
* NRI: Electronically Integrated Microscopic Robot Swarms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Blaauw, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 900,000.00

The dream of microrobot swarms has been around for decades in nanoscience,
robotics and science fiction. Built like semiconductor electronics, such robots
could be made millions at a time, each costing just fractions of a penny. Swarms
of these tiny machines could work together to carry out useful tasks like
assembling circuits from prefabricated electronic components, repairing
microscale cracks in materials, or potentially healing the body at its smallest
scales. For decades this vision has been unrealized, but 50 years of Mooreâ€™s law
scaling have resulted in an amazing miniaturization of electronic components and
systems raising the possibility that microscale robot swarms may finally be
within reach. This award supports work towards building the first swarm of
electronically controlled, programmable robots, each one ten times smaller than
the period at the end of this sentence. As each machine is mass-manufactured and
can be reprogramed, this research takes a major step towards an affordable
system that enables new researchers or industry partners to manipulate the
microworld with precision and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project sets
the goal of a robot swarm with 10,000 programmable agents, each no larger than a
few hundred microns on a side. That is, the research team aims to shrink the
size of the smallest programmable robot ten-fold and to simultaneously make a
swarm with ten times more agents than the state of the art. To reach these
scales, the team pursues several innovations in circuits, robotics, and
nanofabrication that address the fundamental constraints on propulsion, memory,
and communication that arise from microscale physics. First, the research team
plans to leverage concepts from lubrication theory to make robots that walk
quickly and turn reliably in viscous fluids, despite the low frictional forces
associated with low mass locomotion. For precise localization and organization,
the team will develop hardware schemes based on global beacon sensing and
communication strategies where robots drive and detect electrochemistry in the
surrounding fluid environment. Finally, the swarm algorithms specially tailored
to address the extreme memory constraints of programmable microscale machines
will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.