* 2221107
* Supporting Transportation Scholars through Scholarships, Mentoring, and Cohort Building
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Robert Vlacich, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,498,465.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students (Transportation Scholars) with
demonstrated financial need at Pennsylvania College of Technology (Penn
College). Penn College is an open-enrollment, public, four-year college
affiliated with Pennsylvania State University. The college offers an array of
academic programs with a strong emphasis on applied technology. Over its 6-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 45 unique full-time students
who are pursuing Associate’s degrees in Aviation Maintenance, Automotive,
Collision Repair, and Diesel Technologies. Transportation Scholars will benefit
from numerous academic and social supports, including a three-day pre-
orientation bridge program before their first day of class; co-seating in a
common First-Year Experience course taught by the PI; a monthly Career Seminar;
dedicated advising, mentoring, and career coaching by faculty throughout their
college experience, including the summer months; and a video series that will
contextualize mathematics for these fields. The intellectual merit of this
project comes from measuring the success of the Transportation Scholars Program
in comparison to similar student populations at Penn College that do not benefit
from the same financial, academic, and social supports. Penn College will
attract, educate, retain, and graduate 45 low-income, high-achieving students to
join the workforce of the future in critical areas surrounding the
transportation industry. The Transportation Scholars program also seeks to
diversify the student population in these critical fields and, by extension,
contribute to the development of a diverse workforce in the transportation
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Over the course of the project period, the project
will meet the following five specific aims: 1) 50% of the Transportation
Scholars will complete the required math sequences with a grade of B or better;
2) 90% of Transportation Scholars entering as freshmen will be retained until
their second year; 3) 75% of Transportation Scholars will complete an AAS degree
within three years; 4) 95% of graduating scholars will be employed full-time in
their field or continue their education within six months of completion of the
AAS degree; and 5) 33% of scholarship applications will be from females and/or
underrepresented students in STEM. Project evaluation will examine both program
implementation and student outcomes to determine how well each component meets
participant expectations and helps achieve program outcomes. Input to the
evaluation will be collected through surveys and interviews of students,
faculty, and administrators, as well as through extant data on course grades,
and retention and graduation rates. Project findings will be prepared for
publication in peer-reviewed and trade magazines, as well as business and
industry magazines. Penn College will offer professional development workshops
to disseminate knowledge to the campus, peer institutions, and the community at
large. The curated contextualizing mathematics videos and associated curricular
materials, along with the evaluation of their effectiveness, will be made
available for dissemination beyond Penn College via hosting on a publicly
available platform (YouTube, SlideShare, etc.). The PIs, project team, and
mathematics faculty will present these results at relevant conferences and
workshops and will announce the availability of these videos through their
professional and social network. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.