* 2221891
* TRTech-PGR: Rapid Transformation and Editing in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bing Yang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

Transformation and gene editing are critical procedures for genomic analysis and
will be important for agriculture in the coming years to keep pace with the need
to feed the world. There are two aspects to the recovery of stable transgenes
and gene edits in plants, namely introducing the new genes into plant cells and
then the subsequent recovery of the transformed or edited cells. This project
will develop a system in corn for placing transgenes at predetermined sites in
the genome in a recombination reaction as opposed to the standard procedure of
random integration. The system is designed to be able to continue to add new
genes at these pre-determined sites with subsequent transformation events. This
system will be introduced into a fast-flowering mini-maize variety that can be
grown up to 6-7 generations per year. This variety is not only fast developing
but also smaller than normal corn and thus can be grown in growth chambers in
controlled environments. This variety can be used to induce and edit haploids of
maternal plants with only one copy of the genome that can then be doubled into
edited diploids. The target lines can be normal corn of any variety, so the
editing of any line of corn can be rapid using this technique. If successful, an
extremely efficient and extremely rapid technique for both transformation and
gene editing of various sorts will be available to the plant biology community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landing pads that will accept additions mediated by phiC31
integrase will be placed on five different normal chromosomes of maize in two
different versions of fast flowering mini-maize. A copy of the landing pad on
the B chromosome will allow gene stacking on this supernumerary chromosome that
can be used for increasing the copy number of transgenes or removal of the same
via the nondisjunction property of the B at the mitosis that produces the two
sperm. The phiC31 integrase will be used to place genes at landing pads and
recovered using selectable markers and a morphogenic regulator. The selectable
marker and morphogenic regulator will be removed using Cre recombinase,
retaining the gene cargo. Multiple subsequent additions of genes can be added to
the same sites through a reiterative process. Gene stacking at the landing pads
will be conducted as a proof of concept to place multiple genes into the genome.
Gene editing has become an integral part of genomic analysis so the system will
be adapted by converting the stacking lines to haploid inducers. These lines can
produce edits in haploid genomes to be doubled to recover the edits or crossed
as females to rescue the edits as heterozygotes in the same inbred line. Once a
specific haploid inducing editing line is produced for specific gene targets,
the stock can be perpetuated and used to edit any line regardless of its
transformability and without the need for tissue culture. All project outcomes
will be readily accessible by the public. Sequence data will be available
through the NCBI SRA/GEO and biological resources either upon request or through
long-term repositories such as the Maize Genetic Cooperation Stock Center and
Addgene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.