* 2221187
* Enhanced Learning and Training Experiences to Support Talented, Low-Income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2029
* Jorge Rebaza, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2029
* USD 1,499,928.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Missouri State University. Over its 6-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 27 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degree in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and
Physics, Astronomy &amp; Material Science. First-year students will receive up
to four years of support through scholarships. In addition to providing
substantial scholarships to reduce the participants’ need to work or their need
to increase their debt, this project will implement high quality evidence-based
curricular and co-curricular activities to support their success, including
proactive advising, tutoring, faculty and peer mentoring, participation at
professional conferences, as well as increased access to research opportunities,
internships, guest speakers from graduate schools and industry. The intellectual
merit of this project is to advance knowledge by implementing, monitoring, and
documenting targeted best practices on student success, with approaches that
build on current research in the literature. This project will positively impact
participating students, their families and their communities beyond graduation
and it will serve as a successful model for meaningful, intentional, and
sustainable support for STEM education, especially for financially challenged
students. Ultimately, this project will help promote more equitable
participation in STEM and will provide students with solid opportunities to
transform the challenge of coming from a lower socio-economic status into a
rewarding career, thus achieving social mobility, and contribute to our national
competitiveness and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates in STEM fields. This project will academically and financially
support the success of students entering STEM disciplines who have unmet
financial needs to promote successful graduation. The expected student outcomes
of this project are increased retention and graduation rates of participants,
improved grades in their introductory gateway courses, and increased number of
them pursuing graduate school in a STEM discipline or joining the STEM workforce
directly. The project will be evaluated using a mixed-methods approach by
collecting and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data and conducting
formative and summative assessments to discover factors that support or hinder
success in this context. The main findings will be disseminated across campus,
on the project’s website and in academic journals and professional conferences.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.