* 2221453
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Advanced Molecular Architectures for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anastassia Alexandrova, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Advanced Molecular Architectures for Quantum Information
Science is supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Anastassia Alexandrova in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA)
will lead a research team composed of Assistant Professor Justin Caram
(Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA), Distinguished Professor Miguel Garcia-
Garibay (Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA), Professor Eric Hudson (Physics and
Astronomy, UCLA), and Professor Anna Krylov (Chemistry, University of Southern
California) to develop new molecular and surface platforms that contain
molecular appendages that can act as quantum bits (qubits). These “quantum
functional groups” have particular magnetic spin and electric charge, which can
be excited with lasers and prepared into “superpositions” of quantum states—the
fundamental building block of a quantum computer. However, unlike current
quantum computing platforms, which are built from the top down and are limited
to less than 100 qubits, quantum functional groups on molecules can be made and
scaled to trillions of identical addressable qubits, potentially providing a
novel architecture for enormous quantum computers. Computational programs based
on qubits are expected to solve problems at much higher speeds than classical
computers and simulate complicated systems that are beyond the capabilities of
any current computer. Such quantum approaches may also revolutionize ultra-
secure communications (quantum Internet) and ultra-precise chemical and physical
measurements (quantum sensing). Using the rules of chemistry and the tools of
molecular design and synthesis, coupled with advanced spectroscopy and
computation, the Center will make use of unrealized molecular complexity to
develop quantum information systems that enable substantially more flexible,
scalable, and achievable quantum systems. As a result, the Center will tailor
the systems to meet a variety of quantum information science (QIS) needs in
sensing and computing, while simultaneously opening a new branch of chemistry,
namely, the chemistry of QIS. The center will also engage researchers at the
intersection of multiple traditional disciplines, where the future of QIS
resides. The Center’s team will advance education via workshops, innovative
courses and modules, and a teachers education program. Students will be
recruited at all levels and from diverse backgrounds using innovative
strategies, and the contributions of women and underrepresented groups will be
promoted through Center activities, while growing the QIS community centered in
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving quantum enhancement in sensing,
communication, and computing requires the high-fidelity preparation,
maintenance, and readout of defined quantum states, which then would be
resistant to decoherence and amenable to entanglement. So far, the most
successful systems that exhibit such clean quantum states are those of extreme
simplicity: atoms, very small molecules in vacuo, and defects in solids. Because
the electronic states in these systems are “closed”, i.e., strictly localized to
an atom or a defect, they can be optically cycled without dissipation to the
environment, and decoherence can be managed. However, what is gained in
coherence, is lost in system complexity and thus flexibility, scalability and
eventual practicability. This NSF Center will use the rules of chemistry to
substantially expand the repertoire of systems, and therefore the capabilities,
available for QIS. We will design molecules that carry qubit functionalities (or
quantum functional groups), by using chemical complexity rather than avoiding
it. Because molecules are identical and can be synthesized in molar quantities,
they can be assembled into scalable, next-generation quantum information
platforms - a combination of features not yet realized. Broader impacts will
include education of researchers at the intersection of traditional disciplines:
physical, synthetic, and theoretical chemistry, and physics. We will recruit
students at all levels and from diverse backgrounds, using innovative recruiting
strategies, such as through research days for visiting undergraduate students,
and young researchers at the moment of transfer from Community Colleges.
Promoting women and underrepresented groups will be central to all Center
activities. The Center will make a significant effort toward building the QIS
community housed in the field of chemistry, through organizing symposia,
bootcamps, workshops, cross-departmental courses, innovative modules for
undergraduate classes, and regular communication of all researchers of the
center, from all involved backgrounds. The Center will develop a teacher
education program, through which they will be provided visualization tools that
will amplify their ability to reach large numbers of high school students.
Outreach to the public will be done by growing and diversifying established,
successful platforms, such as the Explore Your Universe event by the Division of
Physical Sciences of UCLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.