* 2221923
* Understanding Excimers in Molecular J- and H-aggregates: A Holstein-Peierls Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2026
* USD 381,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical/computational
research and education on how light interacts with semiconductor materials made
of organic molecules. The more familiar semiconductors like silicon, which is
widely used in microelectronics and computer chips, are inorganic. However,
semiconductors based on organic molecules offer advantages such as less
expensive materials processing and more favorable mechanical properties. Organic
materials continue to make inroads into commercial devices, such as organic
light-emitting diodes or OLEDs used in displays (the “OLED” TV), solar cells,
which convert sunlight into electrical energy, and even “wearable” electronic
devices and sensors. The PI and his research team will investigate fundamental
processes such as light absorption and light emission in organic crystals and
aggregates, as well as how the energy from light absorption is transported
between molecules - similar to what occurs in plants during the process of
photosynthesis. The research team will conduct a theoretical investigation by
solving equations based on quantum mechanics which describe how organic
molecules respond to light. The equations will be solved using sophisticated
computer algorithms. Of particular interest are certain electronic excited
states known as excimers, which emit light of longer wavelengths and convert
electronic energy into light energy less efficiently. The PI and his team will
study how such excimers form and ultimately how to design molecular aggregates
which avoid excimer formation. The proposed activities will also enhance
research infrastructure through collaborations with experimentalists such as
Professor Libai Huang at Purdue University, who will employ state-or-the-art
experimental techniques to probe energy transport in organic films. Overall,
this research effort should contribute to a blueprint for the next generation of
electronic devices based on organic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education on how light is absorbed or emitted from semiconductor materials
made of organic molecules. Solid phases of pi-conjugated molecules and polymers
continue to receive widespread attention as semiconducting materials in field
effect transistors, light emitting diodes, and solar cells. However, despite the
more than five decades of intensive experimental and theoretical research
following Kasha's pioneering work on molecular H- and J-aggregates, important
questions remain regarding the fate of photo-excitations and how their spectral
signatures depend on crystal packing and morphology. The PI’s group has extended
Kasha’s model, which is predicated entirely on long-range Coulombic coupling, to
include short-range (super-exchange) coupling arising from intermolecular
charge-transfer, as well as local coupling to the vinyl-stretching mode
responsible for pronounced vibronic progressions in the UV-Vis spectra of a
great many conjugated molecules. Although the model can predict with
quantitative accuracy details of the absorption spectral line shape and
correlate spectral features to the nature of the underlying excitons, it is
limited in its ability to describe photoluminescence and energy transport,
processes which often require the inclusion of excimers. Excimers, common in pi-
conjugated molecules, arise when an electronic excited state relaxes along a
“slow” intermolecular (phonon) coordinate resulting in featureless, red-shifted
emission. In this project, the next generation of molecular H- and J-aggregate
models will be developed which account for excimer formation and emission. The
approach is based on a Holstein-Peierls Hamiltonian which includes electronic
coupling along the slow-coordinate, is particularly strong in closely packed
systems like π-stacks, where the intermolecular electron and hole transfer
integrals are hypersensitive to small, sub-Angstrom, changes in the relative
orientation of neighboring chromophores. The Holstein-Peierls approach enables
all of the important physical processes to be treated on equal footing and fully
quantum-mechanically. The model will be employed to account for the absorption
and photoluminescence spectral line shapes in excimer-forming perylene diimide
dimer complexes and larger π-stacks. The ability of excimers to function as
energy traps will be investigated through analysis of the density matrix
equations of motion. Libai Huang at Purdue University will collaborate and
provide experimental validation by conducting spectroscopic measurements and
femtosecond-resolved transport measurements of several perylene diimide
derivatives which display varying degrees of excimer emission. The PI’s approach
may enhance the likelihood for discovering new and potentially useful physical
phenomena, as well as design strategies for controlling excimer formation for
device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.