* 2221570
* Collaborative Research: NRI: Shape-Based Remote Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Rodney Roberts, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 606,545.00

Remote presence systems, consisting of operator interfaces coupled to avatar
robots, promise new ways of connecting people across the barrier of distance.
For example, the technology will enable physicians to incorporate physical
examinations into telehealth, and families to care for elderly relatives as they
age in place. Present systems, however, can be slow and frustrating to use due
to limited haptic capabilities: operators cannot easily feel remote objects as
if they were in their own hands. To address this, a new paradigm in
telemanipulation, Shape-Based Remote Manipulation (SBRM), will be developed.
SBRM integrates novel multi-finger haptic devices with mathematical models of
grasped objects to enable dexterous in-hand telemanipulation. In addition to
developing novel technology, this project will also make an educational impact
both within and outside the partner universities. The investigators will recruit
and train a majority BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and People of Color) group of
graduate students on this research. Additionally, the research team will design
and host a tele-touch exhibit to be called “The Shape Beaming Experience” where
students at The Challenger Learning Center in Tallahassee, Florida, can
physically interact with students at the Museum of Science and Industry in
Chicago, Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Shape-Based Remote
Manipulation (SBRM) is to overcome a fundamental issue in telemanipulation,
namely the trade-off between stability/robustness and performance in the face of
communication latencies. It accomplishes this through a novel integration of
RGB-D data, geometric models, compliant robotic hands and arms, and bilateral
control, along with innovations in multi-finger haptic feedback and shape-based
controls. The project will be executed in four parts. First, a state-of-the-art
remote manipulation testbed will be developed spanning two university campuses
nearly 1,000 miles apart. Second, techniques for obtaining semantic, geometric,
and physical information about objects in the avatar's environment will be
developed. Third, a novel Shape Interface will be created, allowing operators to
grasp, feel and manipulate virtual objects. Fourth, a set of shape-based control
techniques that coordinate operator and avatar dexterity will be developed. The
project will lead to new knowledge about the factors impacting remote in-hand
dexterity, especially the role of shape-based haptic information. One aspect of
the work will be a novel multi-finger haptic interface that constrains the
fingers to extremely rigid virtual surfaces, enabling heretofore infeasible
studies of shape information in haptic perception and dexterous manipulation.
Another aspect of the work will be a new approach to telemanipulation based on
differential geometry that aims to combine the robustness benefits of unilateral
control with the performance benefits of bilateral
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.