* 2221321
* Transfer to Interdisciplinary Natural and Mathematical Sciences (TraIN) 2.0
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Lara Ferry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,499,702.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Arizona State University’s New College of Interdisciplinary Arts &amp;
Sciences. Arizona State University serves a large proportion of Pell eligible,
non-traditional and transfer students. Over its 5-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships for 45 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in interdisciplinary natural and mathematical science majors
including biology, forensic science, environmental science,
pharmacology/toxicology, biotechnology, statistics, applied mathematics, and
applied computing. Transfer students from partner community colleges and
preparatory academies will receive scholarships for up to 3 years. This project
aims to support students with great potential but fewer opportunities to achieve
a college education in high-demand STEM fields within Arizona and across the
United States. Students will be retained and supported in their undergraduate
degree programs through relationships with faculty mentors, their peer cohort,
alumni from the original scholarship project, peer mentors, professionals who
will offer “soft skill” workshops, and industry mentors through shadowing in a
research laboratory. As an institution with a diverse population of low-income
and non-traditional transfer students, this project has the potential to broaden
participation within the STEM workforce in the southwestern U.S. and beyond.
Furthermore, it will continue to develop a network of scholars who will support
future graduating scholars as they enter the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. This proposal builds on a current project that
created a transfer consortium in the Phoenix metropolitan area between three
Hispanic-Serving community colleges and the New College of Interdisciplinary
Arts and Science at Arizona State University. This new project expands the reach
to additional community college and high school partners in the Phoenix
metropolitan area. The project will support 45 unique scholars at Arizona State
University for up to three years with scholarships of up to $10,000/year, as
they work toward a STEM degree. Additionally, the project will remove barriers
to student participation in research and internships that improve STEM workforce
readiness. This scholarship project plans to study the effectiveness of
implementing research and/or internship shadowing with a low-income, diverse and
primarily non-traditional transfer population. Project findings should advance
the understanding of how less formal shadowing experiences with peer and faculty
mentors increase student confidence about seeking out and engaging with longer-
term research/internship experiences. Furthermore, the project intends to
examine whether students who engage in longer-term research and internship
experiences are more likely than their peer group to enter the STEM workforce or
graduate school after graduation. This project hopes to build STEM talent by
adding new professionals from, and returning these graduates to, the high-need
Phoenix job market. These newly minted professionals will be highly connected
with other STEM professionals in interdisciplinary fields through shadowing and
internship experiences, allowing them to be influential innovators for the
future of STEM, and mentors to STEM students who follow in their footsteps.
Project staff will disseminate best practices to other colleges and universities
by hosting a workshop, presenting at events such as the AZ Transfer Summit and
various national and international meetings, and through publications. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.