* 2221948
* Collaborative Research: SZ4D Catalyst
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 61,473.00

Despite the global urgency to mitigate the risk from geohazards, we still have
limited understanding of the fundamental drivers behind earthquakes, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions, and landslides, and thus their predictability in time and
space. The SZ4D (Subduction Zones in Four Dimensions) initiative is a community-
driven effort that strives to address this need directly by coordinating and
enabling fundamental research on the underlying physical and chemical
characteristics and processes specifically in subduction zones. SZ4D seeks to
answer the following questions: When and where do large damaging earthquakes
happen? How do trans-crustal processes initiate eruptions at arc volcanoes? How
do events within Earth’s atmosphere, hydrosphere, and solid Earth generate and
transport sediment across subduction zone landscapes and seascapes? What
fraction of a subduction zone’s energy budget goes into building and shaping
subduction zone land- and seascapes? How can we transform the mindset of our
geoscience community to embrace education, outreach, accessibility, capacity
building, diversity, equity, inclusion, and social justice as critical
components for the success of the SZ4D and future scientific endeavors by the
geosciences community? Answering these questions will require a substantial
infrastructure investment in the form of instrumental arrays accompanied by
support for field, modeling and laboratory science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expansive vision of SZ4D needs cost estimates, time phasing and project planning
in order to prepare for full submission to the Foundation and any partnering
agencies. This proposal lays out a plan to accomplish this development quickly.
The major components of this proposed SZ4D catalyst effort are: 1) A staffed
center that will organize the work and build equity and capacity in the
Geosciences (BECG) following a Collective Impact model. 2) Technical project
management to realistically evaluate costs and trade-offs of the instrumentation
options. 3) Preparatory work for the geological, modeling and laboratory
facilities which include workshops and modest engineering design work. All of
these specific activities were strategically selected because they directly
affect high-priority elements of the draft implementation plan and have
identifiable, tractable development needs that should be addressed prior to
launch of a full SZ4D program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.