* 2221167
* Collaborative Research: NRI: Understanding Underlying Risks and Sociotechnical Challenges of Powered Wearable Exoskeleton to Construction Workers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Susan Simkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

A wide range of wearable robots are emerging as solutions to human operation
challenges in the construction sector. The aim for such solutions is to reduce
work-related physical injuries among workers by providing lift support, weight
dispersion, and posture correction. In spite of the potential of these wearable
robots in reducing the physical demands of construction workers, the current
body of knowledge does not provide an adequate understanding of the risks and
challenges of incorporating these robots on construction sites. Given the large
number of back-related injuries in the construction industry, this research
contributes to supporting the design and widespread use of powered back-support
robots in the construction industry. By understanding the potential physical,
psychological, and socio-technical risks of these wearable robots at
construction sites, this project aims to overcome the challenges of scalable
adoption of these wearable robots in the construction industry, thereby
improving the safety and productivity of 7.5 million workers in the U.S.
construction sector. Furthermore, this research will provide empirical evidence
for manufacturers to design more adaptable, accessible, acceptable, and
comfortable wearable robots for a wider range of body shapes and sizes to take
into account diverse populations of the construction
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research seeks to integrate
advances across a diverse spectrum of critical innovations, including immersive
technologies, physiological sensing, wearable robots, and organizational
psychology, to identify the underlying physical, psychological, and socio-
technical risks of exoskeletons in the construction sector. The technical aims
of this project are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust will utilize a
socio-technical perspective to identify barriers and facilitators to the
adoption of exoskeletons in the construction industry. The second thrust will
generate an immersive and interactive virtual-reality testbed for the feasible
simulation of different construction tasks executed using these exoskeletons. In
particular, this thrust will develop a user-centered, simulated workspace to
seamlessly examine different interactions for a safe and feasible evaluation of
pertinent physical and psychological risks. The third thrust will design a novel
worker-centered risk assessment framework for evaluating the physical and
psychological risks of using these exoskeletons for construction workers.
Specifically, this thrust will integrate artificial intelligence and objective
evaluations to develop a new interpretive pipeline between physiological and
psychophysiological data with local muscular fatigue, fall risk, joint
hyperextension, cognitive workload, trust, and vigilance of workers during the
construction tasks. These three research aims will be complemented by a
comprehensive evaluation plan featuring three intermediate evaluations to ensure
the reliability of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.