* 2221907
* Collaborative Research: Probing zircon reactivity in aqueous solutions at solubility equilibrium using isotope tracers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chen Zhu, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 73,371.00

The mineral zircon provides an invaluable source of information on Earth's
history that extends further back in time than any other minerals (4.1 billion
years) due to zircon's extraordinary stability. However, the rock record
provides evidence of occasional zircon instability in the Earth's crust and
mantle caused by radiation damage and possibly interaction with fluids,
resulting in zircon recrystallization. While it has been hypothesized that hot
fluids can cause zircon to recrystallize, this hypothesis has not been tested in
the laboratory. Because recrystallized zones in zircon can be dated, knowledge
of how those zones formed can aid in the interpretation of measured ages,
allowing for a more accurate reconstruction of the history of Earth and other
planets from which we retrieve zircon-bearing rocks. Knowledge of the mechanisms
and conditions of zircon stability should also help evaluate the feasibility of
using zircon to safely store highly toxic and radioactive contaminants in
geological repositories. STEM workforce training in experimental and analytical
techniques will be provided to diverse participants ranging in experience from
high school to post-doctoral researchers in laboratories and meeting
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to simulate in the laboratory
the process of zircon recrystallization by conducting innovative isotope tracer
experiments on zircon-fluid mixtures at high pressures and temperatures. The
experimental materials will be characterized using state-of-the-art
microanalysis techniques. The following hypotheses will be tested: 1) zircon
recrystallizes in aqueous fluid via a dissolution â€“ reprecipitation mechanism
that can be detected through measurable Si and O isotope exchange; 2) at the
same conditions, small zircon grains will recrystallize, while large grains will
not; 3) development of a reaction rim will hinder further reaction, slowing the
rate of growth of the reaction rim; 4) large grains of metamict zircon will be
replaced by crystalline zircon at a measurable rate, and 5) the replacement of
metamict zircon by crystalline zircon proceeds at a constant Si concentration,
but the recrystallization rates can be measured with temporal changes in Si and
O isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.