* 2221391
* Collaborative Planning Grant: Bridging Rural Access in Virginia – Building Partnerships for STEM Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Matthew Goff, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,984.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by strengthening collaborations and
planning for a future Track 3 S-STEM proposal that will support the retention
and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need at Dabney S. Lancaster Community College, Danville Community
College, Longwood University, Virginia Western Community College, and two
additional Virginia Community College System institutions. To address the
nation’s and Virginia’s increasing demand for STEM professionals and, at the
same time, consider the unique needs of rural communities, these institutions
will develop a detailed plan to support students in rural Virginia as they earn
their associate’s degrees and transition to earn their STEM bachelor’s degrees.
In this one-year planning period, the project will work to strengthen existing
partnerships and hold a collaborative STEM Summit focused on rural students. The
Track 3 S-STEM proposal that will arise from this effort will be informed by
high school and industry partners. This future proposal will also include
rigorous research and evaluation efforts aimed at assessing project outcomes and
generating important new knowledge for the STEM education community. The project
team will build on the strong foundation of Virginia’s statewide transfer
initiative and emphasize the importance of both expanding transfer pathways and
increasing rural student opportunities and accomplishments in the STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this planning project is to strengthen
collaborations and prepare for a future Track 3 proposal to increase STEM degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Aspiring STEM students in rural communities face challenges that
include unreliable access to high-quality internet, unequal access to advanced
high school coursework, and financial obstacles for many families, school
systems, and communities. This project will engage students, faculty and staff
members, high school teachers, and industry partners to better understand the
strengths, needs, and challenges of low-income students in Virginia’s southern
and southwestern communities. Faculty and staff members will work to identify
specific and achievable strategies for engaging aspiring STEM students. The
project will design a Track 3 S-STEM proposal that includes rich support
services for community college students, provides significant scholarship
funding, and facilitates scholars’ transfer to a four-year STEM program. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.