* 2221098
* Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Exploration of Microstructure-Sensitive Design for Steel Microstructure Optimization to Enhance its Corrosion Resistance in Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Amir Poursaee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 245,238.00

Corrosion of carbon steel in concrete is the most common and costly
deterioration mechanism of steel-reinforced concrete structures. Corrosion costs
in US are equivalent to about 3 to 4 percent of the gross domestic product
(GDP). The annual cost of corrosion of just highway bridges to the US economy is
estimated to be US$23-31 billion. Furthermore, corrosion reduces the lifetime of
civil infrastructure and leads to increased use of material. This, in turn,
increases the carbon footprint of the construction industry and affects climate
change mitigation strategies. Thus, it is critical to develop and utilize
innovative, inexpensive, and effective corrosion-resistant steel to minimize
this burden on the US economy and on the environment. Carbon steel is the most
used reinforcing material in concrete due to its availability and low cost. The
central hypothesis underpinning this collaborative research project is that the
carbon steel microstructure can be optimized to enhance its corrosion resistance
in a concrete environment. Studying the quantitative correlations between
microstructure and corrosion properties is challenging since the corresponding
microstructure design space is very large. Traditional design approaches are
woefully inadequate for systematically exploring such large design spaces and
identifying optimal solutions. Microstructure-sensitive design and materials
knowledge systems employ a comprehensive and quantitative microstructure
treatment, which together with emergent machine learning tools can address the
grand challenge described above. An equally important and novel component of
this project lies in exploiting high-throughput strategies to collect and curate
high-value experimental data. In order to address this need, novel high-
throughput strategies, both in synthesizing material sample libraries spanning a
wide range of distinct microstructures and evaluating their microstructures and
corrosion performances, will be designed and implemented. This research aims to
have far-reaching social, political, and economic impacts by enabling
researchers and material developers with the fundamental tools to hypothesize,
design, optimize, and test new materials to mitigate issues associated with
steel corrosion in reinforced concrete structures in a cost-effective way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific novelty of the approach lies in its ability
to predict the influence of the microstructure of carbon steel on its corrosion
performance. These insights can be used to tune the microstructure to optimize
the corrosion resistance of the steel without changing the steel chemistry. The
main impetus for this research comes from the need to (1) elucidate the poorly
understood linkages between corrosion and the microstructure of carbon steel in
an alkaline concrete environment, and (2) bridge a critical knowledge gap
related to optimizing the microstructure-sensitive corrosion resistance of
steels. This work is focused on four thrusts: (1) high-throughput synthesis of
samples, (2) high-throughput characterization of corrosion performance, (3)
microstructure feature engineering and building machine learning models, and (4)
designing and fabricating steel with an optimal
microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.