* 2221783
* I-Corps:   Automated sound analysis tool for early detection of arteriovenous fistula stenosis/failure in hemodialysis patients
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* George Shih, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of biomedical acoustic analysis software. Sounds produced by the
body often reflect underlying pathophysiological processes and are easy to
collect but difficult to interpret. The proposed concept is to revolutionize
auscultation, an important element of the physical exam, and transform it from a
qualitative art to a quantitative science. Potential applications include the
analysis of heart sounds, blood flow sounds, lung sounds, cough sounds, bowel
sounds, nerve conduction sound signals, and muscle cell contraction sound
signals. Early detection of potential problems from biomedical acoustic analysis
may initiate the necessary preventative actions, mitigating downstream costs and
improving patient quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps project is
based on the development of an artificial intelligence (AI) system that is
designed to detect signs of early stenosis of arteriovenous (AV) fistulas in
hemodialysis patients using biomedical acoustic analysis. At points of abnormal
blood vessel narrowing, turbulent flow produces distinct frequencies,
vibrations, and sound characteristics from laminar flow. The proposed AI
software system comprises of a machine learning model that may be used to
classify fistulas as either patent or stenotic based on the acoustic signals and
their relative variations along the vascular access. The machine learning model
is trained on AV fistula recordings collected using a digital stethoscope and
flow statuses validated by duplex ultrasound. In previous studies, the machine
learning model achieved an accuracy of 80% in classifying AV fistula
patency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.