* 2221747
* Research Infrastructure: Sustaining the ABRC: Arabidopsis genomic and genetic seed and DNA stocks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* David Somers, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,007,779.00

A new award is made to Ohio State University to support the Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center (ABRC). The ABRC mission is to collect, preserve,
reproduce, and distribute resources related to the plant Arabidopsis thaliana
(Arabidopsis) for use in research and education. Arabidopsis is an important
plant model and results from Arabidopsis research inform research and
development in other living systems including crop plants, animals, and even
humans. The ABRC maintains a collection of over a million resources derived from
Arabidopsis and closely related plants. Important and frequently requested
resources include seed lines collected from around the world representing the
full spectrum of natural variation in Arabidopsis, and seed lines with induced
mutations in almost every Arabidopsis gene for investigating gene function.
These resources were developed by researchers in the US and around the world and
are catalogued and stored in optimal conditions. The ABRC actively promotes the
use of Arabidopsis in plant science education. Local K-12 students are served
via in-school programming and field trips to ABRC laboratories and growth
facilities. Teachers utilizing Greening the Classroom and TRAINED education
kits, or using Arabidopsis to develop their own protocols, receive in-person or
remote support. Public outreach includes participation in WestFest, a science
and sustainability festival hosted at The Ohio State University, as well as
activity booths at The Ohio State Fair, and the Big Science Celebration festival
at the Columbus science museum, Center of Science and Industry
(COSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ABRCâ€™s long-term goals are: 1) to provide
cutting-edge biological resources to the Arabidopsis and broader plant science
community at an accessible price, 2) to maintain the existing collection to
ensure continued access to high quality resources, 3) to continue to add to the
collection though acquisition of Arabidopsis resources projected to be highly
requested and new types of resources based on the needs of the community, 4) to
provide free access to curated stock information, and 5) to continue the role of
ABRC as a resource for education and outreach. Materials and bioinformatic
information supplied by the ABRC to the plant research community ensure adequate
resources are available worldwide and offers the most comprehensive Arabidopsis
seed and DNA stocks in the world. The ABRC maintains a web site, accessed by
approximately 2,000 users per week, providing access to information and a
platform for ordering Arabidopsis resources. Close to 100,000 samples are
shipped each year to researchers and educators in the US and 82 other
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.