* 2221230
* Supporting Degree Completion in Engineering and Engineering Technology Programs through Experiential Learning and Self-Directed Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2029
* Edmond Rusjan, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2029
* USD 749,633.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the State University of New York (SUNY) Polytechnic Institute. Over its
6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 20 unique full-time
first-year and transfer students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Civil
Engineering, Civil Engineering Technology, Mechanical Engineering, and
Mechanical Engineering Technology. First-year students will receive up to four
years of scholarships while transfer students will receive up to three years of
scholarships depending on the estimated time to degree. The project aims to
increase first-year and transfer student persistence by linking scholarships
with effective supporting activities, including enhanced pre-college mathematics
preparation, a seminar series, academic advising, faculty mentorship, a self-
directed professional development fund, and experiential learning opportunities
such as internships and undergraduate research. The project will identify the
most impactful initiatives for first-year and transfer students regarding
improved retention, degree completion, and increased identity and self-efficacy
as an engineer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. STEM graduates are tasked with solving the
critical challenges of today and tomorrow, requiring a dedication to continued
intellectual growth. Therefore, this project also aims to foster a dedication to
self-directed professional development and continuing education through a series
of programmatic initiatives. First is access to a 1-credit first-year course
that explores engineering ethics and the 14 Grand Challenges for engineering.
Second is a series of seminars and workshops dedicated to explaining the process
for obtaining and maintaining, through continuing education, a professional
engineering license. Third is a 1-credit course to prepare for the fundamentals
of engineering exam (FE) which is the first step in the licensure process.
Students will also be provided with a self-directed professional development
fund which will: (1) provide additional financial resources to explore specific
topics of interest to the student, (2) reinforce the concept that continued
education requires dedication and commitment of financial resources, and (3)
introduce professional resources that provide continuing education resources
post-graduation. The effectiveness of these initiatives will be evaluated using
results from institutional data, surveys, FE passing rates, and interviews of
students, faculty, and project partners. Results will be disseminated through
the SUNY Polytechnic Institute website, presentations at conferences, and
publications in peer-reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.