* 2221282
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Has Recent Tectono-Magmatic Activity at Lō'ihi (Kama’ehuakanaloa)  Seamount perturbed vent-fluid circulation and hydrothermal Fe export to the oce
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Seewald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 240,688.00

Has Recent Tectono-Magmatic Activity at Lōʻihi (Kamaʻehuakanaloa) Seamount
perturbed vent-fluid circulation and hydrothermal Fe export to the
ocean?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like volcanoes on land, submarine
volcanoes are not continuously erupting but can remain dormant for long periods.
Even while dormant, however, the magmatic heat present beneath a volcano’s
surface can continue to drive hot springs in between eruptions. The focus of
this study is hot springs at the Kamaʻehuakanaloa underwater volcano (previously
known as Lōʻihi), situated about 30 miles south of the Big Island of Hawai’i
which last erupted in 1996. Prior studies between the mid 2000’s and late 2010’s
have shown that the multiple hot-springs associated with that last eruption, at
the summit of the volcano have been cooling down continuously. This study will
investigate whether two sets of recent earthquakes at Kamaʻehuakanaloa may have
altered that cooling trend. In May 2020 earthquakes associated with magma
intrusion into the chamber deep within the seamount were detected. In 1996
earthquakes similar to this accompanied a volcanic eruption. More recently
still, in December 2021 the strongest earthquakes of any kind since the 1996
eruption were detected. This project will use a deep-diving robot to investigate
whether lava was erupted on the seafloor during these earthquakes and also if
the composition of the fluids (chemically altered seawater) flowing out of the
seafloor at the volcano’s summit has
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lōʻihi seamount (recently renamed
Kamaʻehuakanaloa) last erupted in 1996, significantly reshaping its summit and
creating three collapse pits. Inside one of these, Pele’s Pit, hot springs have
been studied which exhibited temperatures in excess of 200°C immediately post-
eruption. Since 2006, however, the multiple sites that have been subject to
long-term study within Pele’s Pit and around its rim have shown more modest
temperatures of 15-55°C which, further, have exhibited progressive cooling at a
rate of 1-2°C over a 12-year period from 2006 to 2018 (the most recent year for
which time-series data exist). Thermodynamic modeling of the fluids collected in
2018 has provided new insight that the subsurface hydrothermal circulation
within this steep sided seamount may extend much deeper than is typical at mid-
ocean ridges (which are more elongate and exhibit shallower-sloping ridge
flanks). Further, a geochemical consequence of Lōʻihi’s unusual circulation
pattern may account for the unusually Fe-rich nature of the vent-fluids emerging
from the seafloor at this intra-plate setting, and their impact on the
surrounding ocean, when compared to mid-ocean ridges vents. This project will
extend the 2006-2018 time-series of vent studies at Lōʻihi to investigate
whether the subsurface hydrothermal circulation system has been perturbed by two
significant episodes of seismicity that have subsequently occurred, as detected
by the US Geological Survey’s Hawai’i Volcano Observatory. In May 2020, a swarm
of earthquakes was detected that were distinctive compared to all seismic
activity since the volcano last erupted in May 1996 because they exhibited
T-phase activity, recognized as being diagnostic of magmatic fluids migrating
within the interior of the seamount and potentially indicative of magma
replenishment. In December 2021, an even more pronounced episode of seismicity
was detected, up to magnitude M4.9, which matched the strongest earthquakes
detected during the 1996 eruptions. This project will use the ROV Jason to
investigate whether the seafloor hydrothermal venting at Lōʻihi has been
perturbed following these episodes of seismicity. The project will test the
hypothesis that the earthquakes, detected by T-phase seismic signals, perturbed
the deep hydrothermal circulation cell at Lōʻihi, which in turn should be
detectable at the seafloor through changes in vent-fluid temperatures and
geochemical compositions. Changes in seafloor morphology and locations of vent-
sites compared to the previous ROV dives in 2018 may also be expected.
Conversely, the null hypothesis would be that the vent-sites that have been
studied since 2006 continue to cool progressively (each vent should then be
6±2°C cooler than when last studied in 2018) with compositions that will have
changed accordingly. Importantly, proving this null hypothesis would still be
scientifically valuable. It would extend the longest time series available for
any intra-plate hydrothermal field worldwide and continue to collect pre-event
data in anticipation of future extrusive volcanism at Lōʻihi that will
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.