* 2221618
* How Does Mid to Lower Arc Crust Respond to the Transition from Subduction to Collision? Investigation of the Gangdese Orogen Crustal Section
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Wenrong Cao, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 449,746.00

This project will investigate how the convergence between two tectonic plates
influences the structural, thermal, and compositional properties of the
continental crust. Understanding how continental crust responds to subduction
and collision during plate convergence will provide insights into the hundreds-
of-million-of-years history of continental crust evolution and how tectonic and
magmatic processes influence the surface topography in major mountain belts. In
order to answer this question, the research team will investigate the Gangdese
Batholith in southern Tibet that was formed during the prolonged convergence
between the Indian and Eurasian plates. The major goals of this project include
establishing a cross section through the ancient Gangdese Batholith crust to
study how crustal properties (e.g., structures and compositions) change along
the vertical (depth) profile. To do this, the researchers will collect rock
samples to determine their pressure–temperature histories and investigate how
the record preserved within these rocks can be used to constrain the temporal
variation of crustal thickness, topographic elevation, and mass transfer
processes. The results of this project will help in understanding the evolution
of the continental crust that forms the foundation of our habitable planet and
how the structure and composition of the crust are shaped by various types of
solid earth processes. This project promotes diversity in geosciences, fosters
international collaboration between US and Chinese scientists, and supports STEM
graduate and undergraduate students and one early-career investigator. This
project also aims to increase educational outreach with K-12 students and the
broader public via in-person talks and through a popular social media platform.
Research results will be disseminated through open-access databases,
publications, and international meetings held on both sides of the Pacific,
including the Himalayan research community. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gangdese orogen in southern Tibet, China, is one of
the only locations on Earth to study the transition from ocean-continent
subduction to continent-continent collision and how such transition affects the
construction and evolution of the continental crust. The overall goals of the
proposed work are to establish the regional framework of bedrock pressures and
the pressure–temperature-time–deformation (P–T–t–D) history across the eastern
portion of the orogen. The research team will: (1) systematically collect
structural observations and samples from different structural levels exposed in
the eastern Gangdese orogen, including less-studied metasedimentary rock
exposures; (2) use a variety of novel barometers and petrochronometry techniques
to establish P-T-t paths of igneous and metasedimentary rocks; (3) conduct
structural and electron backscatter diffraction analyses to quantify finite
strain shape, intensity, deformation temperatures, and kinematics of fabrics;
and (4) integrate P-T-t-D data and existing crustal thickness data to
investigate geological processes operating in the deep Gangdese crust and to
investigate how these processes evolve during and after the transition from arc
magmatism to collision. The Gangdese orogen provides a unique opportunity to
probe how metamorphism, deformation, and crustal flow vary during different
tectonic stages, all of which can be extrapolated to active and other ancient
continental magmatic orogens to advance our understanding of the evolution of
the continental crust. held on both sides of the Pacific, including the
Himalayan research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.