* 2221227
* Sustaining Undergraduate Classroom and Career Excellence for Science and Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Chris Huber, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Doane University. Doane is Nebraska's oldest liberal arts institution,
founded in 1872. The project is centered at the rural, residential undergraduate
campus in Crete (30 miles from Lincoln). Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, engineering, or
environmental and earth sciences. First-year students will receive up to four
years of scholarship support. Doane’s recruitment efforts will involve
partnering with regional high schools with diverse populations and high numbers
of students from low-income families. A range of educational and personal
supports will be leveraged and designed to enhance students’ academic success,
development of STEM identity, and persistence in the program to graduation. This
project will continue, enhance, and expand coursework that strengthens
partnerships and interdisciplinary connections between Doane STEM programs;
provide a living learning community for students; connect students to STEM
professionals through co-curricular activities; provide formal and informal
mentoring; and provide opportunities for faculty-mentored undergraduate research
as well as externally funded STEM research. To most effectively support
students, up to 30 STEM faculty will be trained in research-based best practices
in STEM mentoring of undergraduates, including cultural competency training.
Broader impacts of the project will include helping to meet the growing demand
for STEM graduates in local and regional industry by supporting 30 low-income,
academically talented STEM majors with financial need and by increasing Doane’s
overall production of diverse highly qualified STEM majors, including those from
rural or very rural communities. The intellectual merit of the project includes
broad dissemination of the results of a robust project evaluation that will
measure (a) the effectiveness and impact of individual project activities on
student retention and graduation, and (b) how the development of a strong STEM
identity impacts students’ career and graduate school choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion and post-graduate success of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific objectives and
expected outcomes are to: (1) Recruit, enroll, and provide scholarships for 30
low-income scholars with academic potential and demonstrated financial need
pursuing STEM; (2) Ensure that at least 90% of project scholars are retained
from first to second year; (3) Ensure that at least 80% of scholars graduate in
four years and 100% graduate within five years; (4) Place in STEM graduate
school or direct employment at least 80% of scholars within nine months of
graduation; and (5) Incorporate research and best practices in internal and
external dissemination and continue to refine the understanding of how STEM
identity development among project scholars impacts their career and enrollment
in graduate school. The project will contribute important knowledge about the
effects of the interventions on the retention, persistence, graduation, and
post-graduate outcomes of low-income, academically talented scholars, many whose
underserved status intersects with additional characteristics such as first-
generation in college and underrepresented minority status. The project is
particularly focused on the development of STEM identity and its role in
improving retention and graduation rates and post-graduation outcomes for
underrepresented and underserved scholars. The evaluation will employ formative
and summative assessment measures to monitor the effectiveness of activities.
The management team will collect data needed for formative and summative
assessment of project metrics with assistance from the project's external
evaluation partner. The management team will utilize feedback from each annual
evaluation to inform subsequent approaches, consistent with an action research
framework. The results from the project’s external evaluation and the principal
investigators’ documentation of the project’s development and impacts on
scholars and the institution will be widely disseminated. In addition to
traditional dissemination approaches (conference presentation and publication in
peer-reviewed journals), the management team will host a virtual workshop for
midwestern academic institutions similar in size and scholar populations to
Doane, with the objective of widely communicating the goals and outcomes of the
project and serving as a mechanism to inform the actions of institutions seeking
to achieve similar results. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented scholars with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.