* 2221899
* I-Corps: Thermostable liquid formulations of mRNAs and mRNA lipid nano-particles pharmaceuticals
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Ying Wang, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an RNA formulation technology for safe storage and transport. The
ability to transport and store mRNA-based pharmaceuticals without ultra-cold
requirements may significantly lower the costs of distribution of mRNA drugs and
vaccines. Also, elimination of the requirements for ultra-freezer and
lyophilization will greatly increase the capacity and speed of deployment of
mRNA pharmaceuticals as well as their accessibility to remote areas. Finally,
the superior thermostability of the new mRNA formulations may reduce the wastage
of drugs/vaccines caused by unexpected exposure to elevated temperature during
transportation and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of two methods for preparing thermostable liquid formulations
of mRNA and mRNA-Lipid Nano-Particles (LNPs), respectively. The first method is
to prepare an emulsion containing mRNA condensate-induced non-ionic polymers and
salts. The second method is to stabilize mRNA-LNPs using acidic buffers with
crowding agents. The success of the COVID-19 mRNA vaccines showed the advantages
of this pharmaceutical modality including rapid development, high efficacy, high
safety, and ease of manufacturing (as compared to cell culture production).
However, deployment of the COVID-19 mRNA vaccines has been met with major
logistic challenges due to the intrinsic instability of mRNA. mRNAs undergo fast
degradation in aqueous solutions and require freezing or lyophilization (freeze-
drying) for transportation and storage. The requirements for ultra-cold chain or
lyophilization facilities not only limit the speed of deployment and
accessibility of mRNA pharmaceuticals, but also increase the costs and wastage
during the distribution process. Using the proposed technologies, mRNA or mRNA-
LNP solutions may be able to be stored at room temperature or under
refrigeration for months without freezing or
lyophilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.