* 2221663
* Paving a Transfer Pathway for Low-Income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Yun Wan, University of Houston - Victoria
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the recruitment,
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Victoria College and the University of Houston-
Victoria. Victoria College (VC) is a public, open-admission community college
whose mission is to provide educational opportunities and services for the
students and communities it serves. VC is a designated Hispanic Serving
institution. The University of Houston–Victoria (UHV), also a Hispanic-Serving
Institution, was developed in the 1970s as a university designed to serve upper-
division and graduate students, such as those from Victoria College, who were
seeking to continue their education, and now offers a full four-year academic
program. Over its one-year duration, this collaborative planning project aims to
strengthen ties between UHV and VC in computing program connection; investigate
inter-institution student support mechanisms; and prepare a future National
Science Foundation S-STEM grant proposal for an inter-institutional consortium
between UHV and VC. Through the collection of data, this project will advance
the understanding of best practices to help low-income and under-represented
computing major VC students successfully transfer to UHV, complete their
bachelor’s degrees, and pursue computing careers or graduate study. The
significance of this project to create a smooth matriculating pathway to higher
education will also lead to an important future NSF-funded grant project
proposal to provide scholarships for these students who are pursuing bachelor’s
and graduate degrees in the computer science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this proposed collaborative
planning grant will help advance knowledge regarding: how to design and
establish effective collaborative inter-institutional research and teaching
activities to support computing major students with demonstrated unmet financial
needs; how to identify the other unmet needs for transfer students pursuing
computing majors, especially those from traditionally underrepresented groups,
and how the institution could support them; how to design and develop a robust
inter-institutional workforce development program for transfer students to help
them to be successful in a future computing career and, at the same time, meet
national priority needs. The broad scope of this strong collaboration between
UHV and VC will directly affect current and prospective computing major students
in these two institutions, including their improved academic achievement,
enhanced campus experience, successful transfer to a public university, degree
attainment, and future computing career or graduate study. Findings related to
transfer student needs will also benefit transfer students in other institutions
and regions, as well as researchers and educators in higher education who are
interested in improving the degree attainment and career success of low-income
and underrepresented transfer students. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.