* 2221900
* An Integrative Hands-on Approach to Vehicular Security Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Janise McNair, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Automotive systems have rapidly transformed in recent years, with an explosive
infusion of autonomous features. These features integrate a variety of new
sensors, actuators, computer elements, communication protocols, and software.
Unfortunately, this trend also has increased the vulnerability of these systems
to cyber-attacks. There has been limited awareness of the cybersecurity
challenges posed by automotive electronics, even within the cybersecurity
research community. This project will address this crucial problem by developing
an exploration platform and suite of experiments to enable the dissemination of
vehicular security concepts. The platform will target multidisciplinary
undergraduate students across STEM areas relevant to transportation. It can be
deployed as a comprehensive hands-on lab in a course targeting vehicular
security. Individual experiments can also be used in a cybersecurity, hardware
security, or wireless networking course, on the one hand, and courses on
vehicular systems traditionally offered in Civil and Mechanical Engineering
departments on the other. Modules from the platform can also be used for
training transportation engineers, vehicular electronics designers, and
practitioners in the security of hardware and cyber-physical systems. The
project aligns closely with the National Science Foundation's mission of
achieving a "truly secure cyberspace in today's networked, distributed, and
asynchronous world." It will facilitate the creation of a crucial workforce for
robust, cyber-resilient autonomous transportation systems. Moreover, the
educational materials will give students a strong competitive edge in a highly
promising, emergent market and help them assume leadership roles in academia,
industry, and the public sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
technical objectives. First, it will create a unified exploration platform
covering the spectrum of security concepts in emerging vehicular systems,
including hardware, sensor, compute, network, and full platform levels. Second,
it will create a vehicle for disciplined dissemination of vehicular security
concepts through a hands-on learning platform. The students will get a chance
not just to comprehend known attacks but also to discover new attacks and
defenses. This hands-on, immersive learning is a radically different approach to
teaching vehicular systems security and cybersecurity and hardware security
topics in general. Third, the project will conduct design-based research and
evaluation of hands-on, immersive learning as a mechanism for disseminating
cybersecurity concepts and promoting the fundamental understanding of
cybersecurity learning for students with different academic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.