* 2221203
* Improving Transfer Academic, Career and Community Engagement for Student Success in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Courtney Brecheen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Texas at Dallas (UT Dallas). Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to thirty unique full-time
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biomedical engineering, computer
engineering, computer science, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering,
and software engineering. Transfer students will receive up to three-year
scholarships. The project aims are to increase student persistence in
engineering and computer science by linking scholarships with supporting
activities proven to be effective, including a new orientation program,
mentoring, peer tutoring, professional development and career preparation, and
participation in the Design and Engineering Experiences Projects (DEEP) program.
In the DEEP program, students will complete team projects under the guidance of
a faculty coach, thereby providing students with valuable teamwork, project
management, and problem-solving skills. The project also supports co-curricular
improvements aimed at improving professional skills and career preparation of
engineering and computer science students. By strategically addressing barriers
that impact high-achieving, low-income transfer students, this project has the
potential to increase students’ access to engineering and computer science
degrees and career success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four specific goals guide this
project. First is to increase one-year retention and four-year graduation rates
of engineering and computer science transfer students. Second is to improve the
sense of belonging and professional identity of these students. Third is to
facilitate entrance of graduates into the STEM workforce or STEM graduate degree
program after their bachelor’s degree. Fourth, and finally is to create a
multivariate predictive model to understand the impacts of financial aid on
student outcomes. There are many factors that affect transfer student
persistence in STEM including financial need, sense of belonging, navigating
their new institution, and transfer shock. This project will examine whether by
providing transfer students financial resources and experiences that increase
their belonging and increase their engineering identities while departmental and
institutional barriers are removed, student success will increase and students
will enter the STEM workforce or matriculate into graduate school after
graduation. The plan for knowledge generation includes an efficacy study and
robust external evaluation designed to establish how the program activities
contribute to students’ success and sense of belonging, and the impacts of
financial supports on outcomes related to enrollment yield, retention, hours
worked, and graduation. Results of this project will be made available to the
general public, practitioners and leaders in the STEM workforce and the STEM
education research community through for example publications in refereed
journals, conference presentations and papers, social media, and podcasts. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.