* 2221436
* NRI: Human-Robot Interface for Extraterrestrial Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Thomas Ferris, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Extraterrestrial construction, construction of structures on the surface of the
Moon or planetary bodies, is an essential but challenging task. While it is
anticipated that such structures will eventually be produced by fully autonomous
construction systems, a human-in-the-loop robotic system is a more attainable
intermediate objective for extraterrestrial construction in the intermediate
term. This National Robotics Initiative 3.0 (NRI) award supports fundamental
research to leverage the intelligence and capabilities of astronauts in a human-
centric robotic system for extraterrestrial construction by providing human-
robot interaction that offers stable, transparent, and accurate telerobotic
control. The findings from this project have important implications for
extraterrestrial construction that are essential for a long-term human presence
off-Earth, and particularly on the Moon. Virtual robotic system design and space
mission simulations will also be employed in a STEM outreach program to motivate
young students by teaching them about space exploration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance fundamental knowledge of
astronaut-robot interaction, including how human sensory degradation in space
and signal time delay/visual ambiguity interact to influence teleoperation task
performance, how modulations of sensory feedback display dimensions are
perceived, and how to most effectively map sensed data to enhance situational
awareness and improved teleoperation performance. The first task documents the
human, task, technological, and environmental features in space teleoperation
for extraterrestrial construction. The second task develops virtual robotic
simulation models for space teleoperation in the context of extraterrestrial
construction. The third task develops and tests sensory assistance technologies
in supporting extraterrestrial construction operations and determines the
effects of latency and depth ambiguity on teleoperation performance and explores
novel forms of sensory assistance feedback to enhance task performance. Finally,
the research team tests sensory assistance in robotic simulation of
extraterrestrial construction in increasingly realistic robotic scenarios that
replicate aspects of the altered environment and manipulate variables that
represent specific challenges for human-telerobotic construction systems. By
enhancing the understanding of human-robot interface design for variable and
dynamic delay contexts and visual ambiguity, generalizable strategies of
interface design can be developed for a number of future space work domains
involving human-in-the-loop operation of extraterrestrial robots. A team of
space engineers including former astronauts and professionals from industry
partners with experience in space telerobotic operations will be engaged in the
design and evaluation of the system. Virtual Reality robotic system design and
space mission simulation will be incorporated into a STEM outreach program to
teach young students about space and exploration and research methods and
results of the project will be integrated in an interdepartmental and
interdisciplinary "Human-robot Interface for Future Space Work Domains"
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.