* 2221638
* S-STEM SUCCESS: Supporting Undergraduates through Curricular and Co-Curricula Engagement and Student Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* David Hall, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,867.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Louisiana Tech University. Over its five-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 40 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in one of eight engineering disciplines: biomedical, civil,
chemical, cyber, electrical, industrial, mechanical, and nanosystems
engineering. First-year students will receive up to four years of scholarship
support. This project aims to increase retention rates of undergraduate
engineering students while also decreasing debt upon graduation by pairing
scholarship funds with academic and career readiness experiences. Discipline-
specific faculty mentors will play a critical role in encouraging and empowering
the scholars to success by leading professional development seminars as they
serve as official academic advisors for the students. This project will increase
a sense of community among both scholars and faculty. Because the College of
Engineering and Science at Louisiana Tech University offers very few needs-based
scholarships to first-year engineering students, this project has the potential
to greatly broaden participation in STEM fields. The combined significance of
directed academic support, career readiness activities, deeper community, and
faculty mentorship will inform the University and the greater STEM education
community on effective practices to increase retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There
are four direct outcomes for the participants in the study: (1) reduction in
financial stress, (2) improved academic progress, (3) perseverance to
graduation, and (4) a path to enter the workforce or a graduate school program
in a STEM field. Additionally, there are two indirect outcomes: (1) increased
confidence in chosen career field and (2) increased confidence in academic
ability. Student scholars selected to participate in the project will be
identified prior to the Fall Quarter of their first year of studies. Enrichment
activities will be strategically sequenced to meet the evolving needs of the
scholars as they move toward graduation. The first year will focus on community
building, academic excellence, professional development, and career
applications. The sophomore year will continue providing academic support
activities while incorporating more discussion on internships and summer
research programs. Junior year activities will shift towards career preparation
while maintaining resources for community building and academic excellence.
Finally, career preparation and life skills will be the focus of the senior year
as students complete their degrees. The scope of this project will include
studying the effect of ongoing, discipline-specific faculty mentorship on
academic progress as well as exploring the impact of academic community on
student confidence and retention. Results of this project will be made available
to the STEM education community through conference presentations, peer-reviewed
conference publications, journal articles, and workshops. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.