* 2221189
* The Computer Science as a Career (CSAC) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Misti Clark, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2027
* USD 4,939,545.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas A&amp;M University (Commerce) and two community colleges in
northeast Texas (Collin College and Dallas College). Over its 5-year duration,
this project, the Computer Science as a Career (CSAC) Scholarship Program, will
provide 179 scholarships to students who are pursuing degrees in Computer
Science. The goal of this project is to increase the recruitment, retention,
transfer, and graduation of academically talented students with demonstrated
financial needs from diverse sociodemographic backgrounds. This goal will be
accomplished by providing co-curricular activities and programs that recruit
students to computing and related fields, increase the rate of transfer from
local community colleges to universities, and improve the retention and
graduation rates of computing students. This program will contribute to the pool
of career ready professionals capable of supporting a globally competitive
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will encourage students to
pursue and complete computing degrees and improve computational thinking skills
through many existing high-quality, evidence-based program elements such as
summer camps, workshops, and student mentoring programs. The project team will
conduct a mixed methods research study to examine the effects of the project
objectives and explore how CSAC participants in computing programs, particularly
women and students from underrepresented groups, develop and sustain computing
identities and persist within these fields. This research study will utilize a
phenomenological approach to examine the lived experiences and computing
identity development of CSAC participants. The research will focus on the
computing identity development process, capturing key elements related to
competence, performance, and recognition that may contribute to either the
challenges to and/or the success of participants in CSAC. The results of this
research will lead to a better understanding of how to improve computing
education for students from underrepresented populations and how to more
effectively engage with prospective students. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.