* 2221331
* A Holistic Approach to Build Up A Diverse Community of Rising Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Rodolfo Napisa, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,958.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Northern Virginia Community College (NOVA). NOVA has a very diverse
student body with more than 63% ethnic minority students. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships for 85 unique full-time students
who are pursuing associate degrees in engineering. First-year students will
receive up to two years of scholarship support. The project intends to increase
the number of students from underrepresented groups who transfer to four-year
institutions and ultimately join the engineering workforce. This will be
achieved through synergistic efforts focused on recruitment, financial and
academic support, and community building. Increased participation in STEM
fields, particularly among underrepresented groups, is critical to the United
States’ continued leadership in science and engineering innovation. This project
has the potential to broaden participation in engineering and learn how a
holistic approach will support the STEM workforce to meet the national and
regional needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The goals of this project are supporting
students’ financial needs, closing the equity and achievement gap, and providing
centralized academic and institutional support. This project team plans to
specifically track key outcomes including GPA, participation in internships and
experiential learning, and successful degree completion. This work has the
potential to serve as a model for making STEM education more accessible for all
Americans by recruiting, retaining, and training a demographically diverse
engineering workforce that meets the nation’s demand for STEM talents. The
project will be evaluated through the collection of quantitative and qualitative
data, using historical data as a comparison to track results. Results of this
project will be shared through presentations at conferences, submissions to
journals, and hosting a regional STEM workshop for engineering faculty and
students from nearby colleges. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need earning degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
the academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and career pathways of
low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.