* 2221192
* EAGER: RUI: Elucidating the role of exosomes in the regulation of steroidogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Bobby Fokidis, Rollins College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,819.00

Exosomes are recently discovered small membrane-bound particles that are
secreted into blood by cells, carrying biomolecules that may reprogram recipient
cells and initiate new functions. Despite biomedical interest in exosomes as
biomarkers and therapeutics, their natural physiological function remains
unknown. This research explores one potential role of exosomes, as communication
links between endocrine glands (the adrenal glands, ovaries, and testes) and
other tissues or organs which can only synthesize hormones under certain
circumstances. Using newly developed methods, this project will determine
whether exosomes originating from endocrine cells carry the necessary
biochemical information to initiate local steroid hormone production in non-
endocrine organs, in a lizard model. Such location shifts in hormone production
are observed in many biological processes, including prostate cancer, menopause,
immune cell development, and non-breeding aggression in animals. This research
may provide a unifying mechanism for these diverse processes, while also serving
as the foundation for the interdisciplinary training of several undergraduate
students, including those from traditionally underrepresented groups. The
project will also support development of hands-on activities in undergraduate
laboratory courses, impacting more students. Through student training and
collaborations, this research will likely lead to new insights and future
investigations on the hidden roles that exosomes play in hormonal function,
animal physiology, and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exosomes are nanosized
vesicles secreted into plasma that carry nucleic acids and other molecules that
can alter phenotypes of recipient cells, but their intrinsic organismal
functions remain unstudied and unknown. This research tests the hypothesis that
exosomes are involved in the regulation of local steroid hormone synthesis,
which occurs when “non-endocrine” tissues (e.g., liver, intestine) synthesize
bioactive steroids, with exosomes serving to transfer necessary steroidogenic
enzyme mRNA from endocrine glands to initiate the process. Using the Anolis
lizard model system, this research will test if exosomes are necessary for both
extra-adrenal glucocorticoid hormone synthesis and extra-gonadal synthesis of
sex steroid hormones. This study first aims to determine if local
steroidogenesis increases plasma exosome secretion using nanoparticle tracking
analysis. The second aim will document if plasma exosomes contain steroidogenic
enzyme mRNA using RT-PCR with targeted primers. The third aim will use a new
pharmacological agent to block exosome secretion to test its necessity for local
steroidogenesis. Using novel techniques and testing paradigms, a unifying and
ubiquitous mechanism for activating steroidogenic machinery in non-endocrine
tissues will be tested. The transfer of mRNA between tissues via exosomes to
regulate physiological functions and behavior will transform current
understanding of cell-to-cell communication, with implications for many fields
of biology. This project also serves to provide scientific training for young
biologists, including those from underrepresented groups, and will doubtlessly
lead to collaborations and new biological questions on the role of exosomes in
steroid-regulated functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.