* 2221623
* Improved Persistence to Degree Completion through Enhanced Engineering Identity
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Janet Twomey, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2028
* USD 749,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at Wichita State University. Recognizing the
importance of financial assistance coupled with academic and student services,
the project team will use award funds to increase second and third-year
retention and graduation rates for 24 low-income high achieving undergraduate
engineering students in three cohorts by enhancing the student’s identity in
advanced manufacturing industry careers. The project will award scholarships
over a four-year period to students in engineering technology, computer science
and cybersecurity, industrial systems and manufacturing engineering, and
electrical and computer engineering that will lead to careers in advanced
manufacturing industries, particularly focusing on the local aerospace
industries, filling the growing local and national need for such professionals.
Scholarship recipients will receive funds for four years: Year 1: $10,000; Year
2: $5,000; Year 3: $2,500; and Year 4: $1,250 ($18,750/scholar over four years).
The project is designed to cultivate students’ sense of engineering identity
through their participation in (1) academic, personal, and professional skill-
building activities and (2) a new two-semester First Year Experience Course in
which one semester is spent working alongside engineers on a real-world
engineering problem and in co-op experiences each year thereafter. Faculty and
industry mentors will receive training to facilitate learning and assist
students in developing an engineering identity and a sense of belonging.
Students will be recruited from seven high schools through their "Project Lead
the Way" engineering classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Drawing on the socialization
theory of engineering identity development (Tonso, 2006) and theories of
situated learning to design project activities, students will learn engineering
skills working alongside engineers in an industry setting and by engaging with
the engineering community through trained faculty and industry mentors. The
quantitative and qualitative mixed methods evaluation is designed to be holistic
and is focused on participant perception of identification with engineering as
well as a sense of belonging within the profession as measures of success and
the effectiveness of the planned interventions. The purpose is to determine the
trajectory of participant perceptions and beliefs. Descriptive statistics will
be used to determine the shape of the trajectory while Repeated Measures
Analysis of Variance techniques will be used to determine if there is a
statistically significant difference in participant perceptions. Qualitative
thematic analysis will clarify the findings from the quantitative analysis using
coding and patterns of meaning of one-on-one and focus group interviews. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.