* 2221234
* Increasing the Access and Success of Scholars in Mathematics and Computer Science at a Hispanic Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Nieves Angulo, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Hostos Community College – CUNY, a two-year Hispanic-serving institution
in the South Bronx, NY. Over its 6-year duration, this project will provide
scholarships to 35 undergraduate students who are pursuing Associate’s degrees
in Mathematics or Computer Science. First year students will receive up to three
years of scholarship support and transfer students will receive up to two-year
scholarships. The project intends to increase student persistence in STEM fields
by providing scholars with effective supporting activities. The project will
also support curriculum revisions to improve first-year student retention in
STEM. This project team plans to investigate the effects of psychosocial factors
on student motivation, self-confidence, and perseverance. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of the impact of financial assistance coupled
with flexible online resources for degree attainment and career-enhancing
certifications for students in STEM. As Hostos Community College has a large
population of underrepresented students, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in STEM fields and to learn how mentoring, online
resources, and individual development plans can support retention and graduation
of underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims:
(1) increase the access and success of students by providing financial
assistance; (2) engage participants in online resources to improve students'
learning and academic performance; and (3) offer professional certifications for
scholars’ career readiness. The proposed supporting activities include
mentoring, tutorial support in mathematics and computer science, service
learning through co-curricular activities leading to certification in S-STEM
fields, career readiness, internship and networking opportunities with STEM
professionals, and participation in discipline-specific conferences. The project
team plans to investigate how the scholars develop confidence and learning
proficiency after participating in professional development workshops and
conferences. This project will be evaluated using surveys throughout the
project. Results will be disseminated through professional development
workshops, conference proceedings, journal publication, and a project website.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.