* 2221477
* Scholarships and Programming to Increase Graduation, Retention, and Self-efficacy of Low-income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2029
* Rebecca Fillmore, Spring Hill College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2029
* USD 648,274.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Spring Hill College. Spring Hill College (SHC) is located in Mobile, AL,
a county in which 29% live below the poverty level and a state in which 24% of
students are proficient in science and only 22% are proficient in mathematics.
Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 10 unique
full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, mathematics,
or pre-engineering. First year students in biology and mathematics will receive
up to four years of scholarship support. First year pre-engineering students
will receive up to three years of scholarship support, the total expected time
at SHC. Scholars will (1) participate in a Living Learning Community; (2) engage
in common coursework in core STEM courses; (3) participate in a first-year
seminar; (4) receive faculty mentoring; (5) engage in service-learning
activities; (6) participate in research and internship opportunities; and (7)
attend an annual career seminar. The project is informed by the needs of the
local community and should help broaden participation in STEM in the Gulf Coast
region. The program will advance the understanding of how financial support for
biology, math, and pre-engineering majors—combined with additional curricular
and co-curricular activities—impacts students’ sense of self-efficacy as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The Reflection, Engagement, Action, and Learning
STEM (REAL-STEM) program aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students. The project
will investigate the conditions under which improved student learning occurs as
well as the effectiveness of the project interventions in improving students’
self-efficacy in STEM. By developing lessons and workshops on self-efficacy,
Spring Hill will elevate the value of STEM careers and build a new pipeline of
highly capable STEM professionals in the Gulf Coast region and nationally. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.