* 2221815
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the Origin of the Jurassic Quiet Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* William Sager, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2026
* USD 166,919.00

The Earth’s geomagnetic field periodically reverses with the north and south
poles switching places. These reversals are preserved in ocean crust as linear
magnetic anomalies. Because this process is like a magnetic tape recorder,
studying the sequence of magnetic reversals has enabled scientists to develop a
time scale used to determine ocean crustal age, plate tectonic movements, and
the history of magnetic field evolution. This project will study magnetic
reversals during a time known as the Jurassic Quiet Zone where the magnetic
anomalies are small in amplitude. A magnetic sensor will be towed near the
seafloor to measure these small anomalies. The results will help determine the
processes that cause changes in the Earth’s magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research examines a poorly understood period of geomagnetic field
history, the Jurassic Quiet Zone, during which field strength appears to be much
less than normal and the reversal rate much higher than normal. Changes in
geomagnetic field behavior are thought to have geodynamic significance, such as
indicating heat flux to the mantle from the core, affecting mantle convection.
Moreover, the geomagnetic polarity timescale is used as a basis for magnetic
field, plate tectonic, and many geodynamic and geologic studies. The proposed
research will help define the timescale during a period in which it is poorly
constrained. The main objective of this study is to compile a magnetic anomaly
sequence over the Phoenix magnetic lineations in Nauru Basin of the Western
Pacific for comparison with similar records previously collected over the
Japanese lineations of Pigafetta Basin and the Hawaiian lineations near the
Magellan Seamounts. This compilation will consist of records from the sea
surface, near the seafloor, and in mid-water. This multi-scale approach is done
because the extreme detail of anomaly records collected near the seafloor makes
correlation with sea surface anomalies (the basis of the geomagnetic polarity
timescale) difficult, so the mid-water data complete the picture. Data will be
collected near the seafloor using the autonomous vehicle Sentry, at the sea
surface using standard magnetometers, and at mid-level using a towed platform.
Data will be compiled at each level, correlated, and modeled to determine a
polarity sequence. This record will be compared with Japanese and Hawaiian
anomaly data to make a composite reversal timescale and to determine the
behavior of the low amplitude zone. Multichannel seismic data will be collected
with the purpose of defining the top of the magnetic source layer within ocean
crust in an area where Mid-Cretacous volcanic sills are known to be
emplaced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.