* 2221768
* Collaborative Research: FACTs: Forcing of the upper Atmosphere from Coupling of Troposphere during extreme weather Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Julio Urbina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 95,636.00

Understanding the Earth's atmosphere and its ionized portion, the ionosphere, as
an integrated, coupled system remains a great challenge. This system is strongly
influenced by various space weather drivers such as solar flares, and this
control (from above) is comparatively well explored. In contrast, the continuous
influence of meteorological drivers (forcing from below) remains largely
unexplored. This project focuses on extreme weather systems or EWS such as
tropical storms and hurricanes which serve as an important tropospheric source
of atmospheric waves especially gravity waves (GW) which are known to propagate
upward and couple the troposphere to the middle and upper atmosphere. The
project will employ a wide range of instrumental tools at the Arecibo
Observatory (AO) in Puerto Rico and its Remote Optical Facility (ROF) in the
island of Culebra to monitor the middle and upper atmosphere response to the EWS
traveling towards the Caribbean and the US. It will cover a broad range of
altitudes between ~60 km and ~ 450 km and will include radio receivers, a meteor
radar, lidars, photometers, all-sky imagers (ASIs), Fabry-Perot interferometers
(FPIs), and ionosondes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will focus on
(1) analysis of the response of the D-region ionosphere (60-90 km in altitude)
to EWS activity, (2) investigation of EWS effects on the medium-scale traveling
ionospheric disturbances (MSTIDs), a manifestation of GWs in the F-region
ionosphere (above 150 km in altitude), and (3) comparative analysis of the
neutral and electron densities during MSTIDs with the aim of distinguishing
between current competing theories on their origin. The Remote Optical Facility
on the island of Culebra will be transformed into an observatory that will
provide important scientific observations and impact the advance of Puerto
Rico’s STEM education and culture by making world-class research accessible to
students and teachers. A weather station will be installed in Culebra to provide
hands-on experience to students and teachers from the Culebra’s sole public
school, engaging with underrepresented students. Further, two workshops will be
organized for the local Culebra public high school to promote scientific
engagement and to accommodate ~40 students and 10 teachers, with invited
speakers from AO-affiliated scientists as well as local universities. This
project will also support a female scientist (Principal Investigator), a
postdoctoral scholar, and graduate and undergraduate students. It will support
graduate and undergraduate education in atmospheric sciences and engineering,
field deployment of several ground-based instruments, data collection, analysis,
and interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.