* 2221824
* Emergent Protein Assemblies in Cytoplasm
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Margaret Cheung, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 813,012.00

Proteins are the work horses inside a cell by participating all aspects of
cellular function. They function through the formation of higher-order
assemblies facilitated by the interactions with one another. One of the
functions they perform is metabolism. This is a process where protein enzymes
collectively break down large nutrients such as carbohydrates into smaller
molecules, turning them into biofuels or building blocks of other biomass in a
cell. This project will study how these enzymes assemble into complexes that
regulate or are regulated by metabolism. The knowledge learned from this project
will enable far-reaching impacts on the efficient production of biofuels or
biomass that benefits the bioeconomy. This project will actively recruit the
transfer and continuing students from the community colleges to participate in
research at the University of Washington at Seattle (UW) through collaboration
with the Pacific Northwest Louise-Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(PNW LSAMP). The transfer and continuing undergraduate students at UW are
derived prominently from the historically under-represented marginalized (URM)
groups in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The broader
impact from this program will bolster the retention of transfer and continuing
students in STEM higher education and augment the number of URM students going
into graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
establish testable models of protein assemblies in response to metabolic changes
in a cell. Sequential protein enzymes form transient supramolecular assemblies,
or metabolons, in a metabolic pathway within living cells. We will elucidate the
physical mechanism responsible for their assembly into spatial networks, and how
these complexes regulate or are regulated by metabolism with computer
simulations. This work will build on an advanced theoretical framework to
characterize the rapid formation and disassembly of molecular clusters in a
crowded, open multicomponent system, with quantitative variables learned from
experimental data and protein structural models. The expected outcome will
provide novel opportunities to develop empirically testable hypotheses derived
from complex molecular models as biomarkers to predict a cell's metabolic state.
The long-term goal of the research program aligns with one of the ten big ideas
from the NSF on Understanding the Rule of Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.