* 2221340
* An Accelerated Associate to Master’s Degree Pathway in Data Analytics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated data
analysts and scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at Bunker Hill Community College and
Northeastern University. Over its one-year duration, this project will support
the development of a Track 3 S-STEM proposal, that will outline a plan to
provide scholarships to over 100 unique full time and part time students who are
pursuing associate, bachelor’s, and master’s degrees in data science. This
project intends to develop a proposal for an S-STEM project that would support
data analyst/science students through the entire pathway from associates to
bachelor’s to master's degrees in the data science field. Responding to national
concerns about the high cost of postsecondary education and the demand for data
science professionals, the program intends to offer a low-cost, accelerated
alternative to earn degrees and enter careers in data science. The Track 3
S-STEM program developed in this project intends to provide scholarships, but
additionally, the program will embed students in a supportive, accelerated
pathway that prepares them for academic success and for data science careers in
the greater Boston metro area. With strong industry support, the engagement of
local community partners, and workforce development partners, local high schools
and local industry partners, and together with existing infrastructure and
articulation agreements between Northeastern University and Bunker Hill
Community College, this program aims to encourage, enhance, and accelerate
student engagement in academic preparation, career development, and entry into
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need by preparing a proposal for a program that
provides appropriately tailored pathways to STEM credentials tied to entry-level
data analyst/science jobs that are in demand in the Boston area. The program to
be developed will facilitate participation in undergraduate research and paid
internships, industry and peer mentorship, specialized advising, and other
tailored academic, career, and social supports that are recognized by
researchers as high impact practices in broadening participation and increasing
retention. Over the course of the project, industry partnerships will be
established to ensure that the program is aligned with industry demands and the
growing data analyst/science field. Results of this project will support the
development of a larger S-STEM grant that will contribute to the STEM workforce
and understanding of strategies to support the success of lower income students.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.