* 2221559
* Encouraging Master’s Study in Electrical and Computer Engineering through Scholarships, Undergraduate Research, and Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Ali Hurson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,991.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Missouri University of Science and Technology. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to twenty-seven unique full-time
low-income students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer or
electrical engineering. Second-year undergraduate students will receive up to
three years of scholarships. Any student who chooses to pursue a combined
bachelor’s/master’s degree in either discipline will receive a fourth and final
scholarship that will fund them for the additional year required to graduate
with a master’s degree. The project envisions that ten of the projected twenty-
seven scholarship recipients are expected to pursue this option. This project
aims to increase persistence, success, and graduation with bachelor’s and
combined bachelor’s/master’s degrees in computer and electrical engineering for
talented low-income students. Financial support, faculty mentoring,
undergraduate research, placement in internships, and professional development
activities will be employed to this end. This project will advance knowledge of
best practices for motivating and empowering low-income students to earn
advanced degrees in engineering, cultivate a professional identity, and develop
skills conducive to success in the work force. The ultimate outcomes are upward
mobility of these students and increased competitiveness of the U.S. in the
technology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high- achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Existing research has demonstrated that
students who identify with and see themselves as capable of success in their
field of study are more likely to pursue a graduate degree. This project will
investigate the effectiveness of mentoring and other project activities and
scholarships in fostering this self-perception and enabling low-income
undergraduates to begin a professional career on graduation, or to continue on
to earn a master’s degree. The success of the project will be evaluated using
both subjective student self-assessments and objective measures that include
course grades, graduation rates, and rates of employment or placement in
graduate school after completion of the undergraduate degree. Project results
will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal articles and presentations at
academic conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.