* 2221988
* URoL:EN: Integrating paleogenomics, ecology, and geology to predict organism-environment coupled evolution during rapid warming and ice sheet retreat
* BIO,EF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2027
* Corey Krabbenhoft, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2027
* USD 2,945,234.00

Over the last century, global climate has experienced marked temperature
increases that have incurred environmental, biotic, and societal impacts.
Research on organismal responses to climate change have often concentrated on
single or closely-interrelated species, and over short to very recent
timescales. The long-term effects from the amplitude and duration of climate-
change remain largely unknown because species are embedded in complex networks
of interactions with one another and the environments they live in, and because
there is substantial variation in responses among species over space and time.
While the Earth’s global temperatures have fluctuated repeatedly over its entire
history, the abrupt changes that took place just after the last Ice Age are
particularly useful analogs for processes occurring today. This research will
focus on prehistoric climate perturbations in Southeast Alaska, an ideal natural
laboratory that holds exceptional geologic archives of past biological and
climate change. The region is a hotspot of biological diversity that hosted
remarkable shifts of native species over the past ~40 thousand years and served
as a crucial gateway for early human migration into the New World. The assembled
team of scholars, with cross-disciplinary expertise across the biological and
geological sciences, will examine how Southeast Alaskan ecosystems responded to
Ice-Age environmental change. This research will provide important insights into
how rapid climatic shifts can serve as triggers for dramatic and irreversible
downstream impacts on both native and colonizing species. The project will
invest in interdisciplinary STEM training and career-building to educate the
next generation of multidisciplinary scientists, including training of postdocs
and a cohort of graduate and undergraduate students spanning different
disciplines. It will also offer interdisciplinary seminars, a 1-credit course,
summer continuing education programs for science teachers in Buffalo City high
schools, and an outreach program targeting K-12 students in Southeast
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global warming is occurring at an unprecedented
rapid pace in the history of Earth, and its effects are predicted to include
loss of sea ice, accelerated sea level rise, changes in weather patterns, shifts
in geographic ranges for plants, animals and pathogens, lengthening of growing
seasons and flowering times, and extinction risks. This project will integrate
paleoecological and paleoclimatic information with genetic data to uncover
ecosystem changes across a region that evolved through a backdrop of
considerable temperature, ice sheet, and sea level transitions. Employing a
convergent research approach that combines expertise in paleogenomics, ecology,
geology and paleoclimatology, the project will focus on the Last Glacial Maximum
to Holocene transition and three Holocene rapid warming events in Southeast
Alaska, which will serve as a model system for a new and general paradigm.
Invoking the ecological concept of “alternative stable states” over evolutionary
time, the research will test the hypothesis that in response to past climate
change, ecosystems underwent regime shifts characterized by alternative stable
states, environmental tipping points, and periods of rapid community turnover.
This research will fill important spatial and temporal gaps in high-resolution,
terrestrial climate records spanning a period of dramatic climate change and
define universal principles and emergent properties that underlie ecosystem
shifts in response to rapid environmental transformation, including a better
understanding of how environmental variation impacts ecosystem resilience. The
project will invest in interdisciplinary STEM training and career-building to
educate the next generation of multidisciplinary scientists, including training
of postdocs and a cohort of graduate and undergraduate students spanning
different disciplines. It will also offer interdisciplinary seminars, a 1-credit
course, summer continuing education programs for science teachers in Buffalo
City high schools, and an outreach program targeting K-12 students in Southeast
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.