* 2221026
* Integrative approaches to advancing retention, engagement, and graduation in STEM students across a multi-campus open-access institution
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Natalie Hyslop, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,499,859.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of North Georgia. The University of North Georgia (UNG)
is a multi-campus university, one of six senior military colleges in the nation,
and is a state-designated leadership institution. Over its six-year duration,
this project will fund scholarships to at least 31 unique full and part-time
students who are pursuing both associate’s and bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics. First and second year students
will receive up to four years of scholarship support. This project aims to
increase student retention and persistence in STEM fields by providing
scholarships along with research-based support practices including learning
communities, cohorts, a first-year STEM seminar, intensive faculty mentoring,
robust student support services, undergraduate research involvement,
professional development, and internship opportunities. The project will
additionally assist students with identifying career opportunities that align
with their skills, interests, and the job market while providing them with the
necessary professional development to reach those goals. These activities are
designed to promote continuance in a STEM major while bringing together faculty
and students from various disciplines to share educational and research
experiences to broaden the STEM workforce with a diverse set of highly engaged
individuals. Knowledge generated from this effort will be instrumental in
advancing understanding of how activities such as faculty mentoring, developing
individual learning plans, and early exposure to undergraduate research
experiences support the retention and graduation rates of STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. This goal will be achieved through the following
objectives: 1) successful recruitment of students and retention of at least 80%
after the first year of the program; 2) attain a placement rate of at least 90%
in the STEM workforce, STEM bachelor’s program (for those obtaining an
associate’s degree), or acceptance into a STEM graduate program; 3) graduate at
least 75% of all students pursuing bachelor’s degrees within 5 years and 3 years
for those pursing associate’s degrees. This project will study the importance
and effectiveness of student participation in undergraduate research experiences
in retention and post graduate success of which little is known as it related to
various populations across a multi-campus institution. By investigating
differences among UNG's multi-site S-STEM project, the project will evaluate how
to better assist a breadth of students in STEM to degree completion. This
project will advance knowledge on the leading indicators in various student
populations that lead to STEM persistence. This project will be evaluated using
an outside evaluator and the results from this project will be disseminated at
regional, national and/or international conferences. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.