* 2221250
* Diversifying the West Texas civil and mechanical engineering workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* William Kitch, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,710.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
at Angelo State University (ASU), a Hispanic Serving Instruction (HSI) located
in West Texas. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships
to 36 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in civil and
mechanical engineering. The program will support both first-year students
admitted directly to ASU and students transferring from 2-year institutions.
First year students will receive up to four-year scholarships and transfer
students will receive up to two- and one-half-year scholarships. The project
aims to increase student success in engineering by linking scholarships with
student cohorts, mentoring "familias" of peer, faculty and industry mentors, and
proven student success programs. The inclusion of industry members in the
mentoring familias is designed to provide professional networking opportunities
to students and ease their transition to professional practice. With the large
population of first-generation, low-income students at ASU and regional 2-year
institutions, the project has the potential not only to broaden the
participation of this population in engineering but also to increase knowledge
regarding the effectiveness of industry mentorship in transitioning students
into well-paying engineering jobs after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the project is to increase degree completion of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields. The project aims to diversify the
West Texas engineering workforce by increasing the enrollment, retention, and
graduation of low-income underrepresented students at ASU as well as to provide
a pathway for students transferring from 2-year institutions. The use of cohorts
and mentoring has been demonstrated to improve persistence in engineering.
However, limited data exists on how industry mentoring affects student success
and even less information is available on the effects of a combined industry,
peer, and faculty mentor program. The data collected under this project should
significantly add to the body of knowledge in engineering education research and
support further research. Program data will be published in engineering
education conference and journal papers. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.