* 2221403
* New Fluoride and Oxyfluoride Materials – Targeting Magnetic and Optical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 536,046.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials containing different chemical
elements exhibit a wide range of useful, everyday properties and are found in
devices as basic as LED light bulbs. The properties, which include optical and
magnetic behavior, are found especially in materials containing fluorine and are
used for many applications that require the emission of light for them to
function. Examples include coatings in LED light bulbs, radiation detectors for
homeland security, and scanners for medical x-rays. For many optical
applications it is necessary to obtain the materials in the form of single
crystals. The research, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, therefore, targets the crystal
growth of new fluoride materials by developing new methods to grow such crystals
and by optimizing the chemical compositions to obtain materials with the desired
properties. The basic research focus is on the crystal growth of new fluorine-
containing materials that are designed to exhibit specific properties, such as
light emission, which can find widespread applications and can benefit the
nation. As part of this research, numerous students are trained in the chemical
sciences by involving a wide range of students, including those from
underrepresented groups, in a materials chemistry research laboratory
experience. Furthermore, a summer program for undergraduates allows the
involvement of underrepresented minorities in research and teaches them about
the chemistry of materials with the goal of recruiting them specifically into
the University of South Carolina chemistry graduate program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
concept of materials discovery via crystal growth is applied to substantially
increase the number of new fluoride and oxyfluoride material families to develop
new functional materials. It is well known that complex fluoride materials are
important for applications that rely on their optical properties, such as
luminescence and scintillation, while the ability to obtain fluoride and
oxyfluoride structures exhibiting magnetic frustration is of general interest
for understanding spin-liquid and spin-ice behavior. The research project is
centered around the development of new approaches to systematically synthesize
and characterize new classes of fluoride and oxyfluoride materials and to study
their optical and magnetic behavior. Specifically, the optimization of the
crystal growth of new fluoride and oxyfluoride materials is carried out via
three different synthetic routes (mild hydrothermal, supercritical hydrothermal,
and flux crystal growth) to produce new magnetic and optical materials.
Properties are controlled via the selection and incorporation of transition and
lanthanide elements into the new fluoride and oxyfluoride structures, where
those containing transition and lanthanide metals are used to study magnetic
behavior and those containing lanthanides are used to study optical properties.
As part of this research, numerous students are trained in the chemical sciences
by involving a wide range of students, including those from underrepresented
groups, in a materials chemistry research laboratory experience. Furthermore, a
summer program for undergraduates allows the involvement of underrepresented
minorities in research and teaches them about the chemistry of materials with
the goal of recruiting them specifically into the University of South Carolina
chemistry graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.