* 2221796
* Biophysical Effects of Reversible Lipid Modification of Integral Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Shikha Nangia, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 415,311.00

There is growing evidence that integral membrane proteins, which represent
approximately 30% of the proteins in the human body, undergo lipid modifications
to maintain their healthy biological function. However, how lipidation regulates
the function of the membrane proteins is not well understood. This project will
uncover the effect of lipid modification on these integral membrane proteins.
Using computer modeling and simulations, the project will study the changes in
protein structure due to the attachment of the lipid. The project will also
examine the interaction of the protein with other integral membrane proteins and
the change in their biological activity in the presence and absence of the
attached lipid. The project involves concepts from many disciplines, including
chemistry, biology, physics, mathematics, and computer science, and provides an
excellent opportunity to train students with different academic backgrounds. The
project will provide scientific training to undergraduate students through a
cohort-based approach that will engage a team of 5–10 undergraduates in a ten-
week summer research project. The project will focus on recruiting and better
preparing underrepresented minority students for graduate school. Students will
be equipped with research experiences, fundamental knowledge, and professional
skills to successfully transition to doctoral programs in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is motivated
by a lack of knowledge pertaining to the molecular biophysics of the interplay
of lipids and proteins—the structural and functional workhorses of life. The
focus will be on palmitoylation, the covalent attachment of palmitic acid to a
protein's cysteine residue via a thioester bond. The addition of palmitoyl
chain(s) regulates a protein's dynamics and biological function by altering
specific protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions. The project will (i)
characterize the impact of palmitoylation on protein's structure using all-atom
simulations to investigate the structural and chemical asymmetry introduced in
proteins by the addition of palmitoyl chains; (ii) compute the influence of
palmitoylation on protein-lipid dynamics via multiscale simulations to elucidate
palmitoylated protein dynamics over tens of microseconds, and tens of nanometers
in biomimetic cellular and subcellular membrane environments; and (iii) evaluate
the consequence of palmitoylation on protein function via the application of the
newly developed and validated protein association energy landscape (PANEL)
method to capture protein assembly. Results obtained will be verified by data-
sharing collaborations with experimental research groups. The use of an
extensive computational toolkit and bioinformatics approaches with in vitro
experiments will establish the fundamental structural-functional and dynamical
aspects of palmitoylated membrane proteins in their lipid
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.