* 2221113
* Increasing Perseverance and Retention of Computing and Engineering Students Through Service
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Tolga Kaya, Sacred Heart University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,450,727.00

This project contributes to meeting the national need for well-educated
scientists, technology experts, engineers and mathematicians by supporting low-
income, academically talented technology majors with demonstrated financial
need. Support will be in the form of scholarships and extensive supports that
address their specific needs by strengthening their social capital through
stronger relationships with their faculty and fellow students and by engaging in
community service. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships for 24 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in
majors such as Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science,
Information Technology, Game Design Development, and Cybersecurity. Scholars
will be selected as first-year students and will receive scholarships for up to
four years. Specific project activities include a pre-fall program that will
focus on refreshing scholars’ math foundation, math tutoring, cohort building,
faculty mentoring, lab workshops centered around game controller design,
electronic puzzles, or 3D printing, career guidance for scholars and community
engagement with STEM organizations. For community engagement, scholars will
participate in internships to work with several community partners in
Bridgeport, Connecticut that offer learning opportunities after school and in
the summer to low-income K-12 students. This project will examine how the
internships will impact scholars’ STEM identity and attitudes regarding social
justice and service-learning over time, how they impact academic performance and
how scholars’ personalities change over the duration of the six-year
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be three cohorts of eight students per
cohort for a total of 24 unique scholars and 96 unique scholarships. Through the
aforementioned scholarships and supports, Sacred Heart University will provide
the means for low-income, talented scholars with financial need to persist in
their major to graduation and support its scholars in their preparation to
pursue positions in the workforce or to successfully advance to graduate school.
The program has the following four objectives: (1) Decrease the drop-fail-
withdraw rates for foundational mathematics courses and increase the first-year
retention of scholars retained in their STEM majors; (2) Increase the four-year
graduation rate for scholars in any of the S-STEM targeted majors; (3) Increase
the number of scholars placed in a paid summer internship as a rising senior at
regional companies and place scholars in a STEM position in the workforce or a
graduate school program within six months of graduation. SHU has a longstanding
tradition of service-learning in underserved communities and thus added a fourth
objective: (4) Explore the impact of community engagement by giving scholars the
opportunity to apply STEM concepts in communities of need. Each student will
reach 200 hours per summer or winter break of community-focused, paid internship
per scholar in their first and second years in their program. This project
includes a rigorous evaluation plan to measure formative and summative progress
and will disseminate its findings at the International Association for Research
on Service-Learning and Community-Engagement, the National Society of Black
Engineers, the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, the Society of Women
Engineers, and at other conferences. It also plans to sustain successful
supports beyond the funding period. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. The program also
aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge
about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career
pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.