* 2221962
* Collaborative Research: EAR Climate - Pairing calcium and clumped isotopes to inform carbon cycle and climate dynamics at the onset of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Griffith, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 293,010.00

Past climates are relevant to understanding how sensitive the Earth system is to
rising greenhouse gas levels like carbon dioxide. The Late Paleozoic Ice Age
from 350 to 290 million years ago was the longest-lived glaciated period of the
past half-billion years and represents an important opportunity to study the
coupling between Earth’s climate and the global carbon cycle. Although the
challenge in deep time studies is the need to rely on ‘proxies’ for climate
rather than direct measurements, recent advances provide new opportunities to
understand the full range of natural variability in the climate system that
informs our future. This project will develop novel isotope proxies to
understand the role of land plant evolution on organic carbon burial,
atmospheric carbon dioxide, and temperature at the beginning of the Late
Paleozoic Ice Age. Benefits will include training of early career scientists,
including those from under-represented groups, and developing hands-on
demonstrations aimed at improving student understanding of the delicate balance
between carbon inputs and outputs to Earth’s atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research on the Late Paleozoic Ice Age will
investigate important questions that have hindered progress towards
understanding the relationship between global carbon cycling and climate: 1)
diagenetic influences on stable carbon isotopes in shallow water carbonates that
are used as a proxy for carbon cycling and 2) the role of temperature versus ice
volume in marine oxygen isotope records. To test hypotheses of diagenesis versus
global carbon cycling and temperature versus ice volume, this research will
utilize the novel calcium and clumped isotope systems. Calcium has the advantage
of providing insight on the impact of diagenesis on measured carbon isotopes
whereas clumped isotopes record temperature but are unaffected by mineralogy,
precipitation rate, or the isotopic evolution of seawater. Calcium and clumped
isotopes may transform our understanding of Earth history and this study will
benefit research approaches over a range of spatial and temporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.