* 2221086
* CAS-Climate: Supramolecular Control of Reactivity in the Solid State: From Metal-Free Photoswitches and Click Reactivity to Manufacturing Diverse Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Leonard MacGillivray, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project, with support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
aims to advance the understanding of, and enhance the value of, reactions
performed in the organic solid state. These new insights benefits materials
researchers and synthetic chemists alike. Reactions performed in organic solids
are relevant to the field of green chemistry: they are highly selective, high-
yielding, and solvent-free. Reactions performed in organic solids can also be
used to store chemical energy, which makes the solids valuable to develop
materials for applications in sustainability. The potential of the organic solid
state to be used as a medium to perform synthetic chemistry and develop
sustainable materials, however, has been severely hampered by a lack of a
general method to orient reactive groups into the proper geometry to undergo a
chemical reaction. Professor MacGillivray and his research group make use of
noncovalent bonds (e.g. hydrogen bonds) in a general way to guide the assembly
of molecules in crystals so that reactive groups are properly and reliably
aligned to undergo reaction. Thereby they study the scope of starting materials
that react in the solid state and how to eventually manufacture a wide variety
of molecules and materials as products. The research has the potential to lay
the foundation for a “greener” manufacturing approach for the chemical industry
where reactions can be performed using purely organic solids without the use of
metals or metal ions. As part of the project’s outreach activities, high-school
students are introduced to noncovalent bonding and organic solid-state
chemistry. The principal investigator also involves students from
underrepresented groups in the research activities, maintains active
collaborations with undergraduate colleges, and engages middle-school students
to promote careers in chemical science (e.g. X-ray crystallography). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
makes reactions performed in the organic solid state more valuable to synthetic
chemists and materials scientists by developing solids that form the basis of
functional materials and expand the scope of reactions and products.
Specifically, the researchers study (i) their potential as metal-free organic
switches, (ii) uses of cocrystals to perform metal-free ‘click’ reactions, and
(iii) an approach to generate broad ranges of molecules. Photochromic switches
are designed using hydrogen-bond-directed self-assembly that direct
intermolecular [2+2] photodimerizations. The click reactions are conducted with
the assistance of perfluorophenyl-phenyl interactions to generate extended pi-
conjugated molecules. Broad ranges of molecules are synthesized in crystals
using post-synthetic modifications of cyclobutanes functionalized with aryl
nitriles. The research is motivated by the fact that although the organic solid
state is a highly attractive medium to perform chemical reactions to make (and
break) covalent bonds, there remains a lack of general methodologies to perform
reactions ‘at will’ akin to the liquid phase. Outcomes of this research are
expected to enable a broader application of reactions in solids to problems and
challenges of organic synthesis (e.g. complex molecules, additional chemical
reactions), green chemistry (e.g. solvent-free preparation), and materials
science (e.g. single-crystal switches).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.