* 2221908
* Investigating the Mechanics of Buzz Pollination: A Structural Dynamics Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Erick Johnson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 544,492.00

This grant will fund research that enables a better understanding of how bees
extract pollen from flowers, with application to the design of artificial
pollination systems for reducing costs and enhancing yields of agricultural
crops that depend on dwindling numbers of natural pollinators, thereby promoting
the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity and welfare.
Economically valuable crops such as tomatoes, chilies, and eggplant rely for
reproduction on native bee populations performing a behavior called buzz
pollination, in which a bee lands on a flower stamen (male reproductive organ)
and rapidly vibrates it to release its pollen. This pollen is collected on the
bee’s abdomen and may be transferred to the pistil (female reproductive organ)
of another flower as the bee continues to forage. While buzz pollination is
critical to food security, the mechanical processes by which pollen are released
by the flower are poorly understood. This knowledge gap stands in the way of the
development of new technologies that may supplement natural pollinators in
agricultural settings. In this project, this challenge is overcome by a
systematic development of high-fidelity, data-driven models of the structural
mechanics of deformable stamens and the dynamics of pollen expulsion using
physical experiments and advanced computational analysis. Concurrent development
of buzz pollination workshops, video, and other resources for the public will
increase the accessibility of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to quantify the structural deformation response of floral stamens under
dynamic loads induced by a bee and the subsequent expulsion of pollen due to
stamen vibrations and induced aerodynamic flows. This project will provide
critical insight into how the vibratory forces imparted by buzz-pollinating bees
are optimized to maximize pollen release. First, experimental studies will be
conducted to quantify the forces imparted by buzz-pollinating bees and to
measure how floral stamens respond to such forces. Finite-element models of
stamens will then be created and refined such that they accurately predict
previously measured dynamic responses. Finally, computational models of pollen
expulsion will be developed using the discrete-element method and moving
boundary conditions prescribed from finite element modeling of the stamen. These
pollen expulsion models will consider particle kinetics, adhesion, friction, and
viscous aerodynamics. Pollen particle parameters will be identified via a
combination of atomic force and optical microscopy. Parametric studies will
reveal which physical phenomena are most critical to pollen
expulsion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.