* 2221585
* Networking and Computing: Scholarships and Support for Computing Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Anne Hinderliter, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2028
* USD 749,994.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Minnesota at Duluth. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 19 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Computer Science, with first year students receiving 4
years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase students’ 4-year
degree completion in computer science and to connect them with careers that are
aligned with their interests and goals, and that they find satisfying and
meaningful. The project links scholarship support with effective support
activities including peer mentoring, discipline specific networking
opportunities and skill development, undergraduate research, participation in
national and international professional conferences, and financial literacy
support. With the help of mentors, students will continue to build a sense of
belonging and professional identity and will engage in career exploration to
facilitate their degree completion and transition into the labor market. The
project will also support enhanced mentor training for all peer, computer
science faculty, and computer science industry professional mentors, and
increased academic support aimed at improving first-year student retention in
computer science. Because the University of Minnesota at Duluth has a high
population of women, as well as Native Americans and students from other
underrepresented groups, this project has the potential to broaden participation
in STEM fields and to learn how increasing students’ sense of belonging,
professional identity, and networking capabilities support the retention and
graduation of this student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There are three
specific aims: 1) to increase retention and graduation to 90 percent among
computer science students participating in the project, 2) to assist students to
attain a computer science job matching their interests and goals, find a
rewarding career, and achieve social mobility after graduation, and 3) to
generate new knowledge about factors that will increase students' sense of
belonging, professional identity, and networking capabilities. It is generally
known that mentoring, undergraduate research, and networking can positively
affect student persistence in STEM. However, little is known about how each of
these affect student persistence for low-income, academically talented students
in computer science, especially when offered via a tiered, developmentally keyed
program that is buttressed by mentorship training for peer, faculty, and
industry professional mentors. The project will investigate how these factors
correspond to students’ sense of belonging, professional identity, and
networking capabilities and how these factors in turn correspond to student
persistence and entry into the field. This project has the potential to advance
the understanding of mechanisms that increase low-income students’ graduation
and entry into the computer science field, and to develop new knowledge that
will inform the broader national STEM education community. The project will be
evaluated using a mixed methods approach using information from surveys, focus
groups, and institutional data regarding student participation. Results of this
project will be made available via presentations at scientific conferences,
articles published in scientific and educational journals, the project website,
social media, and presentations on campuses and in community forums. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.