* 2221883
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the roles of biogenic exudates in the cycling and uptake of rare earth elements
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Aaron Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2025
* USD 208,172.00

Bacteria catalyze numerous processes that are critical for the flow of elements
at local to global scales. In many cases, these processes are fueled by enzymes
that require specific metal ions to function. In the last decade, lanthanum and
other rare earth elements (REYs), which have long been thought to lack a role in
biology, have been identified as cofactors for enzymes used by diverse bacteria.
This exciting discovery further expands the periodic table of life and raises
many questions about the biogeochemistry of REYs. A central tenant of the
project is that, because REYs are not abundant in most environments, bacteria
require specific strategies to acquire these elements from their environments.
This project will identify and characterize molecules associated with bacterial
uptake of REYs. Because REYs are strategic materials that are difficult to
purify from ores and waste products, the results are not only important for
understanding biological process but also may have implications for economic
competitiveness and national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing
recognition that the microbial uptake of essential trace metals is mediated by
biogenic chelating agents. The recent discovery that REYs are required for PQQ
Type I alcohol-oxidizing enzymes in methylotrophic and other diverse bacteria
coupled with the natural presence of REYs in non-biologically available chemical
forms lead to the hypothesis that structurally distinct, but as-yet
unidentified, biogenic chelating agents (lanthanophores) facilitate the
solubilization and uptake of REYs from soils. This project combines microbiology
with coordination, soil, and analytical chemical approaches to identify and
characterize lanthanophores, bacteriogenic ligands that promote solubilization
and binding of REYs from soils and other matrices. The result of this project
have the potential to transform our view of the importance of REYs in biological
systems and their impact on nutrient cycling and revise current thinking towards
nutrient uptake and the relationships between microorganisms and mineral
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.