* 2221979
* Collaborative Research: A holistic human-in-the-loop framework for optimizing a personalized prosthetic arm
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Minghui Zheng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2025
* USD 220,000.00

A wide variety of prostheses are available to persons with upper-limb loss.
These include devices that simply open and close the hand to those with multiple
grip options and wrist movement. However, it is difficult to determine the
optimal device for an individual because there is no objective standard. There
are two main reasons for this shortcoming. First, there is currently no means to
evaluate the effect of individual prosthetic features on user performance. For
example, it is currently not possible to solely increase prosthetic wrist motion
without changing the system weight and volume. Accordingly, if the patient
rejects the prosthesis, it is unclear whether they are rejected due to
difficulties in use or because of the weight. Second, it can be difficult to
assess performance with upper limb prostheses as there is no single task that is
representative of all upper limb activities of daily living. The goal of this
proposal is to develop a new metric, called holistic indicator, which quantifies
an individual’s performance and perception of a prosthesis. To make this
possible, a cable-actuated prosthetic emulator is employed which can mimic
different physical characteristics of the prosthesis and use machine learning to
understand the relationship between design characteristics and user performance.
The system developed in this proposal will enable the PI Team to find the
optimal prosthesis for an individual by understanding their unique robot-human
interaction. The research outcomes of this proposal will be disseminated through
Wearable Robotics Camp for K-12 students and FEMMES (Females Excelling More in
Math, Engineering, and Science) events for female high school students to
encourage STEM education among the next generation. The learning experiences of
graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will be a unique
opportunity to acquire multidisciplinary skill sets, build professional networks
through collaboration between faculty and students in robotics, data science,
and biomechanics, and foster trans-disciplinary leaders of AI-based wearable
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to design a human-
in-the-loop (HITL) framework for prosthetic arm parameter optimization by
determining a quantifiable holistic indicator using interpretable machine
learning (ML) models. A holistic indicator is a metric for prosthesis
optimization that incorporates both physical and cognitive quantitative
responses. The innovation of a holistic framework is to reflect multiple
critical factors during prosthesis use for optimizing a specific design
parameter of interest of the upper limb prosthesis. The framework will be
developed by collecting data from individuals with upper limb amputation using a
cable-actuated prosthetic emulator arm, Intelligent COnvertible Prosthetic
Emulator (ICOPE), developed in the PI’s laboratory. ICOPE features off-board
electronics to easily change only specific design parameters through software
while maintaining the rest of the design parameters. The data from ICOPE will be
used to train interpretable ML models to determine the holistic indicator. The
same data set will be collected from non-amputee participants as well, to
identify the unique robot-human interaction of amputee participants for
personalized prosthetic designs. This project will also include pilot studies
utilizing the HITL framework with longer training periods and investigate user
perception of the optimized design when the objective metrics will be shared
with the user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.