* 2221677
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Robotic Iceberg Sentinels (RISE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Michael Krieg, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 455,460.00

Icebergs, originating from glacier discharge and ice sheet calving, are an
important factor in polar regions. During their life-span, they drift
equatorward and transport freshwater, affecting local environments and large-
scale ocean processes, such as the sea-level rise. Icebergs also pose a risk to
marine transportation at high latitudes and can damage offshore equipment
including subsea cables and pipelines. Being able to rapidly assess icebergs and
the surrounding water conditions is important for answering iceberg-related
science questions and risk management for offshore operations. This award
supports the development of the Robotic Iceberg Sentinel (RISE) system for
obtaining accurate in-situ measurements of icebergs’ shapes and their
surrounding water conditions. A comprehensive iceberg mapping data set will be
created for validating iceberg drift and deterioration models, and improving
empirical iceberg geometrical models. The result will advance our understanding
of iceberg impacts on local and global environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will advance the foundation of marine robotics in underwater
localization, coverage-based path planning and inter-robot collaboration. First,
iceberg-referenced localization algorithms will be developed to localize
underwater assets, i.e., the autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) and drifting
floats, relative to the translating and rotating iceberg. This will advance the
state of the art of robot localization in non-inertial frames. Furthermore, an
online coverage-based path planning system will be developed to guide an AUV to
form a complete volumetric scan of the underwater portion of the iceberg by
circumnavigating the iceberg at different depths. This researched system will
feature a new inverse-sonar model to better represent the environment and a new
information-based utility function to balance exploration and exploitation
objectives. Finally, new path planning strategies accounting for communication
and operational constraints will be developed to advance the field of inter-
robot collaboration. One path planner will dynamically adjust the path of an
autonomous surface vehicle (ASV) online to provide reliable communication
support to an AUV, while another planner determines the optimal deployment
occurrences and locations to maximize the sensing coverage of a fleet of
drifting floats in uncertain ocean currents. This project will broaden the
participation of under-served groups through participation in the Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship in Oceanography (SURFO) program at URI and the
Native Hawaiian Science &amp; Engineering Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) at UHM,
and a new summer workshop for students from a local high school with high
minority-enrollment. In collaboration with the Rhode Island School of Design
(RISD), this project will produce new visual and experiential digital products
to describe the critical nature of icebergs and their impacts to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.