* 2221062
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Single-Entity Nanochemistry and Nanocrystal Design
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,810,000.00

The NSF Center for Single-Entity Nanochemistry and Nanocrystal Design (C-SENND)
is supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry. This Phase I Center is led by Sara Skrabalak of Indiana
University. Other team members include Xingchen Ye, also of Indiana University,
as well as Lane Baker and Xin Yan of Texas A&amp;M University, Graeme Henkelman
of the University of Texas at Austin, and Katherine Willets of Temple
University. Crystals with nanoscale dimensions, i.e., nanocrystals, are finding
use in nearly all sectors of our economy. Their utility arises from the ability
to access new properties that depend on their crystal size and shape. This
strong dependence on size and shape provides ample opportunity to discover new
nanocrystals with useful properties. Yet, as nanocrystal samples are inherently
heterogeneous, this discovery process is also exceptionally challenging and
requires that nanocrystals within a sample be analyzed individually.
Conceptually, this challenge is similar to drug discovery and design, where
there is a large experimental space from which a promising target has to be
identified. This process has been transformed over the past few decades by high-
throughput screening and array-based assays, which shorten the time from target
identification to lead generation. Inspired by the conceptual similarities,
C-SENND will apply similar strategies to single nanocrystal analyses to create
the scientific toolkit and chemical knowledge to transform the discovery of lead
nanocrystals with exceptional properties for applications in chemical sensing
and catalysis. Research will occur with an inclusive environment, with
professional development activities being implemented that build student self-
efficacy. Broader impacts of C-SENND emphasize collaboration between scientists
and artists to disseminate scientific content through public art in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-SENND will undertake two aims during Phase
1. First, the team will merge array-based technologies with single nanocrystal
measurements for high-throughput property screening and lead identification from
metal nanocrystal libraries. This effort will leverage an electrochemical
screening system for nanocrystal library generation and optical methods for
high-throughput read-out of nanocrystal properties for chemical sensing and
catalysis, providing large sets of single nanocrystal data for model testing and
guided design of new nanocrystals. Second, the team will develop single
nanocrystal methodologies to establish the relationship between nanocrystal
structure and electrochemical response, achieving the breakthrough of product
identification and quantification at the level of individual nanocrystal
catalysts. This effort will be achieved by coupling electrochemical imaging with
mass spectrometry (ECI-MS) of single nanocrystal catalysts. Looking toward Phase
II, we envision convergence of aims, where the array-based platform for
nanocrystal library generation is paired with the ECI-MS, providing a unique
platform for rapid screening of single nanocrystal electrocatalysts for
nanocrystal discovery and design. Broadly, C-SENND aims to transform how the
chemical community thinks about nanocrystal heterogeneity, viewing such
heterogeneity as an asset to discovery rather than a detriment to be
suppressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.