* 2221809
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Testing the Mechanisms and Consequences of an Adaptive Response to a Catastrophic Fire and Heatwave in Stream Frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* W. Chris Funk, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 121,120.00

Climate change is causing more extreme weather events such as fires and
heatwaves. In addition to the tragic loss of human life, such events have a
devastating effect on animals and plants. One challenge for biologists is to
understand how species will respond to such climatic events – if they can cope
or if they will go extinct. To meet this challenge, researchers must identify
what biological changes occur following extreme climatic events. This project
seeks to understand how populations of tailed frogs, which are found in cold
streams of the Pacific Northwest, have coped in the aftermath of a large fire
and heatwave. The research team had been studying the physiology and genetics of
tailed frogs in this region for 4 years before the fire and heatwave occurred in
2020-2021. Only a year and a half after these events, the researchers will
measure what physiological, genetic, and other changes have occurred in the frog
populations. This will allow the researchers to 1) understand how the frog
responded to extreme climatic events, 2) predict how they will respond in the
future, and 3) present their findings to local land managers to discuss possible
conservation strategies for frogs and other freshwater aquatic species in the
area, and 4) train a postdoctoral and undergraduate researcher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species can respond to extreme climatic events
via plasticity and/or adaptation. How populations respond may depend on the
magnitude and severity of environmental change, although investigations of
responses to extreme climatic events are rare. For four years, the researchers
have been studying the thermal sensitivity and adaptive capacity of coastal
tailed frogs (Ascaphus truei), a dominant herbivore in fast-flowing streams in
the Pacific Northwest, to predict their responses to climate change. They have
measured stream thermal characteristics, tadpole thermal physiology, and
identified genomic markers associated with those variables. In 2020, an intense
forest fire burned on top of two of the study streams. A year later, an
unprecedented heatwave impacted all of the sites. The proposed research will
test hypotheses about changes that have occurred at the environmental,
physiological, and genomic levels in response to these climatic events. This
research will (i) identify patterns of thermal physiological change in fire- and
heatwave-affected populations, (ii) test for signatures of genetically-based
adaptation to the fire and heatwave, and (iii) integrate physiological and
genomic findings to predict the degree to which persistence of populations
changes as a result of each extreme climatic event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.