* 2221645
* CAS-Climate:Collaborative Research:Understanding How Electrochemical Cation Trapping in Metal Oxides Enhances Subsequent Reversible Insertion of Anions in Forming Metal Oxyhalides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Xiulei Ji, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Greater adoption of renewable energy sources
necessitates economical and scalable electric-energy storage solutions. Novel
battery chemistry holds the key to much-needed next-generation electric energy
storage technologies to enable a sustainable society. Conventional batteries
utilize cation-focused battery chemistry, which means positively charged ions
migrate during the charge and discharge of a battery. With this project,
supported by the Ceramics program in the Division of Materials Research,
researchers at Oregon State University and Vanderbilt University investigate a
possible mechanism for anion-based batteries (with migrating negatively charged
ions instead of positively charged ones) for grid storage. Anion batteries have
a great potential to replace current cation batteries for scalable energy
storage, but fundamental mechanistic understanding is lacking. The project
generates knowledge about what chemical environment in the metal-oxide battery
material is more suitable for the transport and storage of anions during battery
operation. Only sustainable, earth-abundant elements are investigated in the
project for the electrodes, including manganese- and iron-based oxides, halide
ions, and hydroxide; they are coupled with inexpensive and safe aqueous
electrolytes. The new battery chemistry, if developed successfully, will greatly
benefit our society by providing a low-cost, environmentally friendly energy-
storage solution in the future. As part of the project the PIs introduce state-
of-the-art materials research of novel battery chemistry to students from
underserved communities and disseminate the knowledge to the public through
institutional tools such as an online course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge of electrochemical anion insertion in hosts
remains limited, particularly when the hosts are metal oxides. Anion insertion
in metal oxides is inherently challenging because the interstitials are lined
with oxides that repulse incoming anions. This project, supported by the
Ceramics program in the Division of Materials Research, precisely tackles this
problem by transforming the local structures of metal oxides with trapped
cations. Researchers at Oregon State University and Vanderbilt University
elucidate a new ion insertion mechanism whereby the irreversible insertion of
cations in metal oxides promotes the reversible anion storage to form metal
oxyhalides. Their research tests the central hypothesis that cation trapping
transforms the structure of metal oxides and the chemical environment such that
the subsequent anion insertion is greatly enhanced. They elucidate how the
cation trapping alters the local structures of metal oxides and how the anions
interact with the trapped cations and advance our understanding of the chemical
environment and the changes caused by cation trapping and the anion insertion.
Utilizing the synergy of expertise in electrochemical and structural
characterization and first principles predictive modeling, the researchers
establish mechanistic understandings of this new mechanism by investigating the
model structure of spinel Mn3O4, in which the trapped Zn-ions enhances chloride
storage. The project also develops a general principle of the new mechanism
across different cations to be trapped, metal oxides as hosts, and anion charge
carriers. Additionally, the integrated experimental and computation studies lay
the foundation for a promising new research field using anion insertion to form
metal oxyhalides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.