* 2221519
* Aligning Career and Campus Experiences for Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Jennifer Wilburn, PENNSYLVANIA WESTERN UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 745,379.00

This project will support the recruitment, enrollment, retention, and graduation
of 12 low-income, academically-talented students with demonstrated financial
need enrolling in the following Bachelor of Science degree programs: Computer
Engineering Technology, Electrical Engineering Technology, or Mechatronics
Engineering Technology. These degrees are a crucial component of 21st-century
workforce development, with graduates entering well-paying jobs that provide
economic benefits at the local, regional, and state levels. The project's title
"Aligning Career and Campus Experiences for Student Success," or "ACCESS,"
conveys the project team's approach that is based on established practices for
teaching and learning, and incorporates intentional, proactive activities to
prepare students for immediate contribution to the workforce. ACCESS Scholars
will be supported through student-centered advising practices, coupled with
opportunities for guided professional exploration. These scholarships fulfill
the NSF goal of enabling access to STEM education for all, including low-income,
academically-talented students. The funding to address unmet need will enable
low-income, academically-talented students to attend college and focus on their
studies enroute to graduation with a degree in a high-demand field necessary for
regional, state, and national economic growth and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide the ACCESS project. First is to
recruit and provide scholarship support (up to $10,000/year for 4 years based on
unmet financial need) for 12 low-income, academically-talented students, six in
each of two cohorts. Second is to retain and graduate students accepted to the
ACCESS project, using support services including Appreciative Advising,
Supplemental Instruction, and other available campus supports to ensure student
success. The third and last goal is to create a network of pre-professional and
career development activities connecting campus learning experiences to business
and industry workplaces that provide participants with skills and experiences
for success as a STEM professional. ACCESS will provide insight on how a
scaffolded series of professional preparation opportunities, combined with
Appreciative Advising and the presence of both peer and faculty mentoring,
affects persistence and retention of low-income, academically-talented students
enrolled in a regional predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI). In
addition, the project provides an opportunity to examine how directed
internships impact student readiness to complete senior capstone projects and
affect job/career placements. As a result of this project, researchers will
identify interventions, either singly or in combination, that maximize
completion of a STEM degree for low-income, academically-talented students at a
PUI. In addition, this project will identify the success of those interventions
in aligning campus and career experiences to develop students who have both up-
to-date content knowledge and the ability to actively engage in the workforce
and make early contributions to their employers. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.