* 2221726
* Thermodynamics of Multi-Domain Power Networks: Principles for Optimization and Control with Applications to Turboelectric Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Hanz Richter, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2025
* USD 399,617.00

This grant will support research leading to advancing the understanding and
application of thermodynamic principles that govern power transfer in
interconnected energy systems with electric power storage, conversion, and
utilization. Environmental sustainability, economy and strategic competitiveness
continue to fuel the quest for more efficient energy management methods. Such
methods encompass, in addition to traditional industrial processes involving
conversions between heat and work, forefront technologies such as microgrids,
hybrid vehicles and electrified aircraft propulsion. Therefore, there is a need
to develop theoretical foundations of interconnected thermodynamic systems that
go beyond the classical setting. This project introduces innovative ideas
allowing meaningful interpretations of entropy and its connection to efficiency
in extended physical domains. It develops methodologies for optimal design and
control in application to electrified turbine engines. Educational and outreach
activities include undergraduate student mentoring and collaboration with the
MathCorps Cleveland summer program that targets students in grades 6 to 12 who
are underrepresented in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Entropy is
connected to the ability to perform work efficiently and is the basis for the
optimal design and operation of systems deriving work from heat. Entropy cannot
be defined for Hamiltonian systems due to their lack of a preferent direction of
power transmission, unlike the diffusive power transfer patterns found in
thermofluid systems. This project adopts a systems-theoretic approach to
thermodynamics to define entropy generation and exergy efficiency by cyclic
averages. The objective is to provide counterparts to key notions of
irreversible thermodynamics, along with methods for model-free parametric
optimization and feedback control design. The objective will be achieved with
tasks organized along three thrusts: i) Formalizing the property of energy
cyclo-directionality, applicable to port-Hamiltonian systems on graphs and
providing definitions for average entropy generation and exergy efficiency; ii)
Solving parametric optimization problems considering second law principles. This
involves online spectral estimation techniques to enable model-free, self-
optimization methods with tools such as extremum-seeking and formulating
multivariable, frequency-domain optimal control methodologies under entropy-
related objectives; and iii) Demonstrating and assessing the practical validity
of this framework using a turboelectric propulsion system where an engine
simulation interacts in real-time with a physical electromechanical system in
the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.