* 2221587
* Awards to Increase Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Diversity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Gail Rosen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,496,929.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Drexel University (DU). Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships for up to 23 unique undergraduate students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Mechanical (ME) and Electrical/Computer Engineering (ECE).
Undergraduate students will receive up to four years of scholarship support. The
Awards to Increase ME and ECE diversity (AIME) project seeks to increase student
enrollment and persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective
wrap-around services and addressing cultural barriers that have made ME and ECE
less accessible to underrepresented minorities (URMs) and women. By employing
the Thrive Mosaic (TM) Framework, an ecosystem of resources and coaches will
support the cohort of AIME scholars in developing a sense of belonging in their
discipline and strengthening their identities as engineers. AIME scholars will
also benefit from various activities including workshops, seminars and invited
speakers to deepen their connections to their discipline and the AIME project.
The AIME scholars will reflect on their experiences studying engineering by
producing a podcast series “Engineers Create!” Additionally, through structured
mentoring and advising the AIME Scholars will establish their career goals and
then prepare for their chosen career by participating in 18 months of Co-op
learning experiences in industry and exploring undergraduate research. The AIME
project will also host workshops for the TM partners and faculty designed to
raise awareness of the barriers to success that face students in engineering
disciplines (particularly URM and women) and introduce teaching approaches that
encourage inclusiveness. The AIME project has considerable potential to
transform the engineering community’s approach to recruiting and retaining ME
and ECE students from historically underserved communities, as well as providing
a framework for programming that will support a more diverse student population
in disciplines that have struggled to attract and retain talented URM and women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIME project seeks to enhance enrollment, retention,
academic performance, and graduation rates for low-income academically talented
students, with a focus on those pursuing baccalaureate degrees in ME and ECE
departments at DU. The project will engage in special efforts to attract female
and URM students to apply to be scholarship recipients. This project will seek
to answer the following research questions: (i) Does providing structured
support services to URM/women broaden the participation of students in STEM?
(ii) How does employing the Thrive Mosaic (TM) Framework help URM/women students
navigate the resources most appropriate for them and create an equitable
environment for their intellectual growth? and (iii) Do intentionally designed
training and workshops delivered to the project's TM partners and faculty in
cultural sensitivity transform STEM departments’ policies, practices, and
classrooms into spaces that are welcoming for all students? The AIME project
will partner with local stakeholders in STEM education to recruit talented,
under resourced students from URM and women populations in the Philadelphia
School District. The AIME Program will provide both financial and academic
support through scholarships, mentorship, tutoring, undergraduate research
opportunities, and Co-op employment in preparation for engineering careers. This
project will generate knowledge about the effectiveness of the factors and
activities influencing the recruitment and success of URMs and women in STEM.
Expected findings from this research include the identification of design
principles that will inform future approaches for designing student support
activities within engineering programs. The evaluative work will use both
quantitative and qualitative data to measure the overall and the ongoing
effectiveness of the program. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.