* 2221912
* The Alliance for Identity-Inclusive Computing Education-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (AIICE-PRF)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,250,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). While computer science has transformed society, there
are striking examples of how the groundbreaking technologies underlying this
transformation have proven extremely harmful for people from groups who are
historically underrepresented in computing. One notable instance is facial
recognition software trained on a set of images with limited racial diversity.
The resulting bias in such software can be attributed to the lack of diversity
in academic and professional computing environments. Successfully broadening
participation in computing requires computing faculty and researchers who can
create/implement identity-inclusive computing curricula, policies, and
practices, as well as perform innovative research in computing education. The
Alliance for Identity-Inclusive Computing Education-Postdoctoral Researcher
Fellowship (AiiCE-PRF) is based on evidence that the lack of diversity in
university computer science departments is replicated in the computer science
and computing education research community in terms of researcher identities,
research topics, and available postdoctoral researcher positions. This
marginalization impacts postdocs’ sense of belonging, publication and citation
counts, and thus future hiring and career advancement. The AiiCE-PRF program
will combine research and professional development activities related to
computing education as well as provide best practices for identity-inclusive
postdoc experiences that can be leveraged across STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the AiiCE-PRF is to increase the
number of postdocs from groups who are historically underrepresented in
computing and the number of postdocs performing identity-inclusive computing
education research. The three-year project includes a research initiative where
Fellows perform mixed-methods research related to training, curricula and
pedagogy, policy, and student/faculty perceptions of race in computing. Fellows
also participate in a professional development program that focuses on the three
key components of a faculty portfolio: research, teaching, and service.
Throughout this experience, fellows will work with the project team, members of
the greater AiiCE alliance (who span disciplines, sectors, and identities), and
each other to also develop independent research projects that will serve as the
foundation for their future programs of research. Ultimately, the AiiCE-PRF will
1) increase fellows’ understanding of and preparation for academic careers; 2)
increase fellows’ sense of belonging in the discipline (both as a postdocs and
members of groups that are historically underrepresented in computing); and 3)
contribute to best practices for supporting computing postdocs across the
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.