* 2221056
* Preparing a Multi-Institutional Research and Practice Collaboration to Increase the Success of Low-Income Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Sabrina Solanki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by strengthening collaborations and
planning for a future Track 3 S-STEM proposal that would support the retention
and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need. Specifically, this project will build upon existing partnerships
between several large public research institutions in the Sloan Equity and
Inclusion in STEM Introductory Courses (SEISMIC) Collaboration including the
University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, which will lead the planning effort. Project
activities include recruiting a diverse, multi-institutional team and outlining
key questions, aims, and actions for the future proposal. The project team will
also conduct a needs assessment and analyze existing data from a co-curricular
undergraduate research program to determine how to better support low-income
students in similar experiences. The project will advance understanding of
inter-institutional cohort programs and strengthen collaborations between
participating SEISMIC institutions by directly connecting professionals in
financial aid, student affairs, and several existing programs that support low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this project will be
achieved by: (1) establishing relationships and agreements across institutions;
(2) assessing barriers for low-income students on participating campuses; (3)
identifying potential curricular and co-curricular activities to support these
students; and (4) analyzing existing pilot data on co-curricular research
experiences to understand potential impacts. Ultimately, this project will
identify a multi-institutional team of collaborators that will work together to
develop and submit a Track 3 proposal to the S-STEM program. The project will
identify strategies to enhance the positive impacts of scholarships and other
financial aid by designing a coordinated, multi-institutional approach that
leverages the expertise of educators, social scientists, offices of financial
aid, and student support services. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.