* 2221046
* Development of Excellence in Science through Intervention, Resilience, and Enrichment, Track II
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Eric Muller, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,978.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Iona College. Iona is a private institution in the New York City
metropolitan area that enrolls a large proportion of underrepresented minority
and commuter students who need strong support to develop connections to their
STEM major and the college. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 24 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in computer science, biology, chemistry (including biochemistry), and
mathematics. Scholars will enter as first-year students and will receive
scholarships for four years. The project objectives are to improve recruitment,
retention, and graduation of the scholars; facilitate the scholars’ ability to
develop strong connections with faculty and peers; increase their awareness of
STEM professional activities and professions through research and internship
experiences; improve their understanding of careers and entrepreneurial
activities; and facilitate their placement in a STEM career or graduate program.
The project initiatives include a first-year learning community, faculty
mentoring, peer-led academic and social network support, undergraduate research
experiences and conference presentations, entrepreneurial education, and a four-
year career development plan. The project adds to the knowledge base by
evaluating the effectiveness of individualized attention from faculty, strong
relationships with peers, and of first-hand experiences of STEM professional
activities through research and internships and entrepreneurial education on the
retention and success of low-income STEM majors, specifically Iona’s minority
and primarily commuter undergraduates. The project hopes to develop highly
trained STEM professionals from low-income backgrounds, thus improving their
economic prospects, meeting local workforce demand, and broadening participation
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Specifically, the project aims to reduce the
attrition rate in STEM majors caused by adjustment difficulties in introductory
STEM courses coupled with a lack of resilience in struggling students, low
feelings of connection and high career uncertainty that discourage students from
overcoming initial academic challenges, and the difficulty faced by
nonresidential students in forming student-faculty and student-peer
relationships and developing a sense of belonging to the institutional
community. Based on Iona College’s prior S-STEM experience and the literature,
retention and graduation rates can be improved through individualized attention
from faculty, strong relationships with peers, understanding of the connections
between science and society, and firsthand experiences of STEM professional
activities. The project will conduct an effectiveness study to generate evidence
in support of these strategies, specifically faculty and peer mentoring, peer
tutoring to increase first-year success, and undergraduate research and
internships coupled with career awareness and development of an entrepreneurial
mindset. The evaluation seeks to specifically determine the impact of activities
that aim to increase retention in STEM and degree attainment by (1) improving
the scholars’ relationships and feelings of connection to their major and the
college and (2) enhancing student motivation to persist through increased
knowledge of STEM professions, societal impacts, and career paths. Findings
shared through regional and national conferences and publications should inform
external STEM faculty and administrators of the merits of increasing
individualized attention and extensive research experiences and could encourage
institutions to adopt similar practices. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.