* 2221872
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Control Automation and Learning for Energy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Tanya Barham, COMMUNITY ENERGY LABS INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a commercial building management
system that uses model predictive control for small to mid-sized commercial
building owners to help them flexibly manage increasingly complex energy codes
and prices. This technology uses machine learning to automate costly aspects of
advanced building control, and eliminating complexity, frustration, and expense
for leanly staffed building owners who are attempting to save money, meet code,
reduce carbon footprint and adapt to rapidly changing energy prices. The
proposed approach significantly reduces the setup time, the amount of training
data, and the compute time needed for the technology to converge on accurate
models and predictions using building thermal dynamics. These improvements
reduce the controller costs without sacrificing accuracy. This technology will
simplify the setup and implementation process for under-represented segments in
the building automation, efficiency and model-based controls market starting
with K-12 schools. This simplification has several distinct societal and
environmental benefits including: increased energy and demand charge savings,
increased energy efficiency, improved environmental footprint, increased job
creation for building controls technicians, improved resiliency, and additional
educational opportunities for K-12 families and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project develops a
technology capable of building efficiency control. The innovation employs a
hybrid approach based on constrained deep learning tools that build on physical
knowledge of building systems and architecture, thereby making use of sampling
data while producing physics-consistent accuracy in modeling and control
predictions. Specifically, the project team hopes to converge on an architecture
that can more reliably and accurately manage energy use and occupant comfort
compared to state of the art control approaches. The project team also aims to
demonstrate a significant reduction in heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
(HVAC)-driven peak system demand in target buildings while keeping
instrumentation, labor, and data costs per building to an affordable cost for
the target market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.