* 2221240
* The Emerge Scholars Program: Preparing Students for an Innovative Future
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2028
* Garrett Lee, South Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 11/30/2028
* USD 749,992.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at South Florida State College (SFSC), a comprehensive community college
and Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). Over its 6-year duration, the ESP will
provide scholarships to 40 unique students who are pursuing an associate of
science (A.S.) degree in engineering technology. Degrees are a specialization in
advanced manufacturing. First-year and transfer students will receive up to two-
years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase persistence in STEM
through a "Guided Pathway" model that includes cohorts, faculty mentoring, and
success coaching. Scholars will have the opportunity to work on industry
projects with local manufacturers as well as capstone experiences. A significant
outcome of this project will be to assess the Guided Pathways model, which is
predicted to increase student success in diverse STEM students from rural
populations. The project will also contribute to the institution’s understanding
of the main factors that influence students’ self-efficacy and persistence in
completing a two-year engineering technology degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The four
specific aims are to: (1) increase affordable pathways from high school to a
two-year degree and then to a four-year institution or STEM career, (2) improve
educational equity among students from underrepresented groups, (3) increase
post-secondary credential-attainment levels, and (4) raise social mobility. The
Regional Demand Occupation List identified the engineering technology major as a
high priority and more recruitment of students into the degree is needed. The
project will investigate the extent that the collective STEM high-impact
practices operating in the context of Guided Pathways framework contribute to
success of students from low-income, rural, underrepresented minority
communities in engineering technology programs. The study will control for
mediating effects of race and first generation by comparing cohorts of scholars
to non-scholarship-eligible engineering students. The dissemination plan
includes internal sharing of results and practices with the college's leadership
team and faculty, as well as external dissemination to peer institutions and
similar programs. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.