* 2221914
* NSFGEO-NERC: Linking species traits to marine ecosystem functioning
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Bracken, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2025
* USD 831,969.00

Humans are modifying the diversity of life on Earth, changing the number and
composition of species in ecosystems. It is essential to understand how these
changes will affect how natural systems function. This project evaluates a
promising method for predicting the impacts of biodiversity change by linking
species’ physical characteristics – their shapes and forms – to the key roles
that they play in communities and ecosystems. These links between traits and
emergent roles are poorly described, especially in coastal marine environments.
This project involves screening the traits of seaweed species along gradients in
environmental conditions on rocky shorelines – tide height, exposure to heavy
surf, and latitude – along the U.S. West Coast and (via a partnership with the
Natural Environment Research Council in the United Kingdom) the coast of Europe.
This project includes experiments and outreach in regions with substantial
exposure to the public, and the investigators will work with community,
university, and museum outreach personnel to communicate this research to
broader audiences. The project includes mechanisms for curriculum development
and outreach and trains undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in marine science. The project also supports a visual arts exhibit
for public display that illustrates the loss of seaweed species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are using a suite of innovative
approaches to understand the links between functional traits and emergent
functional attributes of seaweeds, providing an unprecedented dataset linking
seaweed morphology, physiology, and ecology: (i) characterizing the functional
structure of seaweed communities and how that structure changes across
environmental gradients, (ii) evaluating how that suite of easily measured
traits is related to physiological and ecological processes, (iii) measuring
species and traits at multiple sites along U.S. and European coastlines spanning
gradients in latitude, wave exposure, and tidal elevation, and (iv) evaluating
changes in functional redundancy along these gradients to quantify vulnerability
of community interactions and ecosystem functioning to species loss These
methods and approaches facilitate exploration of relationships between algal
form and function and provide insights into the functional consequences of
changes in seaweed diversity, with the potential to transform understanding of
marine biodiversity across levels of biological organization. These advances in
linking seaweeds’ functional traits, functional groups, and roles in community-
and ecosystem-level processes enhance prediction of the impacts of changing
biodiversity – especially along environmental gradients and species ranges – and
serve as a template for a mechanistic understanding of the roles of species in
communities and ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project jointly
funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate for Geosciences
(NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United
Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a
single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency
whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful
joint determination of an award recommendation, each Agency funds the proportion
of the budget that supports scientists at institutions in their respective
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.