* 2221012
* Sociocultural and Place-Aware Civil and Environmental Engineering Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2028
* Michael Penn, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2028
* USD 1,498,683.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at the University of Wisconsin-Platteville, a
regional-serving predominately undergraduate public institution with a tradition
for strong engineering programs. Over its 5-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 24 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in civil and/or environmental engineering. First-year students will
receive up to four years of scholarship support. In support of the overall
S-STEM program goal of enabling low-income students with academic ability to
pursue successful careers in STEM fields, this project aims to support student
growth into community-minded, socially responsible civil and environmental
engineers. The project features a three-pronged, place-based approach including
a seminar and general education course, local field trips, and an extended
regional field trip. The project centers on the importance of increasing
participation of professionals from a low economic background in the civil and
environmental engineering industry, developing engineers who have a holistic
community and place-based perspective, and influencing the future civil and
environmental engineering workforce to produce solutions that appropriately
address justice, equity, and inclusion. The project will contribute to the body
of knowledge by helping to identify and advance best practices for socio-
culturally aware place-based engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The need
for infrastructure engineers goes beyond graduating civil and environmental
engineers who are technically proficient. As society moves forward into an age
in need of increased equity and accountability, engineers must increasingly
account for the current and future people for whom and the places in which their
infrastructure will exist. Thus, this project has two specific aims: 1) Expand
scholars’ sense of identity and confidence in themselves as civil and
environmental engineers and 2) Cultivate a community and place-based perspective
in the scholars. The project has the potential to identify and advance
understanding of best practices for socio-culturally aware place-based
engineering education. This project will investigate the effects of place-based
engineering education on students’ professional identity development in civil
and environmental engineering. In addition, this project will look at the effect
of high-impact practices in promoting student retention and success. This
project will investigate the possibility that scholars develop a stronger sense
of identity and confidence as well as a community-based perspective from
participating in place-based engineering education activities. This project will
be evaluated using academic performance metrics, retention and graduation rates,
post-graduation placement data, surveys and focus groups, analysis of ABET
student learning outcomes, and analysis of scholar capstone reflections. Results
of this project will be made available at regular UW-Platteville Engineering
Advisory Board meetings, via conference presentations, and through submission to
journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.