* 2221581
* Supporting Undergraduates for Careers in Computing and Engineering with Scholarships and Supervision II
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* David Bridges, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,052,165.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC). TAMUCC is a Hispanic-
Serving and a minority-serving institution in South Texas that serves a large
proportion of Pell eligible and transfer students. Over its 6-year duration,
this project will provide scholarships to 24 first-year and transfer
undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Engineering and
Computer Science and will receive up to four-years of scholarship support.
Building on a prior S-STEM award, the project aims to increase student retention
and graduation of scholars through effective co-curricular and extra-curricular
activities, such as mentoring, academic counselling, first-year learning
communities, undergraduate research, internships, professional development
seminars, graduate school preparation and scientific conferences. The project
will retain scholars through a cohort-based learning community augmented by
support services tailored for freshmen and transfer students. With the support
of a team of faculty, industry, and peer mentors, students will progress towards
graduation and prepare to enter graduate school or the workforce. Because TAMUCC
has a high population of underrepresented Hispanic students, this project has
the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields and to learn how
mentoring, first-year learning communities, and research, support retention and
graduation of this student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the project is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates in STEM fields. There are three specific aims. First is to
recruit 24 low-income, talented undergraduates, including incoming freshmen and
community college transfer students majoring in the nation’s critical fields of
engineering and computer science. Second is to retain scholars to degree
achievement in designated fields. The third objective is to increase the
graduation rates of the scholars. The project will examine impacts of
participating in co-curricular activities such as, the first-year learning
community, mentoring, internships, research experiences and professional
development activities on retention and graduation rates. Project results will
be compared to the prior S-STEM cohorts as well as to non-scholars in the same
majors. In particular, the project has the potential to advance understanding of
how a first-year learning community in engineering and computer science
increases retention of first-year students. The project’s evaluation strategies
include both internal and external processes to determine programmatic
adjustments to project strategies and summative information to determine the
project's impact. The results will be shared with the campus community through
seminars and disseminated more broadly at national engineering conferences and
publications in education journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.