* 2221980
* CCF:Small:Algorithmic Fraud Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Seth Pettie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,237.00

Fraud is a pervasive problem in all areas of human activity where the incentives
are strong enough to cheat and the methods of detection sufficiently weak. Fraud
is evident in financial transactions, insurance claims, and such, but the
internet has opened up entirely new forms of fraud such as click-fraud and
reputation fraud, and helped to automate older forms of fraud. Most modern
fraud-detection efforts are statistical. They look for statistical anomalies in
transaction records that deviate in some way from known or plausible
distributions. This type of fraud detection is usually ad hoc, specialized to
one application, and typically has no formal mathematical guarantees. In the
future there will be more automation in the perpetration of frauds, and the
subject of the fraud will itself frequently be some computer system. The goal of
this project is to develop an abstract, non-domain-specific theory of
algorithmic and statistical fraud detection. The investigator will develop
general methods for algorithmic fraud detection that have formal guarantees on
their efficiency and efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers
multi-party fraud detection games, which are iterated randomized games in which
the adversarial parties must repeatedly achieve a desired outcome (say, fixing
the outcome of a shared coin flip) by forging their random bits --- and yet
remain undetected. It is the goal of the honest parties to detect when
adversarial manipulation is taking place, and to identify specific adversarial
parties, efficiently and reliably. This framework is general enough to apply to
many problems and domains. The initial goals of the project are to study
abstract fraud detection games (coin flipping games, random walk games,
allocation games, leader election games), and to revisit existing algorithmic
challenges through the lens of statistical fraud detection. The investigator
will design a Byzantine agreement protocol with optimal resilience using
statistical fraud detection tests to discover misbehaving processes. Fraud
detection ideas will be used to protect randomized Monte Carlo data structures
whose internal randomness is partially leaked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.