* 2221881
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Graphene Nanoelectromechanical Oscillators for Extreme Temperature and Harsh Environment Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Philip Feng, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 158,938.00

Sensors capable of operating at high temperatures with high precision and
stability are of great interest and importance for emerging harsh and extreme
environments, including but not limited to wildfire, aerospace, engine, nuclear
plant, and other critical applications. Today’s mainstream state-of-the-art
high-temperature sensing solutions involve multiple components distributed in
distant zones at various temperatures and connected via high-temperature cables
or fibers, resulting in bulky and ineffective sensing systems. Miniature high-
temperature sensors are thus highly desirable, to provide real-time sensing and
monitoring capabilities in small form factor, particularly toward future
internet of things (IoT) adaptable to harsh environments. To date, integrated
high-temperature (up to 1000C) sensors remain challenging due to the lack of
device technologies in both sensing elements and interfacing circuits. In
addition to developing a suitable platform, fundamental studies of the effects
of ~1000C high temperature upon devices are greatly needed. This project is
focused on innovating 1000C-capable sensors based on integrating graphene
nanoelectromechanical resonators and graphene electronics, by exploiting the
inherent high-temperature durability and unique combination of the electrical,
thermal, and mechanical properties of graphene. This research will lay the
foundation for developing ultracompact, ultralow-weight sensors that can operate
at very high temperatures and in harsh environments, especially in energy and
aerospace industry, and for environment and disaster monitoring (e.g., to assist
drones for fighting wildfires). Findings in this research of atomically thin
crystals and their devices will generate fascinating experiential learning
materials and inspirations for students from K-12 through graduate school. The
project also creates opportunities for broadening the participation of
underrepresented and economically disadvantageous groups, and for partnership to
bridge the gap between academia and industry in scaled manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design, model, fabricate, and
experimentally demonstrate a new class of low-power resonant
nanoelectromechanical sensors for very high or extreme temperature, and harsh-
environment applications where temperature of interest can exceed 1000C. The
proposed research will achieve these goals by systematically investigating
atomically thin graphene two-dimensional (2D) resonant nanoelectromechanical
transducers, 2D nanoelectronic circuits, and their integrated systems. Built on
understanding fundamental principles and limitations in state-of-the-art devices
and systems, this project exploits multiphysics coupling among mechanical,
electrical, and thermal domains at high temperature in graphene resonant
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) platform, to carry out efficient and
judicious use of the internal transduction effects that uniquely exist in high-
temperature environment, thanks to the inherent high-temperature endurance of
graphene. Specifically, this EAGER project will demonstrate graphene NEMS
oscillators with real-time sensing capabilities, by co-designing and fabricating
graphene NEMS and graphene electronics that are chip-to-chip integrated using
high-temperature interconnects. After successful construction of graphene
oscillators, temperature sensing up to 1000C or even higher will be
demonstrated, to validate sensing function of the graphene NEMS oscillators.
This research will attain new innovations and insights in device-circuit co-
design and nanosystems integration, since otherwise high-temperature
environments deteriorate sensor performance for nearly all conventional
materials and devices. The heterogeneous integration of the graphene NEMS and
graphene electronics will enable next-generation highly durable miniaturized
low-power sensors for high-temperature and extreme
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.