* 2221976
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--The Influence of Terrain on Tornado Characteristics Following the 10-11 December 2021 Tornado Outbreak
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Franklin Lombardo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 35,000.00

Recent observational and modeling studies of the influence of terrain on
tornadoes have universally cited the need for further research. The 10-11
December 2021 tornado outbreak provides a unique and valuable opportunity to
fill knowledge gaps by conducting both aerial and ground evaluations in forested
areas damaged by strong tornadoes that passed over complex terrain. The primary
objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to provide a
preliminary evaluation of the influence of terrain on tornado characteristics.
The project team will conduct a high-resolution assessment of forest damage and
terrain based on aerial imagery and ground surveys, and then develop a
quantitative comparison of damage levels and tornado characteristics across
terrain features using GIS tools, machine learning, and analytical vortex
models. Results will inform simple engineering models to assess risk to the
built and natural environment and will enhance general awareness of the threat
of tornadoes in areas where the public may not recognize the dangers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing research into the influence of terrain on tornado
characteristics has substantial limitations, including a limited number of case
studies, idealized simulation parameters, and inconclusive or contradictory
results. A novel research approach will test the hypotheses that 1) tornado
intensity decreases (increases) as the vortex moves uphill (downhill), 2) higher
(lower) surface roughness leads to stronger (weaker) near-surface winds, and 3)
terrain features can deflect the path of a tornado in predictable ways. This
approach employs the structure-from-motion (SfM) photogrammetric range imaging
technique to provide an extremely high-resolution characterization of both
terrain and treefall at centimeter scales through the development of 2-D
orthomosaics and 3-D point clouds that include information on the size,
location, and disposition of hundreds of thousands of trees. The data collected
here and the subsequent analyses will help the meteorological and engineering
communities to move toward scientific consensus regarding the influence of
terrain on tornadic circulations and will allow for new and more detailed
research studies. Although large eddy simulation (LES) tests are beyond the
scope of the work, the data collected here will also enable next-generation LES
studies with far greater realism than has previously been
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.