* 2221556
* A Socio-Technical Approach to Solve Grand Societal Challenges: Engineering Design and Innovation Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Rajan Batta, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,489,993.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University at Buffalo (UB) School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences (SEAS). UB is a public research university in the State of New York.
Over its five-year duration this project will fund scholarships and provide
support services to thirty unique full-time students who are pursuing
undergraduate and master’s (MS) degrees in engineering or computer science.
First year undergraduates will receive four-year scholarships and MS students
will receive 2-year scholarships. The project will introduce a humanistic
approach to addressing grand societal challenges such as access to healthcare,
access to clean air and water, and accessibility to technology. The project will
demonstrate the ways students can use engineering design and their engineering
and computer science knowledge and skills to make the world a better place for
everyone to live. The project will establish a learning community, offer courses
that study the societal impacts of engineering and computer science, and provide
mentoring, professional development, experiential learning and research
opportunities with faculty and community partners. These activities will be
integrated with existing support activities and a new Social Impact Summer
Research Program to foster academic success and retention. The project research
focus will elucidate how cohort building, mentoring, research, and academic
services support retention and graduation of low-income students in engineering
and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM
fields by establishing an inclusive, cohort-based learning community focused on
issues of societal grand challenges in engineering and computer science. The
research program explores whether this focus on academic integration, research
engagement, and support services increases students’ sense of belonging and
retention in their academic community. The project will also demonstrate how
support for MS students can improve job prospects or act as a bridge to the PhD
for domestic low-income students. It is expected that the project will also
increase the active engagement of all participants in hands-on/action/community-
based research projects, supplementing traditional lecture-based teaching.
Socio-technical research experiences may play a role in the effort to retain
these students. The possibility that students who participate in the social
impact research program will increase their psycho-social factors and
subsequently their academic success will be investigated. The project has the
potential to advance our understanding of how a socio-technical focus on grand
societal challenges can increase the retention of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.