* 2221277
* Supporting Science, Mathematics, and Statistics Majors for University Success and Beyond
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Steven Whitmeyer, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,433,513.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at James Madison University, a primarily undergraduate institution. The
project will fund scholarships or $10,000 each year for up to four years to 22
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, biotechnology,
chemistry, biophysical chemistry, geology, mathematics, physics, and/or
statistics. The project will use a comprehensive support structure to improve
student retention and graduation rates. That structure will consist of several
pairs of linked co-curricular supports. First is a summer transition program for
incoming first-year students which will be leveraged by integrated semester-
based seminars emphasizing cohort building. Second is a network of faculty and
student mentors which will tie into early and continuing research opportunities
with faculty mentorship. Finally, STEM career exploration and preparation will
pair with enhanced academic and non-academic support services. Additionally, the
project will conduct outreach activities linked to the support program and
explore their impact on public scientific literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
objectives of the project are to enroll 22 Scholars in two cohorts of 11
students; retain 85% of the scholars until their second year; graduate at least
70% of them in four years; and place 90% of the graduates in STEM-related
careers or graduate school. This project will encompass a four-year, integrated
student experience built around support structures, including summer bridge
programs; faculty mentoring; research experiences; academic and career advising;
peer tutoring; and seminars focused on refining skills needed for academic
success. The project will determine if and how these structures improve a
student’s sense of belonging, self-efficacy, engagement, and ultimately,
retention, graduation, and employment. This project has the potential to
determine which support structures are most effective in retaining and
graduating STEM majors. The project will be evaluated using formative and
summative mixed methods that will be aligned to project activities and
objectives. Quantitative and qualitative data sources will include extant data,
document review, online surveys, and interviews. To assess progress towards
project goals (formative purposes), the evaluation will monitor implementation
fidelity, success in meeting objectives, scholar progress, and student and
faculty satisfaction with activities. The summative evaluation will include an
assessment of overall attainment of project goals and the impacts of the project
activities. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.