* 2221654
* Mentoring, Development, and Engagement of Diverse STEM Students at a Large, Public, Urban University
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,484,304.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need in the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics (NSM) at the University
of Houston (UH). UH is designated a Hispanic and Asian American, Native
American, and Pacific Islander Serving institution and ranks in the top ten by
US News and World Report for student ethnic diversity. Over its five-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships for 24 unique full-time students
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in the Departments of Earth and Atmospheric
Sciences, Mathematics, and Physics. Incoming first-year students will receive
scholarship support from their first year through graduation. In addition,
scholars will engage with high quality faculty mentors and take part in
curricular and extra-curricular activities to develop a sense of belonging. The
scholarship program will reach many students underrepresented in the sciences
and help promote their academic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There will be a
critical need for STEM majors over the next decade as the projected growth of
STEM-related jobs in Texas, including the Houston region, is expected to grow by
24% over the next decade. This project will engage students in high quality
faculty mentoring interactions, research, professional development, and outreach
and social activities to support their academic success. That success is
expected to increase graduation rates, and hence increase diversity in the
workforce and in graduate school, leading to the promotion of economic mobility
for low-income families. In addition, this project will contribute to
understanding to what extent scholarship support and engagement in program
activities affect scholars’ perceived experience in STEM and at UH, focusing on
which activities were critical to their success. These results will supplement
the existing knowledge base on the impact of student engagement in curricular
and co-curricular activities on retention and graduation and contribute to the
literature on support systems needed for STEM student success. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.