* 2221216
* Supporting low-income student success in STEM through community, mentoring, and immersive research in biology and biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Allison Land, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income STEM students with demonstrated
financial need. This project aims to increase student success in biology and
biochemistry. This will be accomplished by providing students with multiple
supports, including first-year communities, sustained advising and mentoring,
on-going professional and career development events, and real-world research
training. This project will provide undergraduate students with professional
experiences, academic training, and skills needed for STEM employment and
graduate school in the region and beyond. Further, the project will generate
insights about how combining multiple support systems can promote undergraduate
student persistence and success in biology and biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree
completion for low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project will occur at Minnesota State University, Mankato, a
regional comprehensive university that serves many rural and first-generation
college students. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 24 unique students, in three cohorts, who are pursuing
undergraduate degrees in biology and biochemistry. Specific goals include
removing barriers to STEM retention and success by providing scholarship monies,
supportive learning communities, on-going peer and faculty mentoring, and an
authentic first-year research experience. This combination of multiple
interventions is designed to retain low-income students in STEM majors and
support their post-graduate careers in STEM. While some of these approaches have
been evaluated in the literature separately, this project aims to determine how
these interventions might interact synergistically to improve STEM student
success and outcomes. Through focus groups, surveys, institutional data, and
direct observations, the project will investigate how first-year research
experiences, coupled with social integration (first-year seminar, learning
community) and sustained support (mentoring, tutoring, scholarship, pop-up
events), may influence student success in biology and biochemistry. Project
results will be disseminated through conference presentations, journal articles,
and local and regional symposia. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.