* 2221684
* Building a Montana Computing Consortium
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Binhai Zhu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,836.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at institutions of higher education across Montana. Over its one-year
duration, this project will: build collaboration and infrastructure among
college and university computing faculty and other stakeholders in Montana;
identify the needs and gather data on the underrepresentation of computer
science identity, especially for women and American Indian students; and support
funding 20 students from across Montana for two Visit Days, where they will
learn about graduate degrees in computing in Montana. The data gathered will be
useful for setting up standards for scholarships in a later stage.
Intellectually, the research results identify reasons preventing low-income,
women, and American Indian students from pursuing computing degrees and careers.
Broadly, this project will initiate a systematic process to increase computing
populations in Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need. As a planning project for a larger S-STEM Track 3
future project (whose goal is to increase computer science students at all
levels in Montana), the goals of this project are to advance understanding of
the reasons preventing Montanan students, especially minorities, from choosing
computing as careers, and certainly, and to involve student participation to
help build their career. New measures, like persistence intentions (i.e., how
likely a student is to continue his/her career in computing) will be used to
collect data which will help setting up standards on scholarships for the
corresponding students in a later stage. The project will also strengthen
collaboration for computing personnel in Montana and will attract student
participation by supporting 20 out-of-town undergraduate students pursuing
graduate degrees on two Visit Days. In addition to all of these, one of the
outcomes of this project is a larger Track-3 proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.