* 2221423
* Enhancing Career Pathways of Talented Financially Disadvantaged Biology STEM Students Through Scholarships and Inclusive Transformative Academic Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2028
* Enrique Villamor, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,497,556.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Florida International University (FIU). FIU is a public Carnegie R1
Research and Hispanic Serving Institution. Over its six year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to a total of 26 unique full-time students
through two cohorts who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biological Sciences.
First-year students will receive up to eight semesters/ four academic years of
scholarship support. To ensure successful student career pathways, the project
will use a community of practice model (cohort) and a network of mentorship
(senior peers, faculty, and academic advisors), and will integrate funding with
evidence-based academic and co-curricular activities to promote student success
and competitiveness in the workforce. Complementary implementations are designed
to enhance self-belonging and science identity under an atmosphere of
inclusiveness, translating into higher student engagement, academic performance,
persistence, and degree completion. The scholars’ academic perspective, ability
to comprehend scientific findings, and scientific communication skills,
formalized by active engagement in journal clubs, lab courses for undergraduate
research experiences, and research internships, will enrich their professional
development and contribute to the FIU intellectual environment. This project
aims to ensure that 26 historically marginalized students feel included and
valued, and that they belong within their academic communities. In return, these
scholars will be able to enter the workforce prepared to bring their diverse
experiences and work in diverse teams with the goal of developing new solutions
for global concerns related to biological degradation by climate change,
biological restoration, pandemic outbreaks, and building the generation of
science educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project specific aims are: (1) to
implement an effective biology curriculum, the Quantifying Biology in the
Classroom (QBIC), which features: emphasis in critical analyses of primary
literature, integration of math skills into experimental biology, and the use of
undergraduate learning assistants to enhance the academic and professional
training of STEM scholars; (2) to enhance self-belonging and science identity of
scholars under an atmosphere of inclusiveness by facilitating small cohort-based
learning groups, mentorship networks, and research experiences; (3) to implement
novel career development modules during the program’s early years, and generate
longitudinal data determining the effect of these implementations on student
success; and (4) to enhance core STEM competencies through micro-credential
professional training. A mixed-methods approach will be used for the formative
and summative evaluation of the project guided by a logic model. The evaluation
team will conduct annual collections of quantitative and qualitative data on the
quality, effectiveness, and impacts of project activities. Project findings will
be disseminated to the STEM community at science education conferences, and
prepared in manuscripts for publication in science education journals. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.