* 2221160
* Leadership Experience and Advancement Program in STEM: Promoting transfer student success with leadership development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Reed Perkins, North Central College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2028
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at North Central College (NC). NC is a four-year primarily undergraduate
institution located in suburban Chicago, a region with high need for graduates
in STEM fields. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships
to 15 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Computer Science, Environmental Studies, Mathematics, and Neuroscience. Transfer
students will receive two-year scholarships. Tailored support includes a novel
summer bridge program, strengths-based leadership development, faculty and peer
mentorship, and career development, including paid summer research experiences
and internships. This project will generate new knowledge by exploring how
strengths-based leadership programming impacts retention and graduation rates as
well as career readiness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific project objectives
include improving recruitment of STEM transfer students, as well as the
following: 1) improving leadership, resilience, and self-efficacy; 2) improving
retention and graduation rates; and 3) improving STEM career or graduate school
readiness. A strengths-based approach, individualized for each scholar's
preparation and career aspirations, will recognize and build upon their
cognitive and non-cognitive abilities. Although strengths-based leadership
programs are known to help first-time-in-college students adapt to change by
fostering academic, social, and psychological thriving, few studies explore the
outcomes of strengths-based leadership development on transfer students. This
project helps address that gap through an intentional provision of experiences
for transfer students to increase their knowledge, skills, and capacity in
leadership. The project will use program evaluation data, in particular focus
groups and pre/post surveys, to develop understanding about three areas of
interest. First is to probe the relationship between delivered interventions and
changes in specific components of transfer student capital (e.g., resilience,
self-efficacy, and leadership skills). Second is to investigate which specific
aspects of programming most effectively meet the needs of differing student
identities (i.e., academic histories, STEM major, post-graduation aspirations).
Third is to examine the relationship between success outcomes (retention,
graduation, and post-graduation STEM placement) and improvement of leadership
skills. The project team will disseminate outcomes college-wide, locally, and
nationally in the form of formal reports, peer-reviewed papers, and conference
presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.