* 2221924
* CAREER: Examining the genetic architecture and evolutionary history of skin pigmentation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Michael Campbell, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2026
* USD 464,537.00

This CAREER project examines the genetic architecture and evolution of skin
pigmentation through collection and analysis of genomic, phenotypic and
ethnographic data. With increasing access to large-scale data from understudied
populations and corresponding developments in computational methods, there is
the opportunity to explore new and long-standing hypotheses about skin
pigmentation and other human traits in ways that were previously inaccessible.
The project advances knowledge about human biological evolution, variation, and
adaptation. The PI’s educational plan tightly integrates scientific activities
with a mentored research experience aimed at enhancing quantitative, scientific
literacy and science communication skills in minority undergraduate students. To
broaden the impact of this project, a targeted portion of the collected genomic
and phenotypic data also is incorporated into the laboratory sections of the
PI’s undergraduate and graduate-level courses with the goal of increasing
content knowledge through hands-on experience. In addition, the project
contributes to international research collaborations in anthropological
genetics, evolution, and bioinformatics, building bridges that improve cross-
cultural participation in research and development of research
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With data from human populations that have
previously been underrepresented in molecular anthropological research, the PI
assesses the epistatic and pleiotropic effects of novel alleles on skin
pigmentation and related traits; infers the microevolutionary forces that have
shaped the frequency and distribution of significantly associated loci; and
investigates phenotypic differences between spatially separated populations with
similar genetic backgrounds. Using comparative statistical and empirical
methods, this study addresses whether a few adaptive alleles at high frequency
underlie phenotypes (classical selection model), or whether selective events
occurring at many loci with small to moderate effect sizes contribute to trait
variation (polygenic adaptation model), providing new insights into human
biological evolution. This project not only advances knowledge in biological
anthropology but can also inform research in disciplines such as forensic and
dermatological sciences and potentially lead to innovative discoveries
translatable from the bench to the biomedical domain. This project is jointly
funded by the Build and Broaden 2.0 and Biological Anthropology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.