* 2221894
* An Ethnic Spring in the Food Desert? How State Policy Affects Food Environments and Business Entrepreneurship.
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Andrea Silva, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2025
* USD 158,068.00

This study examines how state-level policy ameliorates or exacerbates
institutionalized inequality in food security, food access, and food business
ownership in the United States. In 2018, an estimated 1 in 9 Americans were food
insecure (37 million Americans, including more than 11 million children). The
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated food insecurity in the United
States. Among African American, Latino, and immigrant communities’ food
insecurity is higher leading to serious chronic disease prevalence in these
communities. In 2019, 1 in 6 minority residents in the United States also lived
in a community with limited availability and accessibility to retail grocery
outlets. Nevertheless, as of 2020, nearly 1 in 5 U.S. businesses with employees
were minority-owned, and a portion of these businesses were contributing to the
food environment of communities by providing access to both retail grocery and
dining services. The project examines two broad research questions related to
the combination of food security, food access, and food business ownership that
constitute a community’s food environment. The first question is: What is the
role of state and local policy in the food environment in the United States?
Further, how do state and local food policies affect individual food security
and food access? The broader impacts of the study are numerous. The efforts will
develop academic, institutional, and community partnerships connecting political
science, public affairs, and applied economics research that allows for a
reimagining of food systems research that does not keep diverse stakeholders on
the fringe but incorporates them into existing political, economic, and food
systems. Moreover, the research will shed light on the ongoing racial, ethnic,
and nativity disparities embedded in U.S. state-level food policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will implement a two-part mixed methods
approach to answer research questions related to the variation in food
environments across states. Part I will compile data into a novel dataset to
understand the influence of food policy on the food environment at state and
county levels, as well as the influence of the food environment on individuals.
Part II involves a qualitative approach using research interviews in urban,
suburban, and rural communities in California, Indiana, Maine, New York, and
Texas, to solicit open-ended feedback on how immigrant communities and
communities of color perceive their food environments, opportunities for food
business entrepreneurship, and existing food policies. The project will work
with community partners to co-create, disseminate, and analyze the interview
instrument and its results across the five strategically chosen study sites.
These in-depth research interviews will highlight how state policy shapes the
individual attitudes and access. Lastly, this project will collect a county-
level dataset informed by the findings from the qualitative interview instrument
to investigate how residents and entrepreneurs interact with local and state
bureaucracy and their local food environment. This investigation will explain
how decisions at the state level (policies and expenditures) are significantly
correlated with a change in the quality of individual and local food
environments. Most importantly, the research brings politics, policy, and
applied economic subfields into conversation regarding U.S. food policy,
building an infrastructure among institutions to facilitate data collection and
analysis that includes active collaboration with community research partners and
MSI student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.