* 2221874
* STTR Phase I:  A new class of highly conductive solid polymer separator membranes compatible with high voltage cathodes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Claudiu Bucur, PIERSICA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be transformational to multiple markets that require energy
storage. High-energy densities will be enabled by the proposed advanced polymer
separators. Potential customers for the new battery separator include battery
manufacturers for a variety of applications including, but not limited to, space
and military, small wearable devices, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID),
drones, consumer electronics, as well as automotive manufacturers in the mass
mobility market. Adoption will be driven by the huge demand for electric vehicle
batteries that are cheaper, lighter, safer and allow for longer drive ranges and
reduced charge time. There are multiple ways in which consumers and society will
benefit from the batteries enabled by this novel solid-state separator; from
electric cars, to flying taxis; from more efficient energy storage grids to more
reliable space vehicles; from lighter wearable devices to long lasting medical
implants. In the long-term, the successful development of low-cost, fast-
charging, high-density, long-life, and safe batteries enabled by the company’s
new separator will reduce fossil fuel dependency and drive the electrification
of the transportation sector and the transition towards greener energy
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will develop an advanced polymer separator for novel hybrid
solid/liquid battery cells which will dramatically improve performance of state-
of-the-art solid-state batteries, enabling higher energy density, faster
charging rate and enhanced safety over commercial Lithium-ion batteries. The new
separator will be constructed from a novel polymer material whose feasibility
has been validated at laboratory level. Stability tests showed higher
conductivity and stability than currently available options. Compatibility with
high-voltage cathodes was also demonstrated in preliminary studies. The goals of
the project are (1) to develop a solid electrolyte which has an ionic
conductivity comparable to that of liquid electrolytes that are currently used
in the Li-ion batteries and (2) a scalable solid separator (using the above
electrolyte) that is compatible with high-voltage cathodes (4 – 6 V). Main
technical hurdles to overcome for successful commercialization are developing
blade-cast-worthy slurries and scaling up the separator to a cell-size free-
standing sheet. The former will be achieved by tuning the composition of the
slurry to improve solubility; the latter will be achieved by improving the
molecular weight of the polymer and blending and mixing it with ceramic
oxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.