* 2221106
* Retaining and Graduating Low-Income Biology Students in STEM through Career Development and Discipline-specific Academic Support
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Bernadette Connors, Dominican University New York
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,499,298.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project will provide scholarships to 26 undergraduate students
pursuing degrees in biology at Dominican College, a four-year Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI). The project aims to increase student retention in biology and
science career pathways by linking scholarships with supporting activities,
including mentoring, undergraduate research, and academic support. New biology
courses will introduce students to emerging biological disciplines, as well as
science communication and career planning. Evaluation of the effort in the
context of an HSI has the potential to generate insights into supporting low-
income students in STEM and increasing diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in biology
through three specific goals. First, the project will recruit 26 first-year,
low-income students planning to major in biology as S-STEM scholars. Second, the
project aims to graduate at least 90% of these students within four years of
matriculation. Third, the project has the goal that at least 90% of scholars
will secure STEM employment or graduate school placement in the region within
six months of graduation. Guided by lessons learned from a previous S-STEM
program on the campus, program design is grounded in research-based practices,
including STEM faculty professional development in active learning and inclusive
teaching practices, course-based research experiences integrated in first-year
biology courses, and strong connections to local industry representatives and
STEM researchers from larger area institutions. Additionally, S-STEM scholars
will experience two new biology major courses – both of which emphasize
professional and career skill development – together as a cohort during their
freshman year. Scholars will further be supported by peer- and faculty-mentors,
as well as shared academic and research experiences as cohorts throughout their
undergraduate experiences. The project will investigate how discipline-specific
academic and career development supports may increase low-income student
retention and persistence in STEM. Project evaluation will be guided by a logic
model, scholar surveys, activity participation tracking, STEM course
performance, and institutional data about scholar persistence in the biology
major. Results of the project could yield insights about the model that would be
relevant for other similar institutions. Disseminated will be accomplished
through peer-reviewed journal articles, conference presentations, and the
institutional website and social media. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.