* 2221010
* Resonant Energy Transfer Based Electrically Pumped Hybrid Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Leonid Tsybeskov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 298,224.00

Realization of electrically pumped compact and reliable lasers with low-
threshold current densities and tunable emission wavelengths made from
inexpensive, solution processable materials will have a revolutionary impact on
many disciplines including photonics, chemical sensing, and medical diagnostics.
Colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (CQDs) are attractive nanomaterials for
achieving this goal because they can be fabricated using easily scalable
chemical techniques, and their optical properties can be directly controlled via
the quantum confinement effect. Compared to other approaches, CQDs offer
practically unmatched flexibility of highly controllable structural properties
by using surface modifications and formation of CD heterostructures. However,
low carrier mobilities and poor thermal conductivity of CQD thin films are
currently the major challenges for their applications in electrically pumped
lasers. The proposed project specifically addresses these challenges and offers
promising solution for the development of novel coherent light sources based on
resonant energy transfer (RET) in hybrid nanostructures comprised of epitaxial
Si/SiGe nanolayers and Pb-based CQD thin films. Advances from this research
project will be disseminated widely through publications, conference
presentations, academic courses, undergraduate and graduate student research
experience and summer programs for local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;RET is a short-range non-radiative resonant energy transfer process
from an energy donor to acceptor via dipole-dipole interaction. Normally, RET
co-exists with the undesirable energy back transfer (EBT), but the proposed in
this project device design and choice of nanomaterials should suppress EBT. In
addition, charge carrier mobility and thermal conductivity in epitaxial Si/SiGe
nanostructures are orders of magnitudes better compared to that in CQD thin
films, and the level of carrier injection is expected to be sufficient to
achieve population inversion. Also, the proposed approach is specifically
focused on hybrid nanostructures designed to make the RET rate orders of
magnitudes greater compared to competing processes of energy relaxation, such as
Auger and defect related carrier recombination. To achieve this goal, novel Pb-
based core-shell CQDs with highly controllable interface composition will be
developed using advances in synthetic chemistry and allowing epitaxial coverage
of a QD core by a shell with a thickness of an atomic monolayer. In these
composition-controlled core-shell CQDs Auger recombination is expected to be
suppressed and favorable conditions for optical amplification can be achieved.
In addition, the proposed research addresses other key issues for electrically
pumped CQD lasers including design of carrier injectors, control over exiton
locations and formation of low-defect density interfaces. The anticipated
results will contribute to realization of electrically pumped CQD-based lasers
with QDs of different compositions and provide a promising route for the
development of novel coherent light sources for multiple
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.