* 2221822
* Collaborative Research: Implementing Topologically Protected Gigahertz Acoustic Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Keji Lai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 301,629.00

Microwave acoustic devices are widely used in wireless communication technology
and quantum information science. This NSF project aims to realize acoustic
devices with lower propagation loss than traditionally engineered circuits. The
project will bring transformative change to the design and characterization of
low-loss acoustic systems operating in the gigahertz regime. This will be
achieved by implementing the acoustic analogues of topological electronic states
and characterizing them with network analysis and microwave microscopy. The
intellectual merits of the project include (1) design of acoustic devices with
nontrivial topology, (2) simulation of acoustic transport in complex structures,
(3) fabrication of advanced microwave circuits, and (4) nanoscale visualization
of wave propagation on piezoelectric membranes. The broader impacts of the
project include (1) implementation of practical devices for wireless
communication applications, (2) integrated research and education programs in
both institutions for optimal training and learning experience, (3) outreach to
local high-school students and teachers with a strong focus on
underrepresented/minority groups, and (4) promoting the effectiveness of local
summer camps for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Ultra High Frequency
and Super High Frequency regime, conventional acoustic devices suffer from
narrow bandwidth and high propagation loss. Drawing inspiration from condensed
matter physics, it is possible to design topologically nontrivial phononic
systems, where acoustic waves can propagate without being backscattered. Due to
the challenge in fabrication and the lack of appropriate characterization tools,
however, acoustic topological metamaterials are mostly demonstrated with
kilohertz to megahertz operating frequencies. This NSF project aims to implement
gigahertz acoustic integrated circuits with topologically protected phononic
transport by combining theoretical analysis, numerical simulation, device
fabrication, and nanoscale visualization. In particular, the direct information
on nanoscale acoustic fields is expected be crucial for the inspection and
refinement of novel microwave circuitry. Such a design-validation loop will
expedite the prototyping of acoustic elements such as waveguides, delay lines,
dividers/combiners, resonators, frequency division multiplexer, and filters
based on quantum valley Hall, quantum spin Hall, or quantum-Hall-like effects.
Integrated research and education programs at both institutions will be
established so that students are trained to master modern nanofabrication
techniques, state-of-the-art microwave acoustic systems, and scanning probe
microscopy. The research teams will outreach to local high school students and
teachers through lab experience, Saturday workshop, and summer camps. The active
involvement in frontier research will influence their career path towards STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.