* 2221696
* Innovative and Meaningful Mentoring to Enhance Retention, Success, and Engagement in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jing Folsom, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,498,855.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low- income students with demonstrated financial
need at Skyline College, a two-year Hispanic Serving Institution, situated in
Silicon Valley, a hub of STEM innovation with many high-demand jobs. Over its
5-year duration, this project will fund 90 scholarships to at least 30 students
who are advancing toward an associate degree or transfer to a four-year
university to earn a degree in Biology, Biotechnology, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Engineering, Mathematics, or Physics. All students will receive up to
three years of support. In addition to scholarships, the project will
incorporate a transformative approach to mentoring, and innovative supports
intended to address financial and academic barriers. All participating students
will engage in a comprehensive set of evidence-based co-curricular services
designed to support their persistence, completion, and transfer. By combining
financial assistance with academic support and mentor guidance, this project
should increase the number of students in STEM fields, especially from
underrepresented groups. Faculty mentors will be trained on innovative and
effective approaches to student retention and success, such as the
implementation of ePortfolios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase the STEM degree completion of low-income, high- achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims:
1) leverage existing high-impact, evidence-based processes already implemented
on campus (such as ePortfolios and undergraduate research opportunities); 2)
implement a cohesive multi-layer mentorship program to increase retention,
student success, and graduation of scholars; 3) expand industry partnerships in
association with workforce development programs to support the scholars’
academic and career opportunities with mentoring and internships. The high cost
of attendance in the San Francisco Bay Area leads to high unmet financial needs,
and leads students to seek part-time or full-time employment while they are in
college. Little, however, is known about how combining specific practices, such
as multi-tiered mentoring, ePortfolio adoption or participation in learning
communities, can impact the retention and success of underrepresented minorities
in STEM once financial barriers are lowered. Results of this project will be
made available by presenting findings to other educators involved in STEM
education at regional and national conferences, and leveraging existing
dissemination infrastructure and channels. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.