* 2221404
* Improving Career Readiness for Engineering Students Through a Mentored Living Learning Community
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Martin Abraham, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Western Illinois University, a state-supported Rural Serving Institution
(RSI) in west central Illinois. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 16 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in engineering or engineering technology. First year students will
receive four-year scholarships. This project is centered on career readiness
through a mentored living learning community and early exposure to the role of
engineering in the workplace. Scholars will gain the needed mindset and self-
efficacy to excel in and graduate career-ready from a four-year engineering
program. Living learning communities will provide scholars with social and
community supports to improve student resilience. Peer mentors and learning
assistants will help scholars in achieving learning outcomes and provide
guidance on acclimating to college life. A summer camp to recruit students from
rural high schools will provide students with an opportunity to learn the
fundamentals of engineering and work with engineering technologies. The project
will develop highly trained engineering professionals including students from
rural backgrounds, thus improving their economic prospects and meeting local and
national workforce demands. Contributions to the knowledge and practice related
to higher education of low- income, rural students will include: (1) the
effectiveness of living learning communities; (2) an understanding how a cohort
model supports students both inside and outside of the classroom; and (3) the
effectiveness of evidence-based teaching strategies and early exposure to
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This project aims to recruit rural students,
retain scholars, and improve four-year graduation rates through research-
validated student support activities. The project team will evaluate the degree
to which living learning communities, early project-based engineering curricula,
and internships are effective in increasing student understanding of career
paths and motivation to pursue engineering education and employment. The
evaluation study will address three questions: (1) To what extent do living-
learning communities contribute to the resilience and success of under-resourced
engineering students? (2) Does the cohort model for classroom and non-classroom-
based activities decrease the stress and culture shock of under-resourced
students? (3) Does including student-centered projects and experiential learning
early in engineering increase students’ progress toward a degree and the
likelihood that they remain focused on a degree? A mixed methods approach will
be used to answer these questions based on student surveys and institutional
data on student retention and progress. The project findings will be shared with
the engineering education community through regional and national conferences
and publications so that other institutions can adopt similar practices. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.