* 2221931
* Developing a Reagentless In situ Sensor for Measurements of Dissolved Inorganic Carbon in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhaohui 'Aleck' Wang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 307,190.00

The seawater carbonate system, mainly consisting of dissolved carbon dioxide
(CO2), bicarbonate (HCO3-) and carbonate ions (CO3 2-), is an important part of
the global carbon cycle. It regulates seawater acidity and the direction and
magnitude of CO2 exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere, thus exerting
control on ocean acidification (OA) and the changing climate. Development of
sensor technologies to measure the carbonate system parameters efficiently has
been widely recognized as a priority in the ocean science community. Dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC), the sum of dissolved CO2, HCO3 - and CO3 2- in seawater,
is a master variable that is critical to study a suite of important research
questions related to the marine carbon cycle and OA’s impacts on marine biology
and ecosystems. Various prototype in situ DIC sensors have emerged in the past
decade. However, these systems require chemical reagents, and are thus complex,
have high power requirements, and are limited in deployment duration and
observing platforms that can be used. To address these limitations, the goal of
this project is to develop a new reagentless in situ DIC sensor for seawater
applications using a solid-state sensing technology and reagentless chemical
reactions. The new DIC sensor will have broad applicability to the ocean
research community. NOAA Northeast Fisheries Science Center have expressed their
interest, if development is successful, to acquire the new DIC sensor to be
routinely deployed on their coastal surveys to enhance OA monitoring and improve
in situ studies of the effects of OA on ecosystem health and fishery species.
This development may pave the road for much-needed long-term deployments of DIC
sensors on gliders and floats that the ocean research community is calling for.
One community college student and one local citizen scientist will be recruited
for sensor testing through collaboration with Waquoit Bay National Estuarine
Research Reserve. Their feedback will help improve the sensor’s operation by
non-experts and its overall performance. This democratized strategy will widen
future deployments and applications beyond academia and provide data to
stakeholders. This project will support one PhD student through the joint
education program between Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). It will train one community college student
and two undergraduate summer interns through the WHOI Summer Student Fellowship
program and the Woods Hole Partnership Educational Program. This project will
support diversity, equity, and inclusion through the recruitment of all
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing and ground truthing the first-of-its-
kind reagentless in situ DIC sensor constitutes the core of the intellectual
merit of this work. The new DIC method will be based on a controlled electro-
acidification process to acidify seawater samples followed by optical pCO2
detection. No chemical reagents will be used in this method. The main objectives
of the development include: (1) Develop and optimize the new DIC method in the
laboratory to achieve high-quality measurements of DIC in seawater; (2) Adapt
the new DIC method into a low-power, prototype sensor system capable of in situ
DIC measurements in shallow coastal systems; (3) Test and calibrate the new
sensor system in seawater tanks and evaluate its characteristics, performance
and long-term stability; (4) Test-deploy the new sensor, along with a suite of
other physical and biogeochemical sensors, at a time-series station at Waquoit
Bay, MA for extended periods to evaluate the sensor’s in situ performance and
stability. The new technology will be a significant technological leap forward,
resolving key challenges in current in situ DIC sensing by significantly
improving robustness, power consumption, and deployment duration, while reducing
cost, complexity, and size. It thus has the potential to be adapted for many
stationary and mobile observing platforms, such as the rapidly growing fleet of
surface vehicles, gliders, and biogeochemical floats. This project will
significantly improve our capability to study and respond to the marine carbon
cycle and ocean acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.