* 2221805
* Collaborative: Microbial chain elongation-mediated dehalogenation and carbon transformation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anca Delgado, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 240,039.00

Chlorinated solvents consist of a large family of chlorinated hydrocarbons that
have been used worldwide in large quantities to support various industrial
applications. Chlorinated solvents such as perchloroethylene (PCE) and
trichloroethylene (TCE) are among the most ubiquitous groundwater contaminants
in the United States and worldwide. Bioremediation using Dehalococcoides
mccartyi has emerged as a promising technology to treat groundwater contaminated
by PCE and TCE. Dehalococcoides mccartyi are anaerobic microorganisms that can
reduce and convert PCE and TCE to ethene which can subsequently be mineralized
to carbon dioxide by other anerobic and/or aerobic microorganisms present in
groundwater. However, Dehalococcoides mccartyi require the use of hydrogen (H2)
as a sole electron donor to convert PCE and TCE to ethene. The overarching goal
of this project is to investigate the use of microbial chain elongation-mediated
dehalogenation as a novel groundwater bioremediation process that leverages the
ability of a consortium of anaerobic microorganisms to produce the amount of H2
required to carry out the reduction and conversion of PCE/TCE to ethene using
organic substrates such as lactic acids, molasses, and vegetable oil. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development and
implementation of more efficient and cost-effective bioremediation technologies
for the treatment of groundwater contaminated by chlorinated solvents.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through education and outreach
activities including the mentoring of two graduate students and two
undergraduate students at Arizona State University and the University of
Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dehalococcoides mccartyi are organohalide-
respiring bacteria that utilize halogenated compounds as terminal electron
acceptors in an anaerobic respiration process to generate the energy required
for their growth using electron donors such as hydrogen (H2). During the last
two decades, Dehalococcoides mccartyi have emerged as the most promising
microorganisms with capability to carry out the reductive dehalogenation of
chlorinated hydrocarbons such as perchloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene
(TCE) in contaminated groundwater. However, competing microorganisms (e.g., iron
or sulfate reducing bacteria) in groundwater that utilize H2 as electron donor
can adversely impact the rate and extent of PCE/TCE dehalogenation and
conversion to ethene by Dehalococcoides mccartyi. This competition has been
consistently linked to slow rates of PCE/TCE dehalogenation and/or the
accumulation of toxic intermediates such as vinyl chloride. Building upon the
results of promising preliminary studies, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of
this project propose to explore the coupling of microbial chain elongation with
reductive dehalogenation with the goal of identifying a consortium of anaerobic
microorganisms that can reduce and convert PCE/TCE to ethene while using chain
elongation to generate the amount of H2 required to carry out this conversion.
To advance this goal, the PIs propose to carry out an integrated experimental
and modeling research program to 1) uncover critical metabolic pathways and
ecological interactions that govern microbial chain elongation-mediated
dehalogenation, and 2) develop and validate computational metabolic models of
microbial chain elongation coupled with dehalogenation. The specific objectives
of the research are to: 1) Characterize the growth and inhibition kinetics and
metabolic networks of a consortium of organo-halide respiring and chain-
elongating bacteria that has shown promising potential to convert PCE/TEC to
ethene and 2) Unravel the interactions of microbial chain elongation with the
competing metabolic pathways of methanogenesis and homoacetogenesis in organo-
halide respiring microbial communities. The successful completion of this
research has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of
new fundamental knowledge and computational metabolic models to advance the
development and deployment of groundwater bioremediation by microbial chain
elongation-mediated dehalogenation. To implement the educational and training
goals of this project, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at their
respective institutions to integrate the findings from this research into an RET
(Research Experience for Teachers) program at Arizona State University and an
extension program (4-H) at the University of Vermont (UVM) to teach and inspire
high school teachers and students to explore the use of microorganisms in
environmental remediation. In addition, the PIs plan to leverage existing REU
(Research Experiences for Undergraduates) programs at ASU and UVM to recruit
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.