* 2221122
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Towards Facilitating Kernel Vulnerability Reproduction by Fusing Crowd and Machine Generated Data
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Xinyu Xing, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 321,347.00

The kernel is the core piece of software in a computer's operating system. Due
to the high complexity of kernel software, finding all vulnerabilities during
the development phase is nearly impossible. In recent years, crowdsourcing
efforts have shown great success in discovering kernel vulnerabilities, where
security professionals, hackers, and users can all contribute by submitting
kernel bug reports. However, research shows that many vulnerability reports,
including those generated by automated tools (e.g., kernel fuzzers), are not
easily reproducible. Non-reproducible reports can cause significant delays to
the patching process or lead kernel vendors to misjudge the severity of the
vulnerability. Preliminary research shows vulnerability reports are not
reproducible due to 1) missing information on the compilation configuration; (2)
a lack of data to construct the contexts for triggering the bug; and (3)
inaccurate or incomplete information about the vulnerable kernel versions. This
project will develop new approaches combining crowd-reported and machine-
generated data and static-dynamic program analysis to automate the process of
inferring, constructing, and validating the needed information for kernel-
vulnerability reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide much-
needed automation for reproducing kernel bugs and vulnerabilities. If
successful, the project will significantly advance computer security (for kernel
vulnerability analysis) and contribute to the field of software engineering (for
bug diagnosis and assessment). By improving the reproduction rate of kernel
bugs, this project will also help with other parallel efforts for vulnerability
patching and remediation. The expected advancements are three-fold. (1) The team
will develop novel inference methods to infer the kernel compilation
configuration based on memory snapshots and code segments in the bug reports. It
will design new approaches to handle the untrusted or corrupted memory dumps
caused by the bugs. (2) Team members will develop new mechanisms to construct
precise triggering contexts to trigger the reported bugs (via kernel fault
manipulation and injection). The context construction method is also able to
pinpoint relevant faulty processes and handle kernel interrupt correctly. (3)
New fuzzing tools will be designed to migrate input programs to enable much
broader bug testing across kernel versions, and new methods to quickly determine
non-vulnerable versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.