* 2221463
* Cultivating Talent for Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Art Nitta, Saddleback College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low- income students with demonstrated financial
need at Saddleback College. Saddleback College is a Hispanic Serving Institution
with many years of experience addressing the barriers that impact the success of
low-income and underrepresented students, particularly in STEM-related
disciplines. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
75 unique full-time students who are pursuing associate’s degrees or transfer
degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics,
Natural Sciences, and Physics. Primarily first year students will receive two-
to-three-year scholarships. In addition to scholarships, the project will
include cohort-building activities to help provide opportunities for deep
connections between students, and academic and psychosocial faculty mentorship,
both of which have been found to be critical in supporting underserved students.
Another important feature of this project is an accelerated mathematics program
that supports students getting to Calculus readiness in one year, which is
accelerated compared to the norm in the California community colleges. The
project will evaluate the importance of these supports and other best practices
to achieve improved academic outcomes for STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high- achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. This project aims to contribute to a growing body
of literature on STEM education and student support interventions within
community colleges. Much of the current research examines the success of
education approaches as applied to all students. This project is unique in two
major areas. First, the project examines the impact of scholarships,
psychosocial support, and mathematics course completion to Calculus readiness
targeted to financially needy academically talented STEM students. Second, this
project will aggregate, align, and connect the various successful campus
interventions into a coherent and interconnected web of support for students at
the college. A rigorous evaluation plan will analyze quantitative student
outcomes data and qualitative process outcomes data to provide empirical
evidence on the efficacy of a more integrated approach to supporting and
preparing community college students to meet industry and academic standards for
STEM advancement. This project will advance the larger goals of providing
curricular and supportive services in undergraduate STEM education in a
community college environment. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.