* 2221337
* Collaborative Research: Pacific Alliance for Low-Income Inclusion in Statistics &amp; Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Daniel Gillen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2028
* USD 239,343.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of California - Santa Barbara, the University of
California - Irvine, the University of Washington, California State University,
East Bay, California State University, Monterey Bay, San Diego State University,
and California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo. The Data
Revolution is generating numerous well-paid career paths, and creating a
significant workforce shortage, in Statistics &amp; Data Science. Graduate
degrees are needed for many lucrative, data-rich careers, which can represent a
significant barrier for low-income students. This project will provide
scholarship support to approximately 115 talented, low-income undergraduate
students studying statistics and data science and provide continued scholarship
support for at least 65 of them over two years of graduate studies. Scholars
will benefit from faculty and peer mentoring, an annual meeting that spans all
seven participating schools, and support for applying to and preparing for
graduate school, including a pre-grad summer bootcamp. Additional academic
supports include a small-group directed reading program, shared coursework to
build community within scholar cohorts, and undergraduate research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Additional project goals and aims include: (a)
to offer a cohort-based program that supports students financially via
scholarships lasting up to 3 years; (b) provide scholars with academic and co-
curricular experiences designed to facilitate placement into careers in
statistics and data science; and (c) offer interventions to enhance scholars’
community cultural capital. Project research will use surveys and interviews to
study three main themes: (a) how counterspaces and other kinds of community
develop and support scholars’ progress towards their goals; (b) how scholars’
community cultural wealth shapes and is shaped by the counterspaces and
communities that develop; and (c) how students’ low-income status and other
identities impact key counterspaces and communities and influence scholars’
choices and outcomes. Project evaluation will provide formative and summative
feedback on all aspects of the project to support efficient progress towards
goals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.