* 2221694
* Fostering Equity, Support and Community for Low-Income Undergraduates with Academic Potential in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2028
* Alison Fisher, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 11/30/2028
* USD 1,499,246.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Willamette University, a private liberal arts university in Oregon. Over
its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 72 unique full-
time students (three cohorts of 24 students) who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in biology, chemistry, computer science, data science, environmental science,
exercise/health science, mathematics, or physics. First-year students will
receive a 4-year scholarship. Scholarship recipients will share significant
academic and co-curricular support activities, including residential and social
cohort structures, near-peer mentorship, campus leadership positions, on- and
off-campus research experiences, as well as targeted exposure to STEM post-
graduate opportunities and preparation for navigating the job market provided in
collaboration with Willamette's Office of Career Development. This project will
gather data to inform the development of support systems and advance
understanding of best practices to better serve an increasingly diverse
population of STEM students. Institutionalization of these practices will be
emphasized to ensure that benefits of the project persist in the long term. More
broadly and importantly, its findings will enable other institutions to develop
and successfully implement support structures for low-income students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue the work of Willamette
University's earlier Track 1 S-STEM project (NSF award # DUE-1742159) and will
focus on four key objectives. First is continuing to increase recruitment of
STEM students with high financial need and reducing the financial burden of
achieving a degree. Second is continuing to maintain or increase retention and
graduation rates for low-income STEM students above Willamette's current S-STEM
Scholars &amp; Fellows 90% retention rate, and helping to improve Willamette’s
four-, five-, and six-year overall graduation rates. Third is strengthening
mentoring in STEM departments and with campus partners such as Willamette's
Office of Career Development to ensure participants graduate with a personalized
plan to guide their post-baccalaureate pursuits, and encouraging development of
leadership skills through participation in campus activities. Fourth, and
finally, is to continue improving Willamette’s institutional understanding of
low-income STEM students’ strengths and needs, and establishing which evidence-
based practices and strategies best support these, so that they can become
institutionalized and ensure the long term impact of the project. The project
will gather qualitative attitudinal data through focus groups and one-on-one
interviews, as well as quantitative data through regular surveys typically once
every semester). Outcomes of S-STEM scholarship recipients will be compared to
their non-S-STEM peers, and results will be disseminated in peer reviewed
journals and at relevant disciplinary conferences. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.