* 2221808
* Collaborative Research: CAS - Climate: Improving Nonstationary Intensity-Duration-Frequency Analysis of Extreme Precipitation by Advancing Knowledge on the Generating Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Kenneth Kunkel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2025
* USD 221,826.00

2221803 (Mascaro) and 2221808 (Kunkel). This project will address fundamental
questions at the intersection of climate dynamics and civil engineering aimed at
improving the design of infrastructure systems under climate change. Current
procedures to design infrastructure against extreme precipitation and associated
flooding rely on intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) curves. These curves are
generated through statistical analyses of historical rain gage records under the
assumptions of stationarity ("the future is the same as the past") and existence
of a homogeneous statistical population ("the statistical variability of
precipitation caused by multiple generating mechanisms is explained by a single
distribution"). These assumptions have been recently challenged by theoretical
arguments and climate simulations, which suggest that extreme precipitation (EP)
statistics are expected to change in a future warmer climate. The main goal of
this project is to advance knowledge on changes in the generating mechanisms of
sub-daily and daily EP and use this new knowledge to develop a novel physics-
driven statistical framework to inform the development of improved nonstationary
IDF curves. Two research hypotheses will be investigated: (1) The occurrence
and/or thermodynamic and dynamic components of the generating mechanisms of EP
are changing in time, leading to changes in IDF design values; and (2) improved
nonstationary IDF curves can be developed through statistical models that
incorporate information on changes in the generating mechanisms of EP simulated
by climate models. The research hypotheses will be tested using hourly and daily
rainfall records, atmospheric re-analyses, and climate simulations in multiple
regions of the U.S. spanning a wide range of dominant mechanisms of EP,
including fronts, extratropical cyclones, tropical cyclones, mesoscale
convective systems, air mass convection, and North American monsoon.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;New knowledge on the physical mechanisms leading to the non-
stationarity of EP statistics at sub-daily and daily durations in the U.S. will
be acquired by applying deep learning techniques. Novel methods for detection,
physical validation, and uncertainty quantification of regional trends in EP and
in occurrence and characteristics of the generating mechanisms will be designed
by combining statistical tests and historical climate simulations from the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6. This knowledge will inform a
nonstationary statistical model for IDF analysis of EP that accounts for mixed
populations. Regionalization techniques will be designed to reduce uncertainty
in parameter estimation and incorporate regional changes in the physical
mechanisms affecting EP. A Bayesian framework will be adopted to account for
uncertainty. The added value of the nonstationary statistical model compared to
current stationary approaches will be assessed through cross-validation
bootstrapping experiments. The statistical model will be then applied with
changes in EP mechanisms simulated by selected general circulation models under
different future scenarios and used to compute new design metrics accounting for
nonstationary extreme regimes. The methodological advancements are intended to
address critical limitations of current stationary IDF design methods. Most
importantly, there are multiple generating mechanisms for EP whose frequency and
intensity may change in different ways in response to anthropogenically-forced
climate change. The research will develop a framework for the objective
incorporation of this knowledge into IDF curves, providing more robust estimates
of future changes. This project is targeted to have multiple broader impacts. It
seeks to improve infrastructure design and management against EP under climate
change, which would (i) reduce storm-related damages ($261.1 billion from 2001
to 2020 in the U.S.), thus benefitting society; and (ii) increase the resilience
of critical infrastructure, thus improving national security. The project will
develop an outreach program that involves practitioner education through ongoing
collaborations of the investigators with engineering and construction firms,
public agencies, and the American Society of Civil Engineers. Additionally, the
project will develop new aspects of curricula at the investigators’ institutions
in the areas of engineering, hydrology, and atmospheric
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.