* 2221469
* Engineering Academic Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Catherine Blat, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,608.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, an urban, access-oriented
institution. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 25
unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Civil
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Systems Engineering, and Engineering
Technology. Eligible scholars will be able to receive up to four years of
support while they complete their undergraduate degree. A suite of evidence-
based programming will be deployed to enhance opportunities for social-emotional
learning, academic skills development, and social and navigational capital
building that were missed due to the pandemic. The project makes an urgent,
evidence-based response to pandemic impacts on low-income students’ preparation
for and enrollment of engineering majors, as well as their missed opportunities
for social and emotional learning. Key components of programing include a summer
bridge program, high engagement mentoring, a college skills and professional
development seminar, and dedicated advising. The programing will improve
employment prospects by developing social and cultural capital in students.
Through outreach, the program will also help large numbers of high school
students learn about engineering majors and prepare them for the college
application process and will train high school counselors about engineering
opportunities for low income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Engineering
Academic Pathways program is specifically designed to enhance the prospects of
economic mobility by responding to the unique needs of low-income students that
the pandemic has substantially exacerbated. Recent data indicate the pandemic
has disproportionately harmed people in low-income households relative to
employment, health, and well-being. Prior to the setbacks of the COVID 19
pandemic, Charlotteans were responding to substantial disparities in opportunity
after the city was ranked 50th out of the 50 largest US cities for economic
mobility in 2015. The program will implement four of the strategies for
improving economic mobility that were recommended by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Opportunity Task Force in 2017. First is to broaden the range of and access to
high quality college and career pathways offered by K-12 and postsecondary
institutions. Second is to equip all students and their parents with the
information and guidance they need to understand and navigate multiple college
and career pathways, preparation, and processes. Third is to expand and
strengthen support for First Generation and other low-socioeconomic students who
need help transitioning to and completing secondary education. Fourth, and
finally, is to elevate and actively promote the critical importance of acquiring
a post-secondary degree. The success of individual elements of the program will
be rigorously evaluated and adapted for the greatest effectiveness. This will
advance understanding of the unique needs of low income students in a post-
pandemic world and enable the dissemination of best practices through
professional development seminars and scholarly publications to other
institutions that are reacting to similar conditions. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.