* 2221880
* EAR-Climate: Towards Better Understanding of Global Low Flow Dynamics Under Climate Change With Next-Generation, Differentiable Global Hydrologic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Chaopeng Shen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Freshwater resources are critically important to many competing human and
ecosystem needs around the world. Global hydrologic models are needed to assess
climate change impacts on water resources, but their accuracy is often limited.
Model equations are sometimes arbitrary and we do not fully leverage the value
of available data. In particular, traditional models have trouble describing low
flow periods when rivers run dry, and sometimes predict trends that are opposite
to observational records. These errors could lead to inadequate climate
mitigation strategies, under-preparation for drought, or misallocation of
disaster relief resources. Machine learning models tend to be accurate, but they
remain challenging for humans to decipher, are not well suited to ask precise
questions, and do not necessarily respect physical laws we know to be true such
as the conservation of mass. This work will seek to build a new genre of
hydrologic modeling currently termed differentiable modeling in hydrology¸ or,
simply, differentiable hydrology. Not only will the next-generation global
hydrologic models developed from this project improve our ability to estimate
future low flows, but this work will also establish a new avenue in hydrology
that combines the best aspects of machine learning and processes. The new avenue
will provide the flexibly to ask new scientific questions and learn the answers
from big data. As a result, hydrologists will no longer be limited by the
generalist model design in artificial intelligence where interpretability is
traded for model genericity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the project goals,
the layers of artificial intelligence will be peeled off to harness one of its
core technologies, namely, differentiable programming, to build learnable
process-based models. Next-generation hydrologic models will evolve based on
global hydrologic data, reduce structural deficiencies, build global
parameterization schemes for groundwater, and address scale issues. The project
will characterize errors attributable to structural deficiencies, improve
reliability of predictions in data-sparse regions, and improve model physical
significance. Outcomes will be disseminated to the climate change impact
assessment community. Low flow predictions will also be shared through
continuing collaboration with non-profit organizations with footprints in
Africa. The research effort will be incorporated into educational activities for
graduate students, symposium and workshop attendants, and high-schoolers via
their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences program, as well as a collaboration between the Directorate for
Geosciences and Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open
science activities in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.