* 2221942
* FW-HTF-P: Understanding and Assessing Technology Innovation to Mitigate Distraction and Improve the Performance of Future Forklift Operators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Arunachalam Narayanan, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,860.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) Project
Development award addresses the use of emerging robotics, artificial
intelligence, and wearable sensor technology to benefit workers such as forklift
drivers in future warehouses and distribution centers. This award will support
gathering of preliminary data and building of an interdisciplinary research team
to study how workload and distractions affect worker performance, and in
particular how these effects change for older workers. Preliminary studies will
determine the appropriate metrics to quantify variables including distraction,
comfort, performance, engagement, and levels of technology acceptance. Studies
will relate these variables to noninvasive physiological measurements, including
eye movement, heart rate, skin resistance, facial expressions, and brain waves.
Three workshops will help recruit academic team members and industrial
stakeholders. Academic disciplines represented will include experts in
logistics, autonomous, soft robotics, computer vision, the science of learning,
industrial psychology, data analytics and machine learning, biosensors and
neurophysiology, computer network security and privacy, and economics and
workforce development. Additional participants will be identified to complement
and augment the teamâ€™s current industrial collaborators from the Dallas-Fort
Worth area material handling industry. The result of this project will be an
integrated interdisciplinary team of researchers and stakeholders, a set of
well-defined and impactful research questions, and a detailed plan to address
those questions. Ultimately the project will benefit the transportation
logistics sector and its workers, including operators of vehicles such as
forklifts and pallet jacks. More generally, the research project that is
articulated under this Project Development award will help create technological
interventions to mitigate distraction and improve performance, safety, and
quality of life in an aging workforce, across various occupations where small
distractions may lead to serious incidents involving physical injury, damage to
property, and interruption of operations. Some examples are drone pilots, truck
drivers, longshoremen, and ship-to-shore crane operators. This project includes
activities to engage and support underrepresented STEM researchers at both
graduate and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
validate and advance an explanatory framework of factors correlated to major
attention lapses by forklift drivers and other industrial operators (IOs),
further characterized by population and gender. The major knowledge gap to be
addressed by this project is to identify from among variables such as cognitive
load, stress, fatigue, emotional stimuli, and planning, those that correlate
most strongly to distraction and dangerous degradation of performance. Pilot
data will include physiological and psychological measures. This project will
provide deeper understanding of operator perception of, and interaction with,
advanced technology in warehouse and distribution center settings to mitigate
distraction and improve performance and safety. Specific technology innovations
of interest include personalized interaction rules for autonomous mobile robots
and the use of predictive algorithms to guide IO behavior. The long-term career
sustainability of IO occupations will be related to factors including age,
education, socio-economic status, and gender. The results will improve worker
performance, comfort, and safety, improve business productivity, and reduce
costs due to downtime and injury. Broader impacts of this research will be
amplified by the extensive involvement of industry
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.