* 2221730
* EAGER: Development of Remote Sensing of Seismological Signals via the Enhanced Moiré Technique
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gregory Waite, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 255,000.00

Volcanologists use a variety of sensors to monitor volcanic activities, relying
heavily on seismometers to record signals from subsurface magma movement.
However, because volcanic edifices highly attenuate and scatter seismic waves,
critical seismic signals may go unrecorded unless a dense network of
seismometers is available. In many volcanic areas, it is impossible to deploy
such a network using conventional seismometers due to logistic and/or
environmental limitations; such as areas close to an active volcanic crater
being inaccessible. Existing techniques for remote sensing of seismic signals
have safety or resolution limitations. In this EAGER project, a new remote
sensing technique will be developed using the enhanced Moiré technique. Moiré
patterns are produced when two similar straight-line patterns (called gratings)
are overlaid and rotated relative to each other by a small angle. Small
displacement of the grating (i.e., straight -line patterns) is magnified through
the Moiré patterns, and hence can be measured accurately. In this approach, one
grating is placed by a UAV in the remote location and the other within a
telescope in the base station. Thus, the displacements (vibrations) of the
remote location can be recorded remotely. The major challenge that hampers the
ability of this method for the remote sensing of seismic signals is the presence
of atmospheric turbulence that can create significant noise within the recorded
signals. To address this challenge advance pre- and postprocessing techniques
will be developed and numerically tested on the remotely recorded seismic
signals to assess the accuracy of the method to measure ground displacements for
various atmospheric conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new remote sensing
technique will be developed for measuring seismic waves. The approach is an
enhancement of the Moiré technique, which images the patterns produced by
differential motion between straight-line grids. In our case, one of the grids
is placed on a remote location by a UAV and the other, within a base telescope.
This technique can measure minuscule ground displacement but is subject to
signal degradation due to atmospheric turbulence. We will develop both pre- and
postprocessing techniques to reduce the effect of turbulence. The optical
preprocessor will use a novel and transformative distortion/noise suppression
scheme called active convolved illumination (ACI), in which the image spectrum
is systematically modified using dielectric metasurfaces. Here, using numerical
simulations, the performance of ACI to reduce the effect of the atmospheric
turbulence will be assessed. While the ACI work will test the feasibility of
significantly enhanced data acquisition, a postprocessing procedure based on the
deep learning and wavelet packet decomposition method (DL-WPD) will be developed
and applied to the data to further enhance the accuracy of seismological
measurements. If successful, this new remote sensing technique will improve our
understanding of volcanic processes by enabling seismic recording in otherwise
inaccessible areas. In addition, because seismology is an essential tool for
forecasting volcanic eruptions and mitigating the associated hazards, the novel
instrument will directly benefit society. Moreover, other disciplines such as
earthquake seismology, and civil and mechanical engineering can adopt the
proposed method to obtain high-quality seismic signals for a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.