* 2221200
* I-Corps: Rare Earth Recycling Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Adam Powell, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a process to gather rare earth magnet scrap, that could both
increase supply security for U.S. production of rare earth magnets and also
reduce the environmental impacts of their production. This is particularly
important as production of electric vehicles and offshore wind turbines which
use these magnets are projected to grow by 20-50% per year over the next decade.
The production rare earth element currently has a very high carbon footprint due
to the use of perfluorocarbon that are then emitted into the atmosphere
contributing to global warming. The rare earth metal industry produces
30,000-50,000 tons/year of Neodynium, Dysprosium, Praseodymium and Terbium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
technology to extract rare earth metals from magnet scrap because rare earth
metals are in short supply as there are currently no U.S. producers of most rare
earth metals. The proposed process of recycling rare earth elements uses a
liquid metal solvent leachate to dissolve the rare earth elements in magnets,
followed by a novel gravity-driven multi effects thermal system distiller
(G-METS) to separate the rare earth elements from the liquid metal solvent. This
distillation technology seeks to reduce the overall flow sheet energy
consumption by 70% and the overall capital and operating costs by 50%, compared
with traditional vacuum distillation. This process, with magnesium leaching and
G-METS distillation, uses much less energy than current electrolytic rare earth
production, with no perfluorocarbon emissions. This proposed process with G-METS
magnesium distillation may enables the economical recycling of elements in
magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.