* 2221177
* Natural Science Transfer Scholars: Natural Science Foundations for Innovation in the Data-Driven Economy
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Jerry Caldwell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2028
* USD 4,986,777.00

This project will contribute to meeting the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Michigan State University (MSU), Mott Community
College (MCC; Flint, MI), and Washtenaw Community College (WCC; Ann Arbor, MI).
Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 50 unique
full-time students at MCC and 75 unique full-time students at WCC who are
pursuing associate’s degrees in STEM fields with the intent to transfer to a
four-year institution to complete a bachelor’s degree in a STEM field. This
project will also fund 32 unique full-time students at MSU who have transferred
with 40 or more credits from a Michigan community college (CC) to complete a
bachelor’s degree in the biological, mathematical, or physical sciences. First-
year students at MCC and WCC will receive up to two years of scholarship
support, and students transferring to MSU will receive up to three years of
scholarship support. This project will promote the successful transfer of
academically talented, low-income students from CCs to universities through
graduation with STEM degrees by providing comprehensive academic and
psychosocial support to participating students pre and post transfer. To support
students in the transition from CC to the university, the project will also
provide peer mentoring support and undergraduate research opportunities. The
project will also augment the training of low-income CC students in the natural
sciences by incorporating opportunities to build capacity to apply the methods
of data science to solve problems in their disciplinary area of study, enhancing
their preparation to meet new challenges and innovate in the data-driven
economy. Building a sustainable recruitment effort to attract low-income
students to STEM degree programs through CCs is critical to meeting STEM
workforce needs in Michigan. This work will continue to strengthen the existing
partnership to create a clear and transparent pathway from MCC and WCC to a STEM
bachelor’s degree at MSU. This project will also explore and establish the
academic, administrative, and cultural structures extending across institutional
boundaries that produce effective movement of students seeking to complete a
bachelor's degree in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need through the support of the
multi-institution consortium. This consortium will expand efforts to recruit
talented low-income students to the STEM Scholars Program at MCC and WCC and to
baccalaureate programs in the natural sciences at MSU from CCs in Michigan and
will integrate support structures at the three institutions. The project also
aims to enhance the capacity of students to innovate in the science and
technology sector and increase their competitiveness for well-paying careers by
offering opportunities to engage in data science and app development. One major
goal of this project is to enhance the path for the transfer student population
to a STEM bachelor’s degree to build and diversify the STEM workforce. Research
will be conducted to understand which supports and experiences have significant
impacts on students' successful transfer and completion of a STEM bachelor’s
degree. The embedded research component of this project will address the
following research questions (RQs) that focus on student self-efficacy (SE) and
science identity: &lt;br/&gt;• RQ1: What kinds of structural supports at the CC
impact a student’s transfer SE (self-efficacy to transfer from a CC to a
baccalaureate institution) and degree SE (self-efficacy to graduate with a
bachelor’s degree in STEM)? &lt;br/&gt;• RQ2: What effect do the transitional
supports at the baccalaureate-granting institution have on incoming transfer
students’ degree SE and science identity? &lt;br/&gt;• RQ3: Once a transfer
student has successfully transitioned into the university, what are the key
experiences they leverage to maintain their degree SE and science identity?
&lt;br/&gt;Since SE and science identity change over time, the research will
employ a mixed-methods approach using a novel Experience Sampling Method (ESM)
to measure SE in-the-moment partnered with daily journal reflections where
students share more about specific events. Anticipated project outcomes include
increased numbers of low-income, academically-talented students transferring
from MCC and WCC to 4-year institutions to pursue STEM bachelor’s degrees and
high STEM degree completion rates for students awarded scholarships upon
transferring to MSU from a Michigan CC. Knowledge generated by the research
component of this project will offer a roadmap to developing programmatic
supports to build CC and transfer student SE and science identity for use by
other institutions. The Center for Education Design, Evaluation, and Research
(University of Michigan) will provide formative and summative evaluation of
process and outcomes using qualitative and quantitative methods to assess: 1)
program impact through comparison with matched control groups of transfer and
native students, 2) student perceptions of data-driven science as a promising
pathway 3) progress toward benchmarks, and 4) post-graduation outcomes. External
evaluation will also document project activities and participation,
implementation strategies, and contextual factors and identify best practices.
Best practices and outcome data will be shared with S-STEM communities promoting
transfer student success. Dissemination of research results to the broader STEM
education research community will occur through research presentations and
publications for communities such as the Council for the Study of Community
Colleges, the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, and the
Physics Education Research community. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.