* 2221508
* Changing Campus Climate for Science Scholars' Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Kristine Wammer, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,499,796.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of St. Thomas, a Catholic liberal arts university in
Minnesota. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 23
unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology,
biochemistry, neuroscience, and computer science. Academically talented, low-
income undergraduate students will receive four-year scholarships. This Track 2
project builds on lessons learned from St. Thomas’s previously funded NSF
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Talent Expansion program
(STEP) and other programming focused on improving student success. This project
will advance understanding of how institutions can build equitable support
systems and a strong sense of community to increase low-income STEM students’
degree completion, as well as the importance of transforming university
practices and campus climate in advancing students’ academic success. Four key
activities will underpin the project's execution. First is to establish enhanced
on-campus scientific student job opportunities and streamlined access to campus
support services. Second is developing a science-themed Living Learning
Community. Third is to create a new one-credit culturally responsive Foundations
of Science Success course and a partnership with the Minnesota Academy of
Science to enhance student networking. Fourth, and finally, is to hire a social
work wellness intern who will support STEM scholars, including by incorporating
psycho-education into a new one-credit First Year Experience course. The project
will achieve broader impacts for low-income STEM students by establishing
pathways into on-campus leadership positions such as peer mentors, lab
assistants, and student researchers. By serving in these roles, students will
develop a scientific identity and deepen connections to faculty members and
peers. By integrating diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) professional
development for all STEM faculty, St. Thomas will assure strong intercultural
competency within STEM pedagogy to support retention and success for all
students. The project’s intellectual merit will be achieved by disseminating
findings about the retention and academic success benefits of infusing
academically rigorous, DEI-infused STEM curricula, as well as academic and
social support into STEM disciplines for low-income STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Four key objectives guide the project. First is to
reduce low-income academically talented science students’ financial pressure and
unmet need by providing scholarships. Second is to retain scholars in science
majors from first to second year at a rate of at least 80%. Third is to graduate
at least 80% of scholars with a science degree within four years. Fourth is to
have at least 85% of scholars who graduate report having applied to a STEM job
or graduate program, and at least 70% to have entered a STEM job or graduate
program within four months of graduation. From previously funded NSF projects,
St. Thomas has adopted strategies to improve inclusivity in science education
with culturally responsive pedagogy, redesigned introductory STEM courses, and
strengths-based mentoring in academic advising. From these efforts, the
institution has learned that the direct benefits to students from strengthening
institutional capacities, training staff, and improving resources have had
longer lasting benefits and were more sustainable than efforts to address
specific student deficits. The knowledge generated from this project will inform
St. Thomas’s policies and practices across all majors. Research questions
include: (1) To what extent do Science Scholars interventions support students’
psycho-social needs? (2) How well does a science-themed living learning
community support students’ sense of belonging at the university and in their
majors? and (3) How well does a career-focused STEM professional development
course increase self-efficacy and nurture STEM identity formation? The project’s
anticipated outcomes are that low-income science students will demonstrate an
increased sense of belonging, a strong STEM identity, and emotional and
financial wellness, leading them to graduate with a science degree and pursue
STEM careers at high rates. The project team and independent evaluator will
conduct a mixed methods evaluation to assess project implementation, provide for
ongoing improvements, and to monitor the extent to which goals and objectives
are achieved. The evaluation will study the effectiveness of efforts to increase
scholars’ success, retention, and graduation by minimizing financial and
psychosocial stressors, increasing professional identity as a scientist, and
nurturing belonging for low-income STEM students. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.