* 2221599
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Interfacial Ionics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shannon Boettcher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Interfacial Ionics (CI2) is supported by the Centers for
Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the Division of Chemistry. The work in CI2
is in electrochemistry – i.e., the science that underlies the design of
batteries, control of corrosion (rusting), production of renewable carbon-
neutral hydrogen and liquid fuels, carbon-capture technologies, and the
transmission and processing of information in biology (for example, in the
nervous system). Although electrochemistry inherently couples the motion of ions
(atoms or molecules with positive or negative charge) and electrons, it is
typically only the flow of electrons that is measured by experiments (as
electrical current). This has resulted in an ‘electron-centric’ conceptual
foundation that does not optimally support the design of electrochemical
technologies that are limited by how ions move. The NSF CI2 will address this
basic-science gap of how ions move across interfaces by building precise
platforms to measure ion speeds, inventing and applying state-of-the-art
analytics to understand mechanisms at molecular length scales, and using
computer simulations to interpret experimental results and build improved
theoretical models. This work is expected to provide a renewed foundational
science of interfacial ionics that will inform the invention of new
electrochemical technologies for society. The science effort leverages a diverse
team of research-intensive and primarily undergraduate and minority-serving
institutions to synergistically create a sustainable STEM diversity pipeline. In
education, CI2 will be a flagbearer for fundamental electrochemical knowledge
creation, mold the next generation of diverse leaders in the electrochemical
sciences that underly technologies critical for the prosperity of humanity, and
disseminate topics that engage the public via students and researchers
specifically trained in effective technical and non-technical science
communication techniques. Innovation and entrepreneurship training are tightly
embedded in the research platform to facilitate translation of the science to
commercial products for societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Interfacial Ionics (CI2) has the potential to revolutionize the understanding of
interfacial-ion-transfer (IIT) kinetics by coupling new measurements on
molecularly tunable interfaces with advances in theory and computation to
uncover accurate IIT theories of broad impact in science and technology. The
technical science effort focuses on three aims: (i) developing a molecular
science of IIT that connects clean measurements and tractable theory at
liquid/liquid junctions to technology-relevant solid/liquid junctions, (ii)
probing and tuning the free-energy landscape to understand how to catalyze IIT
at liquid/liquid and solid/liquid junctions, and (iii) accelerating IIT through
IIT catalysis by controlling interface-absorbed intermediates and
solvation/desolvation kinetic barriers. The target outcomes of CI2 are: (i) a
demonstration that the fundamental properties derived from IIT studies of well-
defined liquid/liquid interfaces correlate with technologically relevant
solid/liquid and solid/solid interfaces, (ii) the first IIT theory that
leverages data from experiment and molecular simulations from model systems and
condenses the complexity of IIT to simple formulations broadly enabling
quantitative prediction, and (iii) the design and demonstration of IIT
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.