* 2221893
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic methane fixation cascades based on engineered membrane vesicles for biofuel cell applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 251,126.00

Advances in oil and gas extraction techniques have made natural gas, composed
primarily of methane, widely available for use. Large quantities of methane leak
into the atmosphere during these operations. Well sites are often remote and
isolated. Standard capture and treatment technologies are not generally feasible
to apply in these cases. The objective of this project is to convert methane to
electric power. Artificial enzyme cascades will be created to completely oxidize
methane to CO2, generating electrons in the process. The electrons will be used
in fuel cell applications. This project will include an education and outreach
program that expands student access to project-based learning. Developing an
integrated teaching, research, and curriculum development platform will engage
graduate students, undergraduate, and high school students, particularly those
in underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a big gap
on converting mostly wasted methane to more valuable products under ambient
temperature due to the lack of efficient enzyme cascades. To address this
problem, the concept of fixing methane to methanol coupled to oxidation of
methanol for electron release using an organized four-enzyme cascade on membrane
vesicles is proposed. The membrane-bound enzyme found in methanotrophic bacteria
will selectively convert methane to methanol under mild conditions. This is the
foundation of the approach. Employing new hybrid enzyme-synthetic biology
artificial enzyme cascades, using the enzyme-bound vesicles isolated directly
from the host membranes, should completely oxidize methanol to CO2 and generate
electrons for fuel-cell applications. Specifically, conjugating a protein
scaffold onto the methane fixing enzyme-bound membrane vesicles will enable the
assembly of three dehydrogenases for the sequential conversion of methane to
carbon dioxide. Co-localization of the three dehydrogenases with the methane
fixing enzyme will promote the synergistic action between the enzymes due to
substrate channeling, resulting in an enhancement in the overall current
density. One added benefit of cascading the enzymes is to enable the improved
transfer of NADH and NAD+ between dehydrogenase and the methane fixing enzyme
for higher catalytic efficiency. The expected result is a new platform to
generate synthetic membrane vesicles system for methane fixation to CO2 to power
biofuel cells, and to serve as a technology platform for other membrane-bound
enzyme systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.