* 2221569
* Constraining rupture and relaxation dynamics of crustal fault roots with geodetic and microseismic observations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Junle Jiang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 306,000.00

The behavior of fault zones in the Earth’s crust changes with depth - shallow,
brittle regions produce earthquakes while deep, ductile regions creep in a
stable manner. At intermediate depths (typically 10 to 15 miles below the
surface), “fault roots” connect brittle faults to the stably deforming regions
below, and control how deep into the crust large earthquakes penetrate, as well
as the characteristics of aftershocks and rapid creep following such
earthquakes. This project seeks to reveal a more complete picture of deeper
fault zone behavior after large California earthquakes , using high-resolution
measurements of aftershocks (from seismometers) and surface motions (from GPS),
over timescales of seconds to years. Up to six magnitude 6 or greater
earthquakes that have occurred in southern California since the early 1990's
will be studied together, to characterize their fault properties and identify
factors that control the number and size of aftershocks, as well as how long
they last. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use coseismic and
postseismic observations of geodetic displacements and seismicity associated
with several major earthquakes (moment magnitudes of 6 and above) in California
to study the rupture and early relaxation processes at the base of the
seismogenic zone of crustal faults. The project will involve developing new
methods for observational inferences and constraining the depth- and time-
dependent aseismic and seismic fault behavior in these cases. The comparisons of
early postseismic responses of different fault segments from different events in
the San Andreas fault system will provide new opportunities to test the
controlling factors of aftershock generation at seismogenic depths, constrain
fault friction and rheological properties, and distinguish the transition of
early postseismic deformation mechanisms. The results of this project will
provide excellent examples of integrating continuous geodetic and seismic
observations, and potentially guide the development of physics-based models of
large earthquake ruptures and seismicity evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the EAR Geophysics Program (PH) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.