* 2221276
* Driving Math Competency through STEM Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Dwayne Daniels, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,399,964.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Fort Valley State University (FVSU). As a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU), FVSU has over 86% low-income students. Over its 6-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Mathematics. Specifically, 12 first-year
students will receive up to four-year scholarship support, while 18 third
year/transfer students will receive up to two-year scholarship support. The
project aims to prepare low-income, high achieving students not only to obtain a
degree in mathematics, but also to gain exposure to STEM modeling through summer
research. STEM modeling will enable students to be strong candidates for the
high demanding STEM workforce and/or graduate STEM degrees. This project aims to
increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with
effective supporting activities, including self-regulated learning, growth
mindset, mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, professional
development, and participation in discipline-specific conferences. Over the six
years duration, this project intends to investigate the ways in which the latter
factors affect persistence for each cohort. Because Fort Valley State University
has a high population of underrepresented students, this project has the
potential to broaden participation in STEM fields. Moreover, this project will
assist in the preparation of underrepresented students to become outstanding
STEM professionals, and researchers who are able to solve real world problems
with mathematics. The findings of the project will help to improve the retention
rate of low-income, academically talented students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Four goals animate this project. First is to retain math
students’ enrollment into subsequent year or increase graduation rate from 57%
to 80%. Second is to improve students’ level of self-regulation. Third is to
promote a growth mindset in students. Fourth and finally is to improve
mathematics identity among students. This will be done through the dissemination
of scholarship application information, visits to high schools, cohort-building
activities, faculty mentoring, professional development, and student support
workshops. In addition, instructional activities focusing on cognitive,
metacognitive, and self-management strategies; activities to foster growth
mindsets and regular engagement with mathematics activities; faculty mentoring
and the use of case studies; along with provision of career information will be
coordinated by the project PIs. Though studies have been done to describe the
independent effects of self-regulation, having a growth mindset, and
professional development on African American college students, little is known
on how a combination of all three components affect black low-income math
students. This project will investigate the collective impact of self-
regulation, having a growth mindset, and professional development on the
persistency of black low-income math students. To evaluate the effectiveness of
the project, the Center for Evaluation and Research Services (CERS) at Georgia
State University will analyze pre-/mid/post- assessment data regarding self-
regulation and mindset and will collect and analyze narrative data regarding
participants' experiences in the program and identification with mathematics.
The results of the project will be disseminated through professional local,
regional and/or national conferences and/or journal publications. Insight from
the project will also be shared with the necessary departments on campus through
faculty presentations. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.