* 2221465
* Closing Gaps and Driving Achievement: Intentional, Applied Academic Pathway Supports to Advance Success in STEM Career Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Lawrence Atkinson, Lorain County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2028
* USD 749,693.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Lorain County Community College. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 60 unique full and part-time students pursuing
associate degrees in Cyber and Information Security and Micro-Electrical
Mechanical Systems. The program is designed to enhance the persistence and
completion of academically qualified low-income students. Throughout the grant
period, new and transferring students will be able to receive up to 3 years of
scholarship support. Specific project activities include academic advising,
cohort-based activities, engagement in career-focused networking events, and
experiential credit-bearing learning opportunities. The project will measure the
efficacy of these practices and identify areas for improvement to positively
impact completion rates for talented students in STEM career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project hopes to achieve a retention rate for
project participants of 80 percent; a two-year graduation or transfer rate of 75
percent; and improve persistence and completion rates in Cyber and Information
Security and Micro-Electrical Mechanical Systems programs. Achieving these
objectives will enrich the STEM workforce with students who can contribute to
the American innovation economy. The project team at Lorain County Community
College hypothesizes that aggregated and equitable support resources will have a
statistically significant impact on degree attainment and job placement. Project
evaluation will address several questions relevant to the STEM education
community, including the extent to which comprehensive mentoring programs impact
student recruitment into STEM pathways; how and to what extent cohorts ensure
retention and completion; and how similar programs can enhance work-based and
experiential learning experiences. Accumulated data will help identify best
practices of the project, which can then be shared with the broader community
for replication. The project team plans dissemination activities through
multiple channels and partnerships, including networks such as the American
Association of Community Colleges, Society of Women Engineers, Ohio
Manufacturers' Association, Ohio TechNet, and multiple active partners in the
Manufacturing USA network. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.