* 2221665
* Collaborative Research:New Pathways to STEM Careers in Southern Idaho
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Katherine Wright, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 4,999,494.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at at Boise State University and two strategically located community
colleges in Idaho, the College of Western Idaho and the College of Southern
Idaho (a Hispanic-Serving Institution). The goal of this collaborative project
is to form a higher education consortium across Southern Idaho that provides
responsive recruiting, retention, and career pathways for engineering and
computer science (ECS) students. Over its six year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 136 unique full-time students who are pursuing associate’s
and bachelor’s degrees in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Transfer students
will received a 2-year scholarship at the partner community college of origin
and will continue to be funded for their Bachelor’s degree at Boise State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward this goal, this project establishes a
cohort-based experience with scholarship support for financially eligible,
academically talented students in ECS programs These institutions serve three of
the counties with the largest Hispanic population percentage in the state as
well as a significant proportion of the state’s low-income rural population.
This collaborative project will develop new accessible pathways into ECS careers
and create an educational ecosystem that provides opportunities for low-income
students with demonstrated academic potential to pursue a rewarding ECS career.
This approach will counter known constraints of the current pipeline metaphor
including providing multiple access points and addressing leaks that result in
students pivoting to programs outside of an ECS degree or leaving college
altogether. Creating recruiting and retention pathways in these areas will help
support underserved populations in Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
will also leverage existing relationships developed through the state-wide
Center for Advanced Energy Studies (CAES) to create a CAES Scholars Consortium.
The CAES Scholars Consortium will establish new pathways to attract and retain
students and to increase and diversify participation of low-income students in
the ECS workforce. This team will focus on approaches to recruitment, retention,
and careers. The CAES Scholars will be a cohort model that is connected
virtually through a common set of activities shared across the consortium
partners across the state. Each cohort will participate in activities to build a
professional community around students in ECS programs with close collaboration
and mentorship from professionals working in the energy sector, such as the
Idaho National Laboratory. In subsequent years, upper-class students will become
peer mentors to help newer students navigate the challenges related to
transitions along the pathways. The research component investigates how these
new pathways will improve self-efficacy, in particular the relationship between
ECS literacy and ECS identity, and subsequent ECS retention. It is hypothesized
that a strong ECS identity, increases access to and improves retention through
the transitions along the pathways. The project will also examine how student
experiences and related professional identity formation differ among students
with different pathways or initial institution
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.