* 2221574
* It Takes a Village: Communities Leveraged to Advance Scholars' Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Louise Wrensford, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,993.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Albany State University (ASU), a Historically Black Institution located
in Southwest Georgia. The mission of ASU is to prepare students to be effective
contributors to a globally diverse society. True to its mission, ASU serves
students who have the academic requirements to move into programs awarding
baccalaureate degrees and those whose academic preparation may be missing some
credentials expected of students gaining admission to bachelor of science (BS)
degree programs. Recognizing the impact of financial aid and an ecosystem of
academic and co-curricular student supports on student success, this project
will fund scholarships of $10,000 per year to 24 unique full-time students in
biology, chemistry, and forensic science over the six-year duration of the
project. Drawing on the strengths of the community, institution, faculty,
students, and alumni, the project will build upon and leverage existing and new
academic and co-curricular systems of student supports that have been found to
contribute to student success (e.g., retention, achievement, and graduation).
Project components are designed to build and sustain students’ sense of
community (belongingness) that has been found to support student success. The
project includes a two-semester First Year Experience, course-linked learning
communities, service-learning, undergraduate research, faculty professional
development, Early Alert Programs, Academic Advising, Academic Support Services,
integration of high impact practices into the curricular and non-curricular
activities, peer-faculty-alumni mentoring, monthly cohort meetings, and student
attendance at conferences/professional meetings. A unique component of the
second-semester First Year Experience is a focus on science communication. Based
on the composition of the student population, successful graduates will add to
the diversity of the STEM-oriented workforce and the diversity of students in
graduate studies in STEM. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, the
overall goal is to recruit, retain, and graduate academically talented students
majoring in Biology, Chemistry, and Forensic Science. Specific objectives are
(1) to increase diversity of the STEM workforce; (2) retain 90% of scholars from
Year 1 to Year 2; (3) produce an overall 4-year graduation rate of 85% of the
scholars; (4) result in 75% of the scholars advancing to the workforce or
graduate studies; and (5) generate knowledge of (a) the impact of the First Year
Experience on students’ sense of belonging and science identity and (b) the
degree to which alumni and faculty mentoring are effective in improving
scholars’ academic and career self-efficacy and scholars' pursuit of careers in
STEM. Project findings will be disseminated both regionally and nationally, with
a specific focus on rural institutions. A process and objectives oriented mixed
methods comparison evaluation will investigate the implementation of project
activities and the impact of those activities on expected outcomes. This project
is funded by the NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who ear degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.