* 2221249
* MCA: RUI: Investigating the role of microbialites in Lower-Middle Ordovician reefs of Laurentia: integrating outcrop, petrographic, and geochemical approaches.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Pedro Marenco, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 328,290.00

Coral reefs are declining rapidly due to rising seawater temperatures and ocean
acidification. These economically and ecologically important hard reef
structures will soon be replaced by softer assemblages of microbes, algae, and
sponges. The fossil record of reefs can provide critical insights that allow for
predictions about how reef environments transition away from microbial-algal-
sponge structures to robust reefs built by skeletonized animals like corals.
This project will investigate such a transition during the Ordovician Period by
quantifying trends in reef-builders through time. The ecologic impact of the
fossil reefs will be compared to that of modern coral reefs to help make
predictions about how modern reef environments will function without robustly-
skeletonized reef-builders. The products of this work will greatly advance the
career of two Latinx geoscientists who teach at predominantly undergraduate
institutions. This work will expose ninety first-generation, low-income (FGLI)
students to the study of reefs and will involve six to twelve FGLI students in
mentored research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify
framework builders in reefs of the Early-Middle Ordovician succession near Ibex,
Utah using a combination of outcrop, petrographic, and geochemical techniques. A
specific aim of this work is to develop geochemical techniques for uncovering
the presence of cryptic microbialite fabrics, particularly in mud-mounds.
Another aim is to detail how the combined reef mounds within a given interval
act as a larger reef unit with respect to impacts on the depositional system.
This work will include summer field and laboratory research conducted by FGLI
undergraduates participating in two programs at Bryn Mawr College: the STEM
Posse and STEMLA Fellows programs. Each summer, research mentees will work with
the PI to present short courses on the study of fossil reefs to incoming cohorts
of the two programs. The project will involve a field research trip to the
Florida Keys to compare Ordovician fossil reef data to the Florida coral reef
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.