* 2221990
* Polar STEAM: Where Curiosity Thrives
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Kim Bernard, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,200,000.00

The polar regions inspire wonder, awe, and fascination. But they are also icons
of fragility that have provided global audiences with unforgettable images of
glacial melt, shrinking permafrost, and the resiliency of Indigenous communities
in the face of changing Arctic climates. Scientific activity at the poles
addresses these urgent global challenges, explores the mysteries of our earth’s
history, our solar system and the universe, and investigates the wonder of life
in extreme environments. Oregon State University (OSU) will facilitate a Polar
STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics) program that aims
to increase the impact and visibility of polar science by integrating arts- and
education-based elements into the polar science research setting. The program’s
overarching goal is to increase the impact of the research and the engagement of
the public – general audiences and students – with polar environments and
peoples and to increase access to polar science for faculty and students from
minority serving institutions and two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
programs define Polar STEAM: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i. The Polar Educators
program facilitates deployments to both the Arctic and the Antarctic and virtual
experiences connected to the polar expeditions for both formal and informal
educators. The program aims to inspire transdisciplinary teaching and
transdisciplinary science about the polar regions, integrating art-based and
science-based methods to promote critical thinking, engagement, and conceptual
access for a broad swath of learners. The program works with educators from K-12
institutions, two-year colleges, and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) as
well as informal science institutions to engage students from groups
underrepresented in STEM with the goal of increasing participation by
underrepresented groups and/or diverse audiences in polar science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii. The Antarctic Artists and Writers program facilitates
deployments to the Antarctic for creative practitioners within the arts and
humanities to interact with polar researchers. The program aims to increase the
public’s understanding and appreciation of the Antarctic and human endeavors on
the southernmost continent through the resulting works. The program also seeks
to inspire the critical exchanges that artists and creative thinkers bring to
science research settings, even those as remote as Antarctica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSU’s facilitation of the two programs centers on
integrating the sciences, arts, and education by creating pre- and post-
deployment communities of program participants – both within the two individual
programs and across the AAW and Polar Educators groups. Emphasizing inclusivity
at each step, from the recruitment of applicants through post-deployment
interactions, the program creates the conditions for curiosity to thrive – not
just because the environments are themselves wondrous, but through the rich
community of artists, scientists, and educators that program infrastructure will
create. Through mentoring components, in-person and virtual meetings of
participants across the programs, arts exhibition opportunities, a robust and
content-rich web portal, and long-term relationship building, OSU will manage
the Polar STEAM programs with an eye to enabling participants to learn from one
another’s unique strengths, practices, and ways of knowing. In this approach,
the power and unique vulnerability of polar environments will be activated,
communicated, and studied holistically, and the results and resources will be
made available to the widest possible audience. Evaluation of the Polar STEAM
program will be led by the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton
College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a Cooperative Agreement, funded by
the Office of Polar Programs within the Geoscience Directorate and by three
divisions within the Education and Human Resource Directorate (EHR) including
the Division of Human Resource Development (HRD), the Division of Undergraduate
Education (DUE), and Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Environments
(DRL). This project is partially funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. This project is also
partially supported by EHR’s Division of Human Resource Development, whose
mission is to grow the innovative and competitive U.S. STEM workforce that is
vital for sustaining and advancing the Nation's prosperity by supporting the
broader participation and success of individuals currently underrepresented in
STEM and the institutions that serve them. The IUSE Program in DUE, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students, is also partially funding this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.