* 2221097
* STEM Student Success with Coaching for Full-time and Part-time Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Thomas Carter, Community College District 502
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low- income students with demonstrated financial
need at the College of DuPage (COD). Located just west of Chicago, COD is the
second largest postsecondary education institution in Illinois, serving over
23,000 students, with almost 40% of half-time to full-time students receiving
Pell Grants. Over its six-year duration, this S-STEM Track 2 project will fund
scholarships to a minimum of 120 part-time or full-time S-STEM eligible students
pursuing an Associate’s degree (or intent to transfer for a future Bachelor
degrees) in Chemistry, Computer-Information Science, Engineering, Math, or
Physics. The COD S-STEM Student Success program offers effective evidence-based
activities, research experiences, and scholarship support for S-STEM students. A
dedicated S-STEM Success Coach will provide intrusive advising in
individualized, cohort, and cross-disciplinary program guidance, academic
planning, and enhanced educational opportunities for the students. This includes
university visits, alumni panels, STEM lectures, professional development
workshops, and holistic student support activities to encourage persistence in
STEM majors. S-STEM students are also invited to participate in paid summer
internships through existing partnerships with four-year institutions and local
national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is
to increase STEM degree completion of academically talented undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The COD S-STEM project will achieve this goal by
broadening the outreach to and support of full-time and part-time STEM students
through continued evidence-based methods of intrusive advising by a dedicated
Success Coach, combined with scholarships to reduce financial barriers. While
S-STEM program data shows support strategies to be highly effective for full-
time STEM students, the majority of community college populations tend to be
students who attend on a part-time basis. This project will incorporate six
pillars of evidence-based infrastructure: (1) Intrusive advising and student
tracking through student success coaching; (2) Coordinated academic pathways in
alignment with area four-year universities; (3) STEM faculty mentoring and
cohort building; (4) STEM engagement activities and research experiences; (5)
Reduction of financial barriers; and, (6) Early identification of gaps in
college and career readiness. Whenever possible, strategies will be offered
through a variety of modalities (in person, online) and varied as to time,
location, or other factors to accommodate part-time students’ needs. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low- income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.