* 2221627
* The Science of Success: Addressing Workforce Needs in North Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* William Shay, North Dakota State College of Science
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,447,429.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at North Dakota State College of Science (NDSCS). Over its 6-year duration,
this project will fund scholarships to a minimum of 70 unique full- and part-
time students who are pursuing associate’s degrees in 11 career and technical
education (CTE) and 5 liberal arts transfer programs. Based on enrollment
trends, approximately 85% of the scholarship recipients are expected to be CTE
students. The project addresses retention, graduation and engagement by
providing financial, academic, and professional success support personalized to
each STEM Scholar. This includes experiential learning such as class projects,
internships, research projects, co-curricular activities, and professional
development activities. This project also supports a professional development
activity that will develop STEM awareness, the ability to understand the
relationship between STEM disciplines, and use the fields of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics collaboratively to solve a problem. The
project will address the statewide and regional in-demand workforce by
graduating students who not only possess the technical skills required by
industry and universities but will also possess the career-ready skills critical
for professional success, and understand the importance of their profession to
the STEM community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase degree completion rates for low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The specific objectives of the project are to
(1) recruit academically-talented STEM students with demonstrated financial
need, (2) retain 100% of the STEM Scholars from their first to second year of
study and graduate 90% of STEM Scholars within two years, and (3) integrate
professional skills throughout their plan of study. Retention efforts will focus
on faculty and peer mentoring, student success initiatives, and experiential
learning. This project will address the disconnect between college education and
industry expectations by including professional development activities for
faculty and students that include individualized growth plans and career success
seminars as well as leadership opportunities in the form of co-curricular
activities. Students in each STEM program view their program as being isolated
from the others. The project will address this misconception by incorporating
STEM awareness activities throughout the career success seminars, arranging
tours of each campus laboratory to learn how each program is similar, and by
encouraging collaboration on projects between student groups. The project will
provide students with the necessary knowledge and skills to contribute to their
career, and to understand their individual contribution to regional and national
STEM needs. The project will be evaluated using a mixed-method approach of
student surveys, structured interviews, focus groups, and inventory analyses of
student work and artifacts. The results will be disseminated to the public, and
CTE and STEM communities. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.