* 2221037
* Assuring Students Success in Engineering Technology Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Mukasa Ssemakula, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,830.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Wayne State University (WSU), an urban, public research university in
Detroit, Michigan. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships
to 48 unique undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in
Engineering Technology (ET) programs. WSU’s ET programs are upper division only,
designed to provide a pathway for community college graduates to earn a BS
degree in 2 years. These non-traditional students face significant financial and
personal challenges in completing their degrees. This project will provide high-
achieving low-income students with financial support, implement evidence-based
active learning techniques, as well as offer various professional and academic
support services to strengthen students’ engineering identity and commitment to
enter the STEM workforce or graduate school upon graduation. The project will
also impact all ET students at WSU by a) promoting utilization of evidence-based
active learning techniques in all programs of study at the institution, b)
increasing student retention and graduation rates, while reducing time-to-
degree, and c) providing a qualified technical workforce for local industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. A recent national study indicated that the six-year graduation
rate of transfer students who earned a 4-year baccalaureate degree was only
around 42% and the likelihood of degree completion for low-income students is
even less. Based on identity theory that seeks to understand the links between
social organization and individual behavior, this project hypothesizes that
early engagement, and continuous support play a key role in fostering
engineering identity, retention, and persistence of ET transfer students, thus
improving their academic and professional outcomes. The project will inform
faculty, the engineering education community, and administrators about how
engineering technology students perceive their identification with engineering
careers and how “early engagement” and “continued support” of transfer students
in engineering technology impact their commitment to and identification with the
engineering profession. Upon the successful completion of this project, three
outcomes are expected. First is to improve overall 1st-to-2nd year retention
rates, the average time-to-degree, and the average 4-year graduation rates of
all ET transfer students. Second is to have at least 90% of participating
students enter the STEM workforce or graduate studies within 6 months of
graduation. And third is to help meet industry demand for technologically
competent graduates. An external evaluator will perform process and outcome
evaluation using results from formative and summative assessments. The findings
of this project will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications,
conference presentations and workshops, workshops for area community colleges,
and seminars. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.