* 2221996
* SBP: Collaborative Research: Culturally Relevant Mentorship for Enhancing STEM Identity and Career Interests
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* George Williams, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 208,818.00

In STEM education, mentorship has become an important means of increasing the
participation of underrepresented minoritized (URM) students, including women,
Native/Black/Latinx Americans, persons with disabilities, bilingual students,
and low-socioeconomic status (SES) youth. This B2 3.0 project will identify new
constructs of culturally relevant mentorship (CRM), develop new survey
instruments for assessing CRM, and examine the associations between CRM and STEM
identity and career interest of URM students. The findings will offer insights
for practitioners and policymakers to target resources and design interventions
that can improve STEM outcomes of URM students through CRM. This project will
also support research publications and NSF proposal submissions of faculty and
doctoral students at MSIs, as well as strengthen collaborative networks among
STEM education and social/behavioral science researchers through a STEM
coalition that involves more than 30 pre-college STEM programs and 10 MSIs
across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This B2 3.0 project, co-led by
researchers at both MSIs and non-MSIs, will make substantive contributions to
knowledge in the fields of mentorship, social psychology, and broadening
participation in STEM. It integrates cross-disciplinary theoretical perspectives
to identify novel CRM constructs and link them to URM students’ STEM identity
and career interests. It also addresses one of the most critical measurement
needs in mentorship research and STEM education by developing and validating two
new sets of CRM survey scales for mentors and mentees. Specifically, this
project will conduct: (1) a comparative case study to explore and describe
important CRM constructs and case types of mentors for URM adolescents; (2) a
multi-step scale development study to develop and validate two new sets of CRM
survey instruments for mentors and mentees; and (3) a large-scale survey study
with a diverse sample to analyze the relationships between mentors’ CRM
practices and URM mentees’ CRM perceptions, STEM identity, and STEM career
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.