* 2221648
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Adaptive multi-Robot Configurable Teams Investigating Changing Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Carrick Detweiler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 991,860.00

This project addresses key goals in the development of integrative robotic
systems, such as improvements in robot capability for sample collection,
flexible robot tasking based on vehicle abilities, and improved human
performance in operation and monitoring of robot teams. Teams of complementary
flying, floating, and underwater robots developed by the project team have
recently gained the ability to perform observations at precise locations and
take measurements both above and below the surface of the water. Additional
development aid in obtaining water quality, temperature, and underwater mapping
measurements, as well as wildlife and ecosystem observations, at remote sites in
Alaska. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a vision for advancing
multi-robot technologies, scientific deployment practices, and understanding in
order to extend the reach of human sensing in difficult-to-access environments
while also providing fundamental scientific understanding of a new disturbance
regime affecting all aspects of low-land Arctic ecosystems. New and unexpected
wildlife are moving north into Arctic tundra as climate change redistributes
their habitat. For example, satellite research has shown the North American
beaver has colonized vast areas of northwestern Alaska over the last 20 years
and because of the new dams and hydrological changes, permafrost is thawing.
Access to measure what effect this landscape change has on aquatic habitats and
regional ecosystems is difficult due to the remoteness of the terrain, an
inability to collect underwater measurements, and the complexity of the mixed
aquatic and terrestrial wetland environment that defines the beaver engineered
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the NSF National
Robotics Initiative (NRI) with an integrative robotic agenda, focusing on the
integration of robotics systems and teams, inspired in the context of
Uninhabited Aerial, Surface, and Underwater Systems (UAS, USS, and UUS;
collectively defined as UxS) based tundra ecosystem monitoring, taking a
multidisciplinary approach that requires efforts at the intersection of
robotics, computer science, systems engineering, and tundra ecosystem science.
This work contributes to transformative environmental monitoring technologies as
part of a UxS sampling system to expand the reach of scientists in challenging
environments. This research advances vehicle innovations to improve mechanisms
and algorithms for sample collection in new contexts, online
replanning/retasking of sampling based on environmental and vehicle
observations, understanding of user proficiency, mental models, and mutual
adaptation for improved system performance, and new methods for data collection
in amphibious tundra environments to study permafrost thaw and global change
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.