* 2221525
* Transforming STEM Education and Supporting Indigenous Scientists
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Victoria Retasket, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,752.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Northwest Indian College. Northwest Indian College is a tribal college
located on Lummi Nation north of Seattle, Washington with six extended campuses
throughout Washington State (Swinomish, Tulalip, Port Gamble, Muckleshoot,
Nisqually) and one campus in Idaho (Nez Perce). Over its 5 years duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 43 unique full-time students who are pursing
bachelor’s degrees in Native Environmental Science. Students starting in their
first or second year will receive four- or three-year scholarships,
respectively. Northwest Indian College’s mission is, “through education,
Northwest Indian College provides Indigenous self-determination and knowledge”.
The Native Environmental Science program provides place-based, experiential, and
culturally grounded curriculum and provides training in a diverse range of STEM
careers. S-STEM scholars will participate in a multi-generational STEM
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Key components of that goal are: remove financial
barriers for academically talented, Indigenous science students; enhance student
support services to increase year-to-year retention; build Indigenous science
communities through S-STEM cohorts, alumni, and professional networks;
articulate meaningful pathways to community-oriented post-graduation STEM
employment; and reclaim Indigenous identity. Unique components of this work are
the strengthening of Indigenous STEM cohorts through networking events and
alumni-student mentoring to support community growth and reclaim Indigenous
identity in STEM. This project will generate new knowledge about how to
successfully recruit, retain, and transition American Indian / Alaska Native
students in STEM fields with positive job growth. It will also provide
scholarship on innovative and cutting-edge research projects that actively
incorporate multiple ways of knowing and place-based approaches into its design.
The merit includes increasing the diversity of STEM fields by removing barriers
for entry and promoting success. Innovative evaluation methodology based on the
Indigenous Evaluation Framework will also contribute to an understanding of how
to assess Indigenous Education. Results of this work will published through
academic journals, educational platforms, and community presentations. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.