* 2221384
* Siena Heights: Applying Psychological Constructs and Student Supports to Improve the Education of Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Jun Tsuji, Siena Heights University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

Applying Psychological Constructs and Student Supports to Improve the Education
of Students in STEM (SHAPE STEM) will contribute to the national need for well-
educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting
the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Siena Heights University(SHU). Siena Heights
University, located in southeastern Michigan, is a small, private, coeducational
university. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
30 unique full-time undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in biology, chemistry, environmental science, cybersecurity, data analytics,
mathematics, and environmental and general engineering. First-year students will
receive up to four-years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase
student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with a holistic
approach that uniquely integrates a four-year comprehensive research experience
and positive psychology practices with other STEM supports to reduce stress and
improve emotional wellbeing. The project aims to improve students’ STEM identity
and exposure to career paths by providing access to STEM professionals through
alumni mentorships, internships, and career panels. This project has the
potential to broaden participation in STEM fields by providing increased
emotional supports, cohort building, and career awareness to improve the
retention and graduation rates for SHU’s large number of Pell-eligible and
first-generation students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project
is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in
STEM fields with demonstrated financial need. Many students enter their first
year unaware of degree options. This project will capitalize on Sienna Heights
University’s strong environmental research and education programs to address the
gap in incoming students’ knowledge of career opportunities to support the
substantial employment opportunities for the environmental workforce and
national needs in environmental research. The objectives of the grant include:
1) incorporating positive psychology skills of gratitude, mindfulness, and
wellbeing and engaging students in personal psychological interventions to help
them build social resources and better connect with their peers, 2) expanding
directed social networking and mentoring, and 3) developing a coordinated series
of professional development activities that will help students build a STEM
identity. The program integrates multiple strategies over the students’ college
careers, allowing the research team to track outcomes longitudinally, evaluating
the impacts of elements used in different class years. The project has the
potential to produce diverse STEM graduates who can contribute to workforce
needs and apply their knowledge of environmental stewardship in their
occupations to help address environmental problems that disproportionately
impact low-income communities. Results of this project will be made available
through participation in regional and national conferences and publication in
peer reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.