* 2221621
* Improving Persistence in Undergraduate Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Andrew Assadollahi, Christian Brothers University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2028
* USD 749,877.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Christian Brothers University (CBU). Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 15 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in computer science and chemical, civil, electrical, and
mechanical engineering. Each eligible student will receive funding for up to
four years. The project aims to increase student persistence by linking
scholarships with effective supporting activities, including faculty and
industry professional mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, graduate
school preparation, and participation in discipline-specific student
competitions and conferences, plus the provision of technological resources
(i.e. laptop computers). Project findings will be used to inform both project
and curriculum improvements aimed at improving first-year student retention in
STEM. The project will lead to students' economic mobility and will serve to
broaden the socioeconomic diversity of professionals in the targeted STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Towards this end the project seeks to enhance
the retention of low-income students in introductory STEM courses and lead them
to academic success. Four objectives guide the project team. First is to recruit
15 academically talented, low-income students in computer science and chemical,
civil, electrical, and mechanical across three cohorts. Second is to retain 87%
(13 of 15) of scholars from their respective Year 1 to Year 2 and graduate 15
S-STEM scholars (factoring in replacements) in their chosen STEM major in four
years. Third is to place 100% of S-STEM graduates in a STEM-related graduate
program or in the workforce in a STEM-related field within six months of
graduation. Finally, the fourth objective is to identify the factors that
influence the success of low-income students in introductory STEM courses that
are key to later success. To help achieve these objectives, the PI team and
faculty mentors will utilize early intervention practices such as student-
centered advising networks, faculty and professional mentors, extracurricular
activity involvement, paid research opportunities and internships, cohort-
building through block scheduling, and the provision of technological resources.
This project will provide a better understanding on how these individual
activities and their combined effects influence the students’ persistence.
Evaluation of the project will utilize formative and summative assessment
activities to study the effectiveness of the project activities. Information
about the project will be shared locally with other faculty and staff at CBU and
will be disseminated to the broader STEM education communities to advance the
understanding of improvement of student learning of low-income, academically
talented students. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.