* 2221854
* Atomic Scale Deformation Mechanisms in New Ductile Cu-Based Bulk Metallic Glasses with High Manufacturability
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Donghua Xu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2025
* USD 323,141.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) are a fairly new
class of advanced material that has a non-crystalline (glassy) inner structure.
They do not contain crystal-related defects as are common in metals. This
special structure gives BMGs a host of properties (e.g., strength, hardness,
resilience, wear- and cor-rosion-resistance) that can be superior to many
metals. This difference creates the potential to dras-tically improve upon the
performance of many metals widely used in several engineering applica-tions.
However, one significant challenge facing BMGs is their limited ability to bend
and stretch. Even when they break, BMGs do not show evidence of significant
stretching or bending before failure. A few BMGs have demonstrated good
ductility but they are often very difficult to make in large sizes or require
elements that are either expensive, toxic and/or hard to find. Designing BMGs
with good ductility, that can be manufactured at scale and which do not use
toxic or hard to acquire elements is an outstanding question in the field. This
project addresses this challenge by investigating the atomic-scale deformation
mechanisms in Copper-based BMGs that were recently discovered by the principal
investigator. These Cu-based BMGs possess an exceptional combination of high
strength, good ductility, excellent manufacturability, and engineering-friendly
compositions. Understanding the way these BMGs bend, stretch and ultimately
fail, will help future discovery of other equally or more remarkable BMGs that
will better serve the societal needs of high performance materials than the
materials we currently use. This project engages multiple graduate and
undergraduate students in direct research and prepares them for future
materials-related careers in academia or industry. Through a well-established
summer program, the project also involves K-12 students, particularly from
underserved areas and groups, to cultivate curiosity and interest in materials
science while promoting diversity, equity and inclusion in STEM education for
all. Research findings are used to enrich an undergraduate Introduction to
Materials Science course taught at Oregon State University. This project also
aids the U.S. in being a place for leading research for BMGs which are a
strategically important class of materials and a potential game changer in
future defense and aerospace applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Ductility (or plasticity) often conflicts with strength in
various types of materials. In addition, manufacturability and engineering-
friendliness of composition is an additional common trade-off for engineering
materials. Bulk metallic glasses (BMG) are challenged by both. Achieving good
ductility in BMGs by alloy design without sacrificing strength,
manufacturability and engineering-friendliness of composition are central issues
in the field. A significant barrier to these challenges is the lack of
understanding relative to how atomic-scale features (bonds, elements) in a BMG
govern their macroscopic deformation and how to control these effects by design
of their elemental compositions. This project combines experimental and
computational methods to investigate atomic-sale deformation mechanisms in a
recently discovered family of Cu-based BMGs which possess exceptional
combinations of high strength, good ductility, excellent manufacturability and
engineering-friendly compositions. Coordinated in-situ straining via a
synchrotron beamline and a scanning electron microscope are used to track the
behavior of the atomic bonds and shear bands in the new BMGs at different levels
of stress and strain to probe the effects of changing composition on their
deformation behavior (through atomic bonds and shear bands). Molecular dynamics
simulations and finite element modeling are then used to analyze and interpret
the experimental data. The project is expected to identify the atomic bonds
primarily responsible for elastic deformation and determine the strength of
those bonds chiefly responsible for plastic deformation and ductility. In this
way, investigators are elucidating the fundamental origin of the unusual
combination of strength and ductility in this new class of BMGs as well as
revealing how alloy composition influences stress-driven atomic bond behavior
and macroscopic deformation. Such knowledge is needed for the design of future
BMGs with good ductility and ideal combinations of additional properties. This
project also advances fundamental materials science in the area of materials
plasticity at extreme stresses which cannot be explored with common metallic,
ceramic or polymeric materials. Graduate students supported by the project
experience a unique opportunity to learn about materials macroscopic
deformatiion and atomic-scale behavior, master important experimental and
computational techniques, and prepare for future careers in materials-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.