* 2221147
* Leveraging Citizen Science to Grow and Diversify the Science, Engineering, and Technology Workforce of the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2028
* Diane Murphy, Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,462,268.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technologists by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Marymount University, a private, Catholic institution in Arlington, VA,
that was recently designated as a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Over its 6-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 22 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, biochemistry, or information
technology. First year students will receive up to 4 years of scholarship
support. Through targeted communication and robust marketing, the number of
students enrolled and retained in STEM programs at Marymount is expected to
increase. Scholars will participate in collaborative activities designed to
introduce them to citizen science, empower them to promote STEM in their local
communities through an ambassador program, and allow them to engage with other
STEM professionals by hosting a citizen science symposium. Scholars will gain
STEM-essential skills through process-oriented, topical citizen science projects
and use those skills to serve their local communities. Scholars will develop
multi-stage career plans and receive mentoring throughout the program from
faculty and alumni. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The following aims will be addressed (1)
recruit and enroll 22 unique scholars across three cohorts; (2) retain and
graduate program scholars within four years; and (3) place all scholars in STEM
jobs or graduate programs within 1 year of graduation. In addition the project
aims to explore how engaging in citizen science affects students’ STEM skills
including their ability to think creatively, analyze data critically, work
effectively in a team, exhibit self-confidence, and lend a critical eye to
examine their own perceptions. Participation in citizen science is hypothesized
to increase undergraduate student engagement and make STEM more accessible. Best
practices for embedding citizen science in the undergraduate curriculum of STEM
programs at Marymount will be explored, and a model for citizen science
implementation at other universities will be created. This project aims to
strengthen STEM skills, which will result in greater student success and
retention and promote STEM careers. The skills developed throughout the project
will allow for continued success and the professional mobility of participants.
The project will also benefit the communities with which scholars engage,
demonstrating how science can be used as an instrument of service in local
communities. A mixed methods evaluation approach will be used, including
enrollment, retention, graduation, and career placement data, in addition to
qualitative surveys, written reflections, and focus groups. Results of the
project will be made available through presentations and publications to a wide
audience. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.