* 2221151
* Career Development in Construction Engineering through an Academic and Industry Network
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Ghada Gad, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,493,695.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona or
CPP). Cal Poly Pomona is one of the 23 campuses within the California State
University (CSU) System and an HSI designated institution with 50% of the
student body identifying as Hispanic, where 54% meet the category of
underrepresented minorities (URM), 62% are first-generation college students,
and 45% are Pell grant recipients. Over its 5-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 45 unique undergraduate students who are pursuing a
bachelor’s degree in Construction Engineering and Management (CEM) and to 75
unique undergraduate students who will participate in a pre-arranged summer
internship. First-year students will receive up to four years of scholarship
support and transfer students will receive up to two years of scholarships. The
project aims to increase student persistence in the CEM discipline by increasing
retention, student success, and graduation rates of the Hispanic and URM
students. The project will implement evidence-based curricular and co-curricular
activities to support the students. The project will demonstrate the impact of
additional financial assistance through a scholarship opportunity during
academic semesters as a research assistant and will offer summer opportunities
to work as an intern at a construction firm, which is intended to enhance the
academic performance of low-income students with academic ability and talent.
Because Cal Poly Pomona has a high population of URM and Hispanic students, this
project has potential to broaden participation in the STEM fields and for
faculty to learn how mentoring and individual development plans can be used to
support retention and graduation of a student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase completion
of STEM degrees, i.e., B.S. in Construction Engineering and Management, by low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There
are three specific aims that guide the project. First is a focus on recruiting
activities such as information sessions, guest lectures, or ambassador programs
to broaden the number of CEM students. Second is to address the equity gap issue
in the industry and provide financial resources. Third is to implement
effective, evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities that enhance
student success, academic/career pathways, and graduation. Although the
disparity in URM representation has shown some improvement over the years, it
remains significantly and continuously low. This necessitates an evidence-based
intervention effort to recruit and retain more URMs, working towards a
significant increase in URM representation and a more qualified workforce ready
to respond to the industry’s increasing demands. This project will investigate
the challenges of the current CEM students at CPP (URM, female, first-
generation, and low-income college students), and implement recruiting and
retention activities to support graduates pursuing successful careers in the
construction industry. The project will be assessed using both formative
(process) and summative (outcome) evaluation. Results of this project will be
made available at the California Engineering Liaison Council (CAELC) meetings
and in conference presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.