* 2221714
* Molecular Structure-Activity/Selectivity of Ethane Oxidative Dehydrogenation to Ethylene by MoVNbTe Mixed Oxide M1 Phase Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 399,998.00

Ethane (a hydrocarbon component of natural gas) is the chief feedstock chemical
for the production of ethylene – a highly desirable feedstock used in numerous
industries, most notably the manufacture of polyethylene and other plastics.
Currently, ethylene is produced through the well-established, but energy-
intensive endothermic process of steam reforming. The project focuses on a more
energy-efficient catalytic process known as oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH), an
exothermic reaction that would require approximately 80% lower energy
consumption, reduce CO2 emissions, and lower ethylene production costs.
Achieving those goals (and beyond), however, requires improvements to the
current state-of-the-art catalyst. The project combines spectroscopy, kinetic
analysis, and theoretical methodologies that will provide new insights about
ethane ODH, thus pointing the way towards either improved catalyst performance
or identification of better performing alternatives. The research findings will
be integrated into technical courses at Lehigh, production of online outreach
videos, outreach activities to local schools, and work with the Lehigh Valley
DaVinci Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unsupported MoVNbTe mixed oxide
M1 phase catalyst is the most efficient catalyst known for ethane ODH, but many
aspects of this catalyst system still need to be resolved. The project is built
on the hypothesis (supported by the investigator’s prior research) that the
catalytically active sites are the surface metal oxide sites (both on the
proposed external amorphous overlayer surface and on the internal channel walls
of the M1 phase) and not the metal oxide sites of the crystalline M1 phase
commonly assumed in the literature. Preliminary studies reveal the somewhat
static nature of the M1 bulk phase and the highly dynamic nature of the surface
phase during ethane ODH. The almost complete absence of reported surface
information about the M1 phase catalyst during ethane ODH has prevented
development of fundamental understanding of this catalytic system. The complex
nature of the M1 phase necessitates application of multiple advanced research
experiments under ethane ODH reaction conditions to understand this catalyst
system, namely 1) in situ and operando spectroscopy studies (Raman, IR, NAP-XPS,
HS-LEIS, XANES/EXAFS, E-TEM) to determine the molecular level behavior of the
crystalline and surface metal oxide sites, and 2) transient kinetic studies
(Steady State Isotopic Transient Kinetic Analysis (SSITKA) and Modulation
Excitation Spectroscopy (MES)) to address the redox kinetics of each cation and
source of participating oxygen (i.e., (gas phase O2 (L-H) vs. lattice O* (MvK)).
Molecular level DFT calculations and Microkinetic Modeling will complement the
experimental findings to provide additional insights into structure-activity
relationships. The objectives are to determine the dynamics of the surface
cations present on the external surface and internal pore walls: (i) surface
composition, (ii) oxidation states, (iii) redox kinetics (steady state,
reduction with ethane and re-oxidation with O2), and (iv) location of
catalytically active site(s) (external surface or internal pores). The new
insights will lead to realistic structure-activity catalyst models of this
important, complex catalyst system that will guide the rational design of
advanced M1-phase mixed oxide catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.