* 2221052
* Supporting Engineering and Computing Studies Scholars through Experiential Learning, Personal Development, and Community Service
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Saeed Tiari, Gannon University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,499,998.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Gannon University. Gannon is a private, four-year, primarily
undergraduate university located in Erie, Pennsylvania. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to approximately 85 unique full-
time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in engineering and computing
studies, including mechanical, electrical, software, environmental, biomedical,
and industrial engineering. One-year scholarships (renewable for up to four
years) will be offered to selected incoming freshman students. The program
provides professional and personal development activities chosen to support
retention to graduation and help students thrive post-graduation. These
activities include sessions geared towards building student competence in the
workplace, experiential learning, personal development, and community-building
activities. The project contributes to student academic success through active
advising of students, peer mentoring, and development of close, personal ties to
faculty members. The broader impact of the project is found in the experiential
aspect, wherein local in-need charitable organizations are assisted in
development of low-cost engineered solutions to specialized problems, thereby
enhancing livability in the university neighborhood (which is situated in one of
the poorest zip codes in the USA) and encouraging students towards community
service. Intellectual merit of the project is to be found in the establishment
of additional best practices in student retention and in knowledge gained about
the efficacy of actions taken to provide academic aid to students struggling in
fundamental math and physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The goals of the Scholars of
Excellence in Engineering and Computing Studies (SEECS) program are to: (1)
increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need, especially women (an under-represented group),
enrolled in and graduating from Gannon University’s engineering and computing
studies programs, (2) facilitate students’ degree attainment by providing
scholarships and rigorous academic support, (3) foster professional development
and assist students’ entry into careers in STEM fields and/or graduate
education, and (4) study and communicate the impact of targeted interventions on
retention of high academic performing students, focusing on attrition-point
courses. To realize these goals, this project aims to: (1) provide 25
scholarships per year on average for eligible students, (2) achieve an average
90% freshman to sophomore retention rate for SEECS scholars, (3) provide
scholars with academic and professional development preparing them for
employment in a STEM field and/or graduate school, (4) develop and maintain
recruitment strategies to achieve a 30% rate of women applicants, and (5)
provide academic support for critical path courses. The underlying philosophy of
SEECS is to help increase diversity in engineering studies by increasing access
to low-income students. Further, based upon past study of attrition, it has been
noted that there are two particular courses that cause academic problems, namely
Calculus and Physics. This project utilizes peer mentoring and multi-level
academic advising to provide additional support to bolster student success in
these courses. Thus, SEECS goals both foster diversity, and support development
of a strong work force by providing academic and financial assistance towards
graduation. Results will be disseminated through publications in conference
proceedings and journals and will be made available through the university
website. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.