* 2221516
* Fostering Interdisciplinary Community, Belonging, and Success of Low-Income, High-Achieving Mathematics, Computer Science, and Statistics Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Gregory Bodwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for scientists and
professionals highly trained in quantitative fields by supporting the success
and retention of high-achieving, low-income students at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor. Over its six year duration, the project will provide
scholarships to three cohorts of students (45 unique undergraduate students
total) who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Mathematics, Computer Science, and
Statistics. Second-year students and transfer students entering the program will
receive financial support through graduation. The project will support scholars
through their major and into their post-graduation pursuits via several key
activities and structures. These include a project-based, interdisciplinary,
summer institute; small learning communities in key second year courses;
trained, long-term faculty mentors; project-dedicated academic advisors; and the
resources of an established broader STEM scholar program. The project will
support students by increasing their sense of belonging, academic success, and
financial upward mobility, and the institution and disciplines more broadly will
also benefit. As part of the project, faculty will be trained in mentoring
students from historically marginalized groups. The course-adjacent learning
communities that the project supports will also continue to sustain majors,
especially those from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM, beyond the
lifetime of the grant. Most broadly, the three target disciplines will benefit
from diversifying the pool of practitioners. While much attention has been paid
to Calculus as a gatekeeper to STEM disciplines, this project offers a novel
approach in its targeted support for students in courses beyond Calculus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase degree
completion success (as measured by grades, employment, and graduate program
admissions) of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in Mathematics,
Computer Science and Statistics. Specifically, goals of the project include
having scholars achieve grade benchmarks in targeted second-year courses, obtain
internships, build lasting relationships with mentors, and persist in relevant
careers or graduate school in their chosen disciplines. A utilization-focused
approach will be used to conduct a formative and summative outcome monitoring
evaluation of the project’s duration to (1) document the attainment of project
goals and objectives, (2) inform improvements in the implementation process, (3)
document student outcome attainment, as well as departmental and institutional
impacts, and (4) capture lessons learned to inform knowledge dissemination
products. For formative evaluation, the evaluation team will collect scholar
feedback in written and focus group format, track overall attendance and
participation, and compare different incentive structures for study group
participation and their success rates. For summative evaluation, the evaluation
team will collect survey data on several validated scales, grade data, course-
taking data, and career planning/attainment data, and compare these results with
a quasi-experimental, comparable “waitlist” of 45 students. The evaluation team
will also track outcomes at the department, discipline, and institutional
levels. The grant team will share program results and key lessons at relevant
national conferences, within the University, through peer-reviewed publications,
and on a project website. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.