* 2221350
* Research-based Interventions for STEM Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2029
* Cynthia Anderson, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2029
* USD 1,499,928.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Black Hills State University. Black Hills State University is a rural-
serving institution with 36% of undergraduates eligible for Pell grants. Over
its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 24 unique students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, environmental
physical science, mathematics, and physical science. Participants will be
awarded scholarships as entering first-year students and receive four years of
support. In addition to scholarships, students will be provided with Faculty
Mentoring, Learning Communities (co-enrolled courses and co-location in
residence halls), Embedded Tutoring/Peer Instruction, Undergraduate Research
Experiences, and a new STEM Pathways Course focused on preparing for graduate
school and STEM careers. BHSU faculty will attend a Mobile Summer Institute
facilitated by the National Institute on Scientific Teaching to help them
integrate active problem solving and high-impact practices into their
instruction. Rooted in best practices, project activities will not only prepare
students with relevant skills and experiences, but will also foster self-
efficacy and STEM identity, which have been shown to increase the likelihood
that students will persist, graduate, and enter the STEM workforce. Participants
should benefit personally from the support offered by the project, and they will
also contribute to the success and resilience of research teams they join later
in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are five specific objectives: 1) To increase
the persistence and graduation rates among low-income students in STEM; 2) To
increase low-income students’ performance in gateway courses in STEM; 3) To
increase low-income students’ self-efficacy, STEM identity and sense of
belonging in STEM; 4) To increase the number of low-income students who obtain
employment in high-demand STEM careers or enroll in graduate school; 5) To
evaluate interventions for efficacy, institutionalizing those that are
successful and disseminating results to the wider STEM community. A STEM
educational researcher will be part of the project leadership team and will work
with the PI and external evaluator to determine impacts of the proposed
interventions on the BHSU student population with an eye toward
institutionalization. Interventions such as faculty mentoring and undergraduate
research have been widely studied. The team anticipates these will meet with
success, though formative and summative evaluation will still be conducted to
understand nuances specific to BHSU. An examination of new interventions, such
as the STEM Pathways course, will provide an opportunity to add to the body of
knowledge about postsecondary STEM education. The team will share results
broadly within the STEM education community through publications and
presentations so that other small, rural, primarily undergraduate institutions
can adapt and implement these interventions on their own campuses. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.