* 2221150
* Supporting Ecology and Data Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2029
* Jonathan Hodge, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 02/28/2029
* USD 1,499,627.00

The objective of this project is to provide a pathway for low-income,
academically talented students to achieve career and financial upward mobility
through equipping them with in-demand skills for ecology and data science,
providing targeted cohort experiences and mentorship, and facilitating nature-
based recreation and co-curricular activities - all of which are demonstrated
high-impact practices. This approach addresses the first goal of the NSF's
strategic plan "to empower STEM talent to fully participate in science and
engineering." Environmental Science and Data Science are two fields of critical
need, each with above-average expected job growth over the next decade. Against
this backdrop this project will leverage the unique opportunities afforded by
access to the Wild Basin Creative Research Center, as well as the booming
technology industry in Austin, Texas. In particular, this project will
contribute to workforce development in the convergence of these two critical
fields while also providing insights into the effectiveness of student success
interventions for low-income STEM majors. The project's findings will be
disseminated broadly within the science education community to further expand
the reach and impact of the funded activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide four-year scholarships of up to $10,000 per year for three cohorts
of 7 to 10 students, with eligible students majoring in one of five majors:
mathematics, biology, bioinformatics, environmental biology and climate change,
or environmental science and policy. Ecology and Data Science Scholars will be
recruited through advertising to admitted STEM applicants and targeted high
school students, with selection based on unmet financial need, academic
potential, and a short application essay. The project will support scholars
through intensive faculty mentoring and by leveraging and expanding St. Edward’s
University’s existing high-quality evidence-based practices, including student
cohorts, first-year seminars, learning communities, undergraduate research, and
internships. The project will also implement novel interventions, including: (1)
common intellectual experiences focused on ecology, data science, and
environmental education; (2) experiential learning at St. Edward’s University’s
Wild Basin Creative Research Center; (3) nature-based recreation and wellness
opportunities; (4) provision of laptop computers and necessary software; (5)
near-peer mentoring; and (6) on-campus employment opportunities related to
scholars’ academic fields. Career counseling and placement services will be
provided by career coaches (one is assigned to every St. Edward’s University
student) and the Office of Career and Professional Development. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.