* 2221115
* Improving Retention Rate and Success in Computer Science Scholars in a Historical Black University
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Kai Koong, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,963.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Tuskegee University, a historically black university located in the
“Alabama Black Belt” region. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 24 unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in computer science and information technology. First-year students will receive
four years of scholarships. This project aims to improve student retention rate,
graduation rate, and academic performance in computer science by linking
scholarships with effective supporting activities. This project will take steps
to identify the scholars with high attrition risk employing an early-alert
system that makes use of risk factors for attrition, such as attendance rate,
academic outcomes, mathematics proficiency, sense of belonging in computer
science programs, psychological sense of community, and perceived value of
computer science. As soon as the scholars with high attrition risk are
identified, the project team will make an intervention plan for each one of
them, including assigning a peer tutor to help the student, offering advising by
other faculty, and recommending learning resources and activities. These include
academic advising, peer tutoring, peer-cooperative learning, peer mentoring, a
living learning community, undergraduate research experiences, and career
planning. Peer tutoring and peer-cooperative learning will assist students to
become independent learners and learn course material in a deeper and more
concrete way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project will investigate the effects of
the factors on first-year student retention, 4-year degree completion, and
academic performance. This project has the potential to advance understanding of
persistence and graduation of undergraduate students in computer science
programs at HBCUs. This project will be evaluated using a mixed-methods approach
using formative evaluation data collected throughout the project to ensure the
activities are implemented as planned and to obtain feedback that will be used
for project improvement. Results of this project will be made available through
websites, academic conferences, workshops, and journal publications. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.