* 2221721
* SBIR Phase I:  Broadband focusing for non-invasive cell metabolomics
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Adam Hanninen, TRESTLE OPTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is aimed toward advancing sustainable production of chemicals using
synthetic biology. Here, single-cell microbes are engineered to produce valuable
metabolites using enzymes rather than sourcing these chemicals from petroleum.
Developing genetically engineered cell strains with high yield remains an
ongoing effort due to the complexities in how genetic code leads to phenotype
expression. This problem is addressed using a bottom-up approach to screen
microbe populations at the single-cell level. The method deployed to identify
metabolite content in individual cells is based on infrared (IR)-absorption
spectroscopy which is label-free, quantitative, and non-destructive. Synthetic
biology is poised to disrupt the chemical value-chain by providing an
alternative to petroleum-based chemicals that is sustainable and carbon-neutral.
Once a highly productive cell is identified it can be selectively propagated to
create enriched cell lines. Innovations in optical microscopy are required to
improve the performance of the cell screening instruments, which will allow
high-resolution focusing across a broad spectral range. The upgraded platform
will optimize yield more quickly, providing value by reducing the upfront cost
to develop new industrial cell strains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project emphasizes optical engineering to develop a microscope designed for
high-resolution chemical imaging based on molecular vibrational IR-absorptions.
This is achieved by deploying focusing elements that operate over a broad
spectral range that extend standard optical microscopes to include mid-infrared
light sources. The optical instrument will be used to evaluate chemical content
in industrial microbe strains and develop enriched cell lines. These single-cell
microbe populations are engineered to produce enzymes used to catalyze the
synthesis of valuable metabolites. Yields from individual cells, however, are
variable due to genetic mutations in the population. Therefore, a quantitative
analytical tool based on IR-spectroscopy that can non-destructively identify
highly productive cells for selective propagation is extremely desirable. This
bottom-up approach for metabolomic cell screening and directed evolution is an
innovation as it is label-free, non-invasive, and has strong chemical
specificity. In this project, the team will study an industrial microalgae
strain used as a low-cost feedstock supplement and identify cells rich in
protein content to enhance the overall protein yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.