* 2221637
* Partnering with Rural and Low-income Students for Academic Success in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2028
* Jennifer Momsen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,469,211.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at North Dakota State University (NDSU), a Rural-Serving Institution. Over
its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 28 unique full-time
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology. First-year students
will receive up to 4-year scholarships, and transfer students will receive up to
3-year scholarships. Students receiving scholarships will have the opportunity
to participate in the Herd Scholars academic and career support project. This
project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking
scholarships with effective supporting activities, including establishment of
learning communities, mentoring, undergraduate research and internship
experiences, and preparation for graduate school and employment. Because NDSU
has a high population of rural students, this project has the potential to
broaden their participation in STEM fields and contribute to our understanding
of how social and academic integration in STEM is achieved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need, and broaden the diversity of students entering graduate research
programs and/or the STEM workforce. To achieve this goal, the project will first
use a network of high school guidance counselors, NDSU alumni teachers and
Native American partner organizations to enhance recruitment of high-achieving
low-income students from rural areas. It will establish a learning community of
Herd Scholars through a 2-year cohort curriculum that engages students in career
exploration and development of STEM skills, while ensuring interaction with
peers and faculty mentors on a weekly basis. To ensure that the curricular and
co-curricular activities are meeting Herd Scholars’ academic needs and promoting
their science identity, the project will use a Students as Partners framework in
which the student’s perspective is deliberately incorporated into the design of
curricular and co-curricular activities in order to promote students’ sense of
belonging and self-efficacy. Students will receive supported opportunities to
participate in undergraduate research. The project aims to build a network of
regional industry and governmental agency partners, including representation
from those providing employment opportunities in rural areas, who will share
their knowledge of STEM career opportunities and provide internship
opportunities. This project aims to advance understanding of curricular and co-
curricular structures that promote academic and social integration of
underrepresented groups, such as rural, low-income students. Evaluation will be
conducted using mixed-methods to gather both quantitative and qualitative
information about each component of the project. The results will be used to
continuously make improvements throughout the project duration and identify
those components most valuable for replication of in other settings with high
rural student enrollment. The outcomes of this project will be disseminated
through internal seminars, journal publications, and conference presentations.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.