* 2221225
* Preparing Computational Biologists for the New England Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Winnie Yu, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,499,994.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Southern Connecticut State University, a public university in a region
that is home to the second largest cluster of biotechnology companies on the
East coast. The project, "Preparing Computational Biologists for the New England
Workforce (ComBiNE)," will address the demonstrated need for well-trained
graduates in computing and bioscience in New England as well as at the national
level. This project will recruit academically talented students with interest in
the area of computational biology and have financial needs, implement activities
to support retention, and provide high-quality career readiness training. Over
its six-year duration the project will award 4-year scholarships to 2 cohorts of
11 and 12 scholars. The project’s objective is to offer equity in talent
development to students with financial need and to help fill a gap in the
research and industry workforce by building interdisciplinary curricula in
computational biology and helping students strengthen career readiness and
pathways to meet the local and regional workforce demand. In addition to the
interdisciplinary computational biology curricula, a tiered summer research
experience, mentoring and cohort building and support are also prominent
features. ComBiNE aligns with NSF mission as it will also generate knowledge on
how to improve retention and graduation rate in STEM education. With 45% of
Southern Connecticut State University undergraduate students coming from groups
underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM fields, this project holds promise to
support diversity and inclusion. ComBiNE will also increase partnering between
academia and industry, and it will increase the economic competitiveness of the
United States by providing the workforce with well-trained professionals in a
fast-growing field both at the national and state
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Awarded students will participate in a variety of
activities aimed at engagement and retention. First is a computational biology
themed orientation and first-year experience coupled with specially designed
major and minor curricula that ensure acquiring interdisciplinary computational
biology expertise. Next, peer-support through a learning community and cohort
building events will be offered along with one-on-one mentoring with an assigned
mentor throughout the duration of the scholarship. Finally, structured and
incremental three-phase interdisciplinary computational biology research and
internship experiences are paired with career-development events for students in
their junior and senior years, increasing their prospects in career placement.
The interdisciplinary summer research experience is one of the key elements in
the ComBiNE program and consists of the three phases: Introduction, Incubation,
and Independence. These summer research experiences will support students in
securing internships in the local industry in the summer prior to their senior
year. The ComBiNE program will also inform and generate knowledge about academic
success, retention and completion, and program efficacy particularly among STEM
students with financial needs. With much evidence in the literature on the
importance of undergraduate research in improving retention and completion,
ComBiNE will focus on the efficacy of the structured and incremental three-phase
interdisciplinary research experience in increasing students’ persistence in
research and ultimately their retention in and completion of the program of
study. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.