* 2221733
* I-Corps: Historical Photo Identification with Crowdsourcing and Automated Face Recognition
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Kurt Luther, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,309.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to generate significant cultural and economic value,
including recognizing the contributions of historically marginalized groups.
While we initially focus on the user groups of auction houses, appraisers, and
dealers, this work can also apply to the vast volume of unidentified photos in
the collections of galleries, libraries, archives, and museums (GLAMs) and
genealogical societies, which are generally short-staffed and largely rely on
donors and outside researchers to identify photos. Further, the identification
workflow can also be extended beyond the American Civil War era to other
historical time periods. Finally, this work fosters new, interdisciplinary
connections between technology, art, and history through a commercial platform
made available to both scholars and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology identifying unknown people in historical photographs. This is a
challenging task performed by a broad range of researchers, including
journalists, historians, curators, genealogists, archivists, dealers, and
collectors. Currently, these researchers largely rely on manual investigative
methods such as paging through hundreds of pages of reference books looking for
a potential match. AI-based facial recognition algorithms and crowdsourcing
offer promise for supporting this task, but key shortcomings, such as false
positives, bias, and groupthink, must be overcome. This work explores novel
human-AI collaboration techniques that effectively and ethically combine the
complementary strengths of human and artificial intelligence to support
historical person identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.