* 2221298
* Building Biologists Using Assets for Scholar Success
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2028
* Tyrun Flaherty, Kansas City Kansas Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 11/30/2028
* USD 745,635.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Kansas City Kansas Community College (KCKCC). Over its five-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students
who are pursuing Associate’s degrees in biology or Associate’s general degrees
with a biology emphasis. Full-time students who have declared their intention to
major in biology will receive $7,500 annually in scholarships for two years. The
project aims to increase persistence to graduation and then in transferring or
directly entering the STEM workforce by linking scholarships with effective
support services. These services include asset-based mentoring, undergraduate
research experiences, internship opportunities with industry partners, and
participation in presentations and workshops that showcase the demands and
rewards of a STEM path. Because KCKCC has a high population of students from
underrepresented groups, this project has the potential to broaden participation
in a STEM field and to advance the understanding of the effectiveness of asset-
based mentoring and high impact practices within the two-year college
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims: 1) establish a
successful scholar fellowship program that recruits three cohorts of 10 students
using existing infrastructure, collaborative efforts, and new support programs;
2) develop a robust asset-based mentoring and advising program; and 3) implement
scholar engagement and enrichment activities to encourage learning communities
and create a positive academic climate for all students. Many research studies
on STEM student persistence focus on what must be done to address students' real
or perceived deficits. Educational disparity is often framed with stereotypical
traits based on race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, disability, and other
factors. Students may be encouraged to take less rigorous educational
trajectories as a result of these stereotypes. Alternatively, asset-based
interventions are an effective means for increasing student persistence by
building upon the wealth of a student's culture, motivations, and dreams. This
project seeks to investigate how the adoption of evidence-based, asset-based
support practices, that is, asset-based mentoring, impacts the number of
students obtaining an Associate’s degree in biology and Associate’s General
Science with a biology emphasis. Scholars will develop individual identities as
scientists and obtain a high-quality biology education to prepare them to either
enter the workforce or transition to a four-year STEM program. Two facets
comprise the project evaluation. An annual external evaluation will be conducted
by a non-profit organization that provides local/regional leadership in program
evaluation, applied research, needs assessments, and strategic planning.
Internal evaluation will be conducted more frequently by KCKCC project
management. Both formative and summative evaluation will be conducted. Knowledge
from this project will be disseminated locally across campus through faculty
seminars and discussions. Results of this project will also be presented to the
greater scientific community by publications in peer-reviewed journals and
through presentations of findings at regional and national science and education
conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.