* 2221722
* SBIR Phase I:  Re-envisioning alt text for education through concurrent authoring and diagram design
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Julia Winter, Alchemie Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a pathway to success in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) for all students, including those
that are blind or have low vision (BLV), with a usable and effective description
system for STEM diagrams. Only 3% of BLV individuals have been employed in a
STEM field. The lack of accessible accommodations creates roadblocks for these
students in STEM education throughout their academic journey, leading many
students to give up, even though they have as much potential for academic
success as the general population. All web-based, non-decorative diagrams are
required to include alternative (alt) text descriptions for use with screen
readers. Current methods for making STEM visualizations accessible through alt
text are not scalable or amenable for use with dynamic digital media, nor is alt
text standardized or proven usable by learners, resulting in lost learning
opportunities for BLV students. The absence of reliable auto alt text generation
is a roadblock for educational institutions and academic publishers to adopt new
instructional technologies, as digital content and learning systems must include
accommodations for accessibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will create a first-of-its kind system that
generates descriptions of STEM diagrams as the educational resources are
constructed. This project will go beyond current standards for accommodation, by
creating an innovative layered approach to the alt text representation of STEM
diagrams so that screen reader users can interact with the content in a manner
that is best supported by their skills and prior knowledge. The technical
objectives are to: 1) create a system that produces machine-readable
configurations for the components of a diagram and spatial relationships between
the components, and then generates a text-based description of the diagram and
2) devise a non-linear method for representing STEM content through a
standardized system of representational layers within the description. Both the
general description (objective 1) and layered description (objective 2) will be
constructed by matching the diagram configuration to a context-driven
lexicon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.