* 2222089
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: The Interplay of Plasticity and Evolution in Pierid Butterfly Responses to Recent Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Lauren Buckley, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 468,775.00

Plants and animals have responded to recent climate change in a variety of
different ways, highlighting the need to identify the biological mechanisms that
can result in seemingly unpredictable responses. Incorporating the mechanisms
into ecological and evolutionary forecasting models is essential to accurately
project the biodiversity consequences of climate change. Dramatic insect
declines, including of butterflies in the Western US, reinforce the need to
improve forecasts for conservation planning related to biodiversity,
agriculture, and the maintenance of ecosystem services such as pollination. Will
insect populations move, go extinct, or be able to adapt to future climate
change? Researchers will repeat historical lab and field experiments with Pierid
butterflies to ask whether evolution and developmental plasticity of larval and
adult traits relevant to thermal responses have kept pace with recent climate
change. Modeling resources will be disseminated through the ‘TrEnCh’ project,
which provides computational and visualization tools to Translate Environmental
Change into organismal responses. Trainees will translate the research into
TrEnCh-Ed inquiry-based modules with interactive data visualizations. Workshops
will introduce these resources to high school and undergraduate teachers. The
proposed research will partially be conducted via course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) at a community college with a diverse student body.
The CUREs will introduce students to relevant concepts in plant and animal
biology and to the research process. Some students will continue research and
professional development training in the summer to facilitate their transition
to a 4-year college and their retention in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will identify the biological mechanisms underlying evolutionary and
plastic responses to climate change by quantifying how butterfly temperatures
have shifted over several decades and developing a mechanistic model that links
the temperature changes and traits to ecological and evolutionary responses. The
following studies will test the mechanisms predicted to drive evolution and
refine the model. Repeating field selection studies will investigate whether
selection on Pieris rapae larval thermal performance curves (TPCs) and on Pontia
occidentalis adult body size and wing traits has shifted over time. Studying
selection on several wing traits across seasons will indicate relative selective
responses to thermal means versus extremes and assay whether selection varies
seasonally. The research will determine whether selection results in evolution
of larval TPCs as well as adult traits and their plasticity. The project will
test several hypotheses related to recent warming. Performance at high
temperatures will be enhanced relative to the past. Wing coloration involved in
heat-avoidance postures will be lighter. Wing coloration involved in basking may
lighten in response to climate warming, but there may be selection for wing
darkening to allow for performance in cool, early season conditions. These
opposing selection pressures will lead to amplified seasonal variation in
selection and selection for increased plasticity. The research will additionally
assess whether genetic correlations and variation have constrained evolution and
whether they have shifted over time. The research will further develop and test
phenotype-based models to solve the problem of unpredictability in climate
change biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.