* 2222764
* Collaborative Research:FW-HTF-P: The Future of Virtual Teams: Enhancing Collaborative Creativity and Socio-cognitive wellbeing  in Video-based Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jonali Baruah, Tarleton State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 98,746.00

The emergence of novel virtual technologies is enabling a new era of connection
between humans at a global level. This has led to a new wave of growth in the
popularity of video-based teams, and it has become essential to develop
productive, successful, and healthy human interactions using smart devices.
Additionally, the migration to digital platforms that is further spurred by the
COVID-19 pandemic has increased barriers to interactions, diversity, and
inclusion. Due to the strong likelihood that videoconferencing (and thus virtual
meetings) will continue for a long time after the pandemic ends, there is a need
to develop more inclusive and equitable environments that support productivity
and collaborative creativity in diverse virtual team contexts. The project will
design a novel Smart Meeting Assistant (SMA) as a transformative solution to
efficiently enhance video-based team innovation. The high-level goal of SMA will
be to facilitate objectives such as: (i) collaborative creativity; (ii)
convergent thinking by clustering of ideas from similar topics; (iii)
feasibility of generated ideas through video-based meetings; (iv) reducing bias
in video-based teams. The project team includes researchers from a rural-serving
institution and a Hispanic-serving institution in Texas, and a mid-sized public
institution in Colorado. Participants of pilot studies include students from
diverse backgrounds and workers from real-world settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will use a mixed
methodological approach to examine human interactions and features of virtual-
meeting platforms that influence userâ€™s social and cognitive wellbeing. Design
of SMA paves the path for bringing the recent advances in deep learning and data
analytics, supported by psychological sciences with a strong focus on human
factors and ergonomics, to design virtual sociotechnical systems facilitating
collaborative innovation without jeopardizing the social and cognitive wellbeing
of video-based teams. First, the project team will develop a broader
understanding of how people perceive creativity, wellbeing, and equity during
virtual group interactions. Subsequently, an expanded pilot study will explore
ways in which fundamental meeting features (e.g., speaking time, duration of
meeting) and socio-cognitive variables (e.g., degree of knowledge sharing,
satisfaction) statistically interact to predict collaborative creativity,
wellbeing, and equity in diverse (gender and multicultural) video-based teams.
Finally, the research team will carry out the foundational work to design a
social-cognitive training module assisted by a Smart Meeting Assistant to
facilitate collaborative creativity, wellbeing, and equity in the video-based
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.