* 2222018
* Research on Educational Equity and Diversity in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Judy Kiyama, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,250,671.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
opportunities for postdoctoral fellows to engage with STEM educational practices
within the context of a research-intensive Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI).
The project team will create research opportunities for a diverse cohort of
fellows, foster research on diversity and equity in STEM undergraduate
education, support inclusive and equitable research environments for the
fellows, and develop the postdoctoral researchers’ capacity to utilize and
advance equitable practices as early-career STEM educators. The project will
advance the scholarship about broadening participation in STEM and contribute to
the professional development of a community of scholars and practitioners who
are committed to improving educational practices in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cohort of postdoctoral fellows will develop a
research agenda exploring the relationship between culturally responsive
practices and several critical outcomes, including i) the impact of culturally
responsive practices on early STEM interest, success, and persistence; ii) STEM
transfer rates; iii) STEM identity; and iv) sense of belonging in STEM. Rich
data from already established research projects will afford fellows the
opportunity for project leadership experiences with mentor support, enabling
analysis and dissemination of results through presentations and publications.
Under the leadership of each mentor, four research projects will ground the
fellows’ work and serve to frame their independent research agendas. Attention
to the professional development of the fellows will be woven throughout their
experience such that learning and development will be a spiraling process of
growth through reflection and enhancement. In particular, each fellow will
create an individual development plan that will serve as a framework to assess
their skills, interests, and abilities, to communicate with mentors, and to
implement activities to achieve academic and professional
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was submitted in response to the STEM
Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) competition. The STEM
Ed PRF program is designed to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM Education, and related disciplines
to enhance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research in
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported with co-
funding by the HSI Program which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.