* 2222945
* Collaborative Research: PurSUiT: Phylogenomics and taxonomic revision of Rhopalodiales - diatoms with obligate cyanobacterial endosymbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Scott Miller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 317,027.00

Symbiosis, the close association of distinct organisms living together, is a
common phenomenon in nature. From the ancient organelles inside human cells, to
lichens and corals, the integration of life forms from disparate backgrounds
occurs across the tree of life. What are the mechanisms that drive this
integration to happen? What are the costs and benefits of these relationships?
In one group of eukaryotic microorganisms called diatoms (which form the base of
the food chain in aquatic ecosystems and generate more oxygen by photosynthesis
than all rainforests combined), symbioses are commonly formed with cyanobacteria
that “fix” nitrogen. This project will analyze how these organisms came
together; whether that happened once or many times; the impacts of the
association on host, symbiont and the ecosystems in which they live; and how the
co-occurring organisms coordinate their life activities. Over 40 students will
be involved in the research through courses, workshops, and research training.
The project will be featured in the Hidden World of Microbial Diversity course
offered through the University of Montana’s Indigenous Research and STEM
Education summer program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scientific
collaboration between three U.S. universities and seven universities, research
institutes and museums in China, India, Indonesia and Argentina will gather data
from a variety of sources, including entire genomes of the chloroplast and
mitochondria of the diatom hosts, cell wall morphology of the diatoms, and the
entire genome of the cyanobacterial symbiont (also called a spheroid body) to
address three main aims: 1) the evolutionary origins and diversification of the
diatom order Rhopalodiales, including when the endosymbiont was acquired during
diversification of this lineage; 2) the sister taxon of the Rhopalodiales, and
the extent of cryptic diversity among cosmopolitan rhopalodian taxa; 3) the
coevolution of host and symbiont. The project will integrate information on the
group from herbarium collections in the United States, Europe and South America
for both extant and fossil taxa. Integrated phylogenetics, functional genomics
and taxonomic revisionary work will produce a time-calibrated phylogeny that
will inform a revised classification system for the
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.