* 2222289
* Reimagining Grading to Support Nontraditional and Rural Students in High Enrollment, Gateway STEM Courses
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Tara Slominski, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common classroom practices, such
as grading and the use of grades to assess knowledge and performance, may have
unintended consequences on students who invariably derive an awareness of their
own academic abilities from the results of those grading structures. In fact,
these traditional practices may inadvertently create and promote inequities
among different student groups, particularly in large enrollment courses, but
these issues have largely been unexplored. This postdoctoral research fellowship
project seeks to examine the impact of grading practices on self-concept and
STEM persistence with a special focus on rural and nontraditional students. The
project has promise to produce new insights about equitable classroom and
grading practices for rural and nontraditional students that are compatible with
the constraints of high enrollment gateway courses. In addition to conducting
the research project, the investigator will build STEM education research
capacity in quantitative methods and approaches through an explicit professional
development plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research hypothesis is
that nontraditional and rural students are especially vulnerable to the
limitations of traditional grading when used in high enrollment, gateway STEM
courses. The investigator will use a mixed-methods, community-based
participatory research approach with three objectives. First is to explore the
relationship between grading structures and nontraditional and rural students’
self-concept and intentions to persist in high enrollment, gateway STEM courses.
Second is to characterize how aspects of traditional and alternative grading
schemes influence nontraditional and rural students’ academic self-concept and
intentions to persist in STEM. Third is to develop empirically supported
approaches of equitable grading strategies that are conducive to high enrollment
STEM classrooms and are particularly supportive for rural students and students
that identify as nontraditional. The findings could provide faculty with
practical assessment and grading approaches to address the systemic inequitable
practices associated with grading and create more equitable learning
environments for students broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to
the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that
aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent
doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines to
advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.