* 2222918
* FW-HTF-P: Toward Collaborative Remote Physical Examination: Transforming Medical and Nursing Practice
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 149,996.00

Since the early in in the COVID-19 pandemic, telemedicine has seen tremendous
growth in the U.S, providing people in under-resourced areas with broader access
to healthcare through remote telemedicine visits with health professionals and
experts to whom they may not otherwise have access. However, these visits are
currently restricted to video teleconference-style exchanges and lack the
capacity for physical examinations, which contribute significantly to diagnoses
and the identification of health concerns that may not otherwise surface during
a medical visit. This project investigates the possibility of supporting
physical examination as a paired practice between a caregiver local to the
patient and a remote physician, using touch-based and augmented-reality
technologies. Caregivers will perform examinations while wearing touch-sensitive
gloves, guided by remote physicians using a physical examination cockpit that
lets them see and feel the patient using the outputs from the caregiver’s gloves
and a video feed. The technology and practice will potentially transform the
work of physicians and local caregivers, opening the door to more effective and
more accessible telemedicine visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foregoing
discussion uncovers a number of questions that the project is designed to
address. First, tactile interpretation is active, meaning that one has to
typically be in control of the sensing process to be able to interpret the
sensory output. The proposal will explore conditions under which one can
meaningfully interpret passively received tactile information, such as what the
remote physician would feel when a local (to the patient) caregiver is now in
control of the sensing motions. One method to be tested for returning agency to
the physician is the psychological phenomenon known as the ‘rubber hand’ or body
transfer illusion, where one psychologically associates an appropriately-placed
rubber hand as one’s own, and an impact on the rubber hand is viscerally felt by
the subject. Even if the rubber hand illusion does not fully activate, joint
expertise between the local touch explorer and the distant interpreter may
facilitate the needed tactile understanding, and this understanding may be
enhanced through practice. The project team will explore configurations (e.g.,
relative positions of the distal toucher’s hands to the subject’s hidden hands,
degree of and type of movement/tactile exploration, visual/augmented reality
presentation) that allow body transfer illusions or joint expertise to enable
interpretation. The team will also conduct a series of video-based grounded
theory explorations of physicians performing physical examinations to gain a
better understanding of the process and to categorize specific actions that may
serve as the basis of communication between the local caregiver and the distal
physician, and to inform the technology developments necessary to enable this
collaborative examination. Finally, the project team, comprising physicians and
nurses, mechanical engineers, human-computer interaction researchers, and
perceptual psychologists, will collaborate on the research described, engaging
in team development exercises to gain a stronger shared understanding of the
joint physical examination process and support future research and development
of these practices and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.