* 2222699
* FW-HTF-P: Building Human-Technology Safety Partnerships in Roadside Work Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Sabya Mishra, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,932.00

Highway construction and maintenance is reported as one of the most unsafe
occupations in the United States. Road workers are six times more likely to be
injured or killed during work, compared with other occupations. In the past two
decades, more than 22,000 highway construction and maintenance workers have died
due to work-related accidents, which translates to a societal cost of $55
million/year. Nevertheless, alerting a worker to an emergency in real-time is
extremely difficult, as the work environment is noisy and chaotic, filled with
visual distractions, heavy vibrations, and loud noises. Identifying threats and
taking appropriate action is very challenging, especially when the time
available to respond is very brief. This project explores the concept of using
connected wearable technology to create smart work zones that would enhance
workers' safety &amp; comfort. This wearable device would assist workers in
identifying and warning of potential threats/hazardous situations, give initial
preemptive guidance, and help them find a way to safety. The research team aims
1) to provide virtual reality (VR)-based tools for training workers and 2) to
provide agencies and contractors with guidelines for best practices for worker
safety in the emerging sociotechnical landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
convergent research team of scientists, public/private stakeholders, and
industry partners will (1) develop an initial prototype of connected wearable
devices (Future Technology); (2) use VR experiments to investigate workers'
behavior during hazardous events and safety-related decisions with and without
wearable devices (Future Worker); and (3) develop a novel technology acceptance
model and quantify the societal/economic benefits of this new human-technology
safety partnership (Future Work). Successful project outcomes will be collated
into a training-and-learning platform (SHIELD: the Science of Hazard
Identification and Evasion for Laborers and Drivers), initiating a long-term
research roadmap that will facilitate design choices for work zone safety
technology. The SHIELD platform will provide realistic yet safe learning
environments in which data on future workers' evasive behavior in various
struck-by-hazard scenarios can be measured in order to inform the human-
technology safety partnership. The VR training modules resulting from this
project will improve the workers' mental model of the wearable device
capabilities and overall situational awareness, thereby enabling workers and
organizations to formulate new safety strategies afforded by the newly augmented
physical capabilities. The scientific insights on learning and adaptation across
a diverse range of workers will help make the technology designs more inclusive
and effective and ensure equitable workforce diversification. The eventual aim
is to make the SHIELD Platform scalable and transferable to several other work
contexts with struck-by hazards, either by vehicles (e.g., fire respondents,
towing, waste removal, roadside assistance, and law enforcement) or by falling
or flying objects (e.g., mining, general construction, oil, and
gas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.