* 2222952
* FW-HTF-R/Collaborative Research: RoboChemistry: Human-Robot Collaboration for the Future of Organic Synthesis
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Carson Bruns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,222,182.00

Chemical R&amp;D is the backbone of countless technologies including life-saving
medicines, energy harvesting and storage materials, and additive manufacturing.
Chemists, who hold nearly 100,000 US jobs, face considerable risks in the
workplace, leading to tens of thousands of injuries per year. Chemists must take
great care to avoid chemical exposures, fires and explosions while handling the
high physical and cognitive demands inherent in the laborious, manual nature of
synthetic chemistry procedures. Intelligent robotic technologies could improve
working conditions for chemists by reducing these risks and challenges, while
accelerating the pace of chemical R&amp;D. Robots have already revolutionized
the workplace in many industries, such as manufacturing, packaging, and
shipping, but most chemical R&amp;D labs remain devoid of collaborative robotic
assistance, likely due to the high number, diversity, and complexity of tasks
involved in this work. Instead, chemical synthesis robots currently in
development are designed to replace or displace the human chemist. The objective
of this proposal is to evaluate the benefits and challenges of an alternative
approach, where collaborative robots deployed in the lab work together with
chemists and provide them with helpful task assistance, rather than end-to-end
automation of all activities. This approach has the potential to improve
laboratory safety, increase accessibility for chemists with disabilities, and
increase productivity and job satisfaction for chemists. The project will also
engage young women to consider STEM careers in chemistry and robotics through an
afterschool workshop series that exposes them to professional chemists,
roboticists, and hands-on chemistry automation experiments. Partners in this
collaborative work include University of Colorado at Boulder, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and New Iridium, Inc. This project is funded by
the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier program which supports
multi-disciplinary research to sustain economic competitiveness, promote worker
well-being, lifelong and pervasive learning, and quality of life, and illuminate
the emerging social and economic context and drivers of innovations that are
shaping the future of jobs and work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To realize the vision
of collaborative mobile robots that assist chemical R&amp;D workers in order to
reduce mental/physical workload while improving safety and efficiency, this
project integrates three threads of research: (1) classify, model, and evaluate
robotic efficacy in various chemistry procedures, (2) develop novel task
planning and interaction programming for mobile robots to interact with
synthetic chemists, and (3) create hardware and software solutions that ensure
safe and autonomous deployment of mobile collaborative robots in unstructured
laboratory environments. Weaving these three threads of research together, the
project will identify scenarios in which human-robot teams may collaborate
effectively on various specific subtasks of organic synthesis procedures.
Chemists from New Iridium and chemist/materials scientist trainees will perform
tasks representative of routine synthetic chemistry procedures in the R&amp;D
lab, both in the presence and absence of a teleoperated collaborative mobile
robot performing prescribed assistive task support. The efficacy of co-robot
assistance will be evaluated and quantified by a combination of objective
measures associated with the procedure (time to completion, reaction yield,
number and or severity of errors, etc.) and subjective measures of the chemistsâ€™
experience with the robotic assistant, including survey-based assessment of
their cognitive and physical workload, and sense of personal safety and
efficiency. The feedback loop between roboticists and chemists will allow the
team to iteratively identify and refine collaboration scenarios for chemist-
robot pairs that enhance safety, productivity, accessibility, and job
satisfaction for chemical R&amp;D workers. The newly developed open-source
software underpinning these collaboration scenarios will enable any laboratory
in possession of an appropriate robot to replicate, use and adapt these
scenarios in their own workplaces. Ultimately, this research will make
fundamental contributions to both chemistry and robotics while helping to unite
these two historically disconnected fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.