* 2222542
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R: The Future of Trucking: Pathways to Positive Societal Outcomes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Brad Hershbein, W E Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 86,863.00

The long-distance trucking industry is poised to be an early adopter of vehicle
automation. Significant technological challenges need to be resolved before
long-distance trucking can work safely without substantial human oversight. This
research team effort is motivated by a shared belief that remote operation of
trucks is a necessary step in the automation journey and will lead to positive
technological, economic, environmental, and societal outcomes. As-needed remote
operation could fundamentally transform trucking into something closer to a
white-collar job, requiring human-computer interaction, in a controlled and
scheduled environment. It would eschew long hours by drivers on the road, far
from home, and likely change the skills and characteristics of the job in ways
that will have gender/racial equity, health, and socio-economic implications.
What technological problems must be solved for a truck to safely operate almost
entirely autonomously, with a remote operator intervening on request or as
warranted when the autonomy stack is challenged? How will the nature of the
trucking occupation change, and what does it portend for current and future
workers? We propose an integrated effort that innovates on remote operation
technology and identifies concomitant changes in policies, regulations, and
skills (including (re)training requirements) to positively affect the number and
quality of jobs and improve outcomes for all stakeholders. This research will be
informed by key stakeholders: drivers, independent owner-operators, shipping
firms, regulators, vehicle manufacturers, and automation developers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Future technology context, this project will: (i)
develop a data-driven and simulation-informed system that can continuously
monitor and predict challenging traffic conditions, (ii) develop a robust safety
filter that mediates the commands issued by the local autonomy stack and the
remote human operator, (iii) establish a cooperative architecture and algorithms
for automated trucking, and (iv) identify network solutions to meet the
communication needs of remote operation. In the Future work component, this
project will: (i) investigate information requirements of remote operators and
techniques to balance automated in-vehicle control with remote control by an
operator, (ii) explore managing operatorsâ€™ attention and level of control across
multiple trucks, and (iii) address critical regulatory issues and how to balance
operator compensation, firm profitability, and technology adoption. In the
Future worker category, this project will: (i) evaluate expected changes in the
distribution of occupations and skill requirements in the workforce, (ii) assess
the impact of job creation and loss on rural economies, and (iii) elucidate the
skill and demand changes for truckers and the new training needed for these
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.