* 2222716
* FW-HTF-P: Safeguarding the Health of Healthcare Workers During Future Pandemics, Using Robotics and Automation
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Axel Krieger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 10/31/2023
* USD 158,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has stressed the healthcare system to the breaking point
and has transformed healthcare delivery, forcing a strong shift to telemedicine.
This reduction in-person healthcare visits is a key strategy for healthcare
surge control now and in the future. However, current tele-systems provide
mostly communication support, while the physical interactions required for
diagnostic procedures, interventional procedures, and bedside care still largely
rely on in-person care. Innovative approaches in automation and robotics have
the potential to assist and protect healthcare workers in many of these areas of
patient care. The current work develops novel compliant actuators to enable safe
physical interactions with patients, thus minimizing the need for physical
contact with healthcare providers. The investigators will design robotic systems
with varying degrees of autonomy, using a vascular access delivery system as a
testbed. The technology developed in this project can be used to mitigate the
impact of the next pandemic and spearhead change in healthcare for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project serves healthcare workers in clinical
settings who care for patients with infectious and other diseases by
investigating robotics, autonomous systems, trust of physical human-robot
interaction and the impacts on safety, productivity, and economics. The proposed
research and experiments on compliant robotics should yield new techniques for
medical robots that are safe for physical interaction with humans, while
maintaining low cost for mass production. The proposed control-design activities
address shortfalls in current autonomous robot controllers by providing new
strategies to maximize safety, trust, and performance. Finally, this work brings
stakeholders from nursing, medicine, economics, and psychology together with
experts in medical robotics, artificial intelligence, autonomy, and disease
transmission to provide a roadmap for a sustainable future of healthcare in
which increased use of robots and autonomous systems is part of the
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.