* 2222739
* CRII:SCH:A Generative Deep Learning (GDL) based Platform for Super-resolution, Virtual-Pathological Visualization of Coronary Images
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Yu Gan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 10/31/2023
* USD 126,228.00

Coronary artery disease (CAD) has been influencing a market over $2.8 billion
with roughly 1,000,000 treatment procedures performed annually. Existing
guidance for CAD treatment suffers from limited spatial resolution and lacks
real-time detailed pathological identification. This project is to investigate
novel computational techniques for pathological, super-resolution visualization
of coronary images. The project, if successful, will contribute towards a new
generation of clinical guidance for the treatment of cardiovascular disease,
which is currently the leading cause of human deaths in the United States.
Technically, the method of encoding multi-domain image representations into a
single-domain image acquisition could benefit other fields, such as multi-camera
surveillance monitoring, multimodal biomedical imaging, etc., in terms of
greatly reducing hardware cost and medical labor. The educational plan in this
project emphasizes activities designed to guide senior designs, enrich
curriculum in deep learning courses, and facilitate outreach for minority
students in multicultural engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a data-driven approach to use off-line data and training
process, without any hardware modifications, to generatively produce new
information that could not be acquired previously or can only be obtained ex
vivo. This project will develop generative deep learning algorithms to produce
additional information for low-resolution optical coherence tomography (OCT)
images by aggregating image information from high-resolution OCT images and
histological microscopic images during off-line training. This project will
investigate on improving the resolution of OCT while maintaining fast scanning
rate via a volumetric generative adversarial network (GAN) for super-resolution.
This project will develop a novel unpaired training scheme to map OCT image to a
histopathology image by using a GAN-based image translation framework. The
approach will be validated using both objective and subjective analysis on OCT
images and histopathology images. This project is expected to generate academic
outcomes in both computer science and biomedical informatics. This project will
provide a deep learning solution for cross-platform volumetric super-resolution
and a generative learning approach to address cross-modality image
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.