* 2222687
* Conference: IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Gondy Leroy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 13,980.00

This award supports ten US matriculated students to participate in IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) Doctoral Consortium
Program. Students who are selected will receive funding to cover their
expenditures on registration, travel, and lodging. Students will be scheduled
for a rapid-fire talk to present a synopsis of their work. These rapid overviews
will be followed by a poster session where participants and mentors can discuss
research in greater detail. Selected participants may also be invited to give a
longer oral presentation. The consortium will close with a panel discussion
discussing topics relevant to doctoral students (e.g., dissertation proposal,
dissertation execution, job search, and grant seeking). Awardee students will
also benefit from vis-a-vis meeting with leading researchers and receive
valuable guidance on direction of their dissertation, specific issues in health
informatics, as well as career development. This award promotes the training and
development of the future generation of leaders and workforce, as well as
enhances the participation of women and minority students in in this critical
field. The student award application procedure and results will be announced at
the ICHI 2022 conference website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE International
Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) is the premier community forum
concerned with the application of computer science principles, information
science principles, information technology, and communication technology to
address problems in healthcare, public health, and everyday wellness. The
conference highlights the most novel technical contributions in computing-
oriented health informatics and the related social and ethical implications. The
conference aims to (i) fertilize interdisciplinary education among healthcare
informatics students, researchers, and practitioners; (ii) promote research
design and methodology development in the emerging fields; and (iii) coalesce
knowledge translation between academia and industry/government. Issues addressed
by ICHI become increasingly important in the marketplace with availability of
numerous consumer and clinician systems and services. The conference has been
held 12 times: 2010 (IHI 2010 [2], Washington DC, USA), 2012 (IHI 2012 [3],
Miami, Florida, USA), 2013 (ICHI 2013 [4], Philadelphia, PA, USA), 2014 (ICHI
2014 [5], Verona, Italy), 2015 (ICHI 2015 [6], Dallas, Texas, USA), 2016 (ICHI
2016 [7], Chicago, IL, USA), 2017 (ICHI 2017 [8], Park City, UT, USA), 2018
(ICHI 2018 [9], New York City, NY, USA), 2019 (ICHI 2019 [10], Xi’an, China),
2020 ([11] Oldenburg, Germany) and in 2021 ([12] Victoria,
Canada).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.