* 2222710
* FW-HTF-P: Technology as partner for improving the effectiveness of teams of clinicians
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Thomas Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,680.00

This project’s goal is to build a deeper understanding of human-human and human-
machine teaming in dynamic healthcare environments, in particular Intensive Care
Units (ICUs). Teamwork is an important part of clinical practice and as data-
powered technologies expand, human-machine teamwork will become increasingly
important as well. Further, there are common needs in human-human and human-
machine partnerships around clear and timely communication of context-sensitive
data and on developing a shared understanding of the data and its reliability.
Clinicians are taught to engage in patient-centered care, but with increases in
technology, are being asked to be data-workers as well. The research team will
interview groups of frontline clinicians and expert healthcare administrators
and technologists to identify issues that arise for clinicians both around
managing data and the technological tools they are given. The team will use
these results to identify promising directions for future technologies and
identify the additional expertise needed for a team that can pursue them. In
particular, the team expects that the work will lead to new ideas for to support
better remote collaboration and to reduce clinician
burnout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project starts from known challenges that
data-intensive healthcare technologies bring to clinical work: lack of expertise
in data management, dealing with noisy and incomplete data, bridging gaps
between incompatible systems, adjusting clinical workflows to account for these
technologies, and developing shared awareness. The goal is to deepen
understanding of these problems from the expertise of multiple fields, taking an
iterative, human-centered design approach with a range of healthcare
stakeholders, including nurses, doctors, and hospital administrators. Through
focus groups, expert panels, prototyping exercises, and workshops, the project
team will explore three main categories of potential technical advances: 1)
technologies that sense people’s presence, location, and activities in order to
support shared access to teams’ real-time status; 2) the potential of machine
learning to support data and decision analysis while still being intelligible to
human partners; and 3) better designs for presenting sensed and analyzed
information that align with work contexts and workflows, in order to support
mixed in-person and remote teams. These activities will lead to the development
of a refined set of research questions and promising socio-technical
interventions, clinical testbeds and partnerships, and an expanded team with the
appropriate expertise and management structure to pursue future research in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.