* 2222057
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Understanding Organismal Behavioral Responses to Climate Change to Forecast Eco-evolutionary Dynamics of Albatrosses Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Joanie Van de Walle, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 753,082.00

The accelerating pace of global change creates urgency to understand and predict
climate impacts on populations to enable decision-making for conservation and
resource management. Such a capacity requires a clear understanding of how
organisms respond to climate change and whether this response can scale up to
the population level and have demographic consequences. This project focuses on
two sentinel species, the wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans), and the black-
browed albatross (Thalassarche melanophris), living in the Southern Ocean and
asks whether adaptation in individual behavior, which is the most proximal
response of organisms to climate change, can mitigate population declines.
Through a comprehensive examination of the links between climate, individual
capacity to acquire resources (i.e., foraging behaviors), and population
dynamics, this project will improve our understanding of the pathways through
which population resilience may be expected. Also, based on state-of-the-art
modeling techniques that will account for adaptive evolution, this project will
result in forecasts of population trend and predictions of population
persistence in the future. Predictions will then be brought directly to the
international bodies involved in conserving these species, seeking to inform
ongoing conservation efforts, including the development of Marine Protected
Areas. This award will also allow training of the next generation of scientists
to work directly with policymakers as engaged scholars.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive changes in foraging effort have a potential to mitigate
population declines under climate change. Surprisingly, a large gap remains in
our understanding of the links between foraging effort and individual fitness,
as well as population dynamics. This project aims to understand and forecast how
plasticity and evolutionary adaptation in foraging effort can limit population
declines of climate-threatened seabird species through an eco-evo-demographic
approach. This project relies on individual-level empirical data on body
condition, foraging behaviors, demographic rates, and pedigree collected on two
albatross species living in the Southern Ocean: the wandering albatross
(Diomedea exulans) and the black-browed albatross (Thalassarche melanophris).
This project will first assess the mechanistic linkages between climate change,
body condition, foraging effort, individual fitness, and population dynamics.
Then, using state-of-the-art eco-evolutionary matrix population models coupled
with climatic scenarios, the project will result in forecasts of eco-
evolutionary dynamics and future population trends under climate change and
adaptive evolution. This award will bring together the fields of climate
forecasting and organismal and population ecology to transform our understanding
of the relative importance of natural climate variability and predictability for
eco-evolutionary dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.