* 2222264
* Collaborative Research: The Anthropology of Demographic Transition and Livelihood Diversification
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Katherine Wander, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 16,947.00

The average size of human families has dropped dramatically over the last
several decades. This affects families’ abilities to meet household needs and
the welfare of family members adopting different subsistence roles. Given the
implications of such demographic transitions for individual, family, and
societal well-being, changes in family size have been intensively studied, and
yet remain poorly resolved, particularly within contexts where relatively large
family sizes remain normative. This research project uses theory from cultural
and biological anthropology to understand the role that livelihood
diversification may play in driving family size in mixed (subsistence and
market) economies. It creates new collaborations among minority-serving
institutions and research-intensive institutions, offers significant, fully
remunerated training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
including in field, laboratory, and computational methods, and supports both
early career and underrepresented scholars. It disseminates results broadly to
stakeholder communities and to academic and non-academic audiences via scholarly
presentations and publications and a variety of public-oriented media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that the need to
diversify livelihoods in contexts with mixed economies is associated with larger
family sizes than are predicted under typical models of demographic transition.
Its first objective is to test whether and how economic and cultural factors
influence ideal and realized family sizes. Its second is to investigate how
family size affects children’s daily activities, both productive and
consumptive, and how activity profiles influence children’s nutrition,
energetics, physical fitness, and well-being. To do so, investigators collect
data from a large sample of children residing in market-integrated, mixed, and
subsistence economies, including data drawn from socio-demographic
questionnaires that characterize livelihoods and cultural norms surrounding
family size, physical activity and dietary logs, and anthropometric and
biomarker assessments of health. Together, these data provide a much more
detailed assessment of the patterns, causes, and consequences of family size
variation as affected by variation in economic and cultural factors. Results
thus inform missing aspects of demographic transition theory by focusing on the
proximate means by which families adjust subsistence strategies to accommodate
variation in economic and cultural landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.