* 2222509
* The Young Black Girl: Influencing Science Interest and Commitment to STEM through the Merging of Lived Experiences of Learners in an Out-of-School Program
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Heather Lavender, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black women make up the smallest
percentage of persons in STEM careers. Girls aged three through fourteen years
old, regardless of ethnicity, consider science occupations as unachievable at
higher rates than other groups because they sense that these occupations are
inappropriate for girls. Prior research also indicates that factors influencing
Black girls to consider STEM majors and careers include interest in the science
being studied, the learner's own sense of identity, and whether interest can be
sustained. This project aims to develop an informal learning program designed as
a venue through which Black girls tell STEM educators and researchers about the
science activities that propel their interests and participation. The associated
study will examine connections between Black girls’ lived experiences and their
interest in pursuing STEM careers. Making a “connection” to students’ lived
experiences has the potential to decrease the science achievement gap for
students historically marginalized in their participation in STEM. The study’s
premise is that connecting to science through lived experiences has the
potential to support Black girls’ sustained interest in science, and thus
increase the potential for them to pursue careers in STEM. The out-of-school
program developed in this study will incorporate activities that use low-cost
science supplies thereby increasing the curriculum’s potential use in other
contexts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will recruit Black girls in fourth
through sixth grades with various levels of interest in STEM for participation
in a summer camp. During the camp, participants will explore the fields of
engineering, mathematics, and physical science and learn to use multiplicative
and additive comparisons, conduct investigations about matter and sound, and use
engineering design processes and scientific inquiry to make connections to their
real-life lived experiences. Lived experiences are the experiences, knowledge
gained through those experiences, and the ways these experiences inform an
individual’s evolving culture. Additionally, participant’s guardians are an
important part of their lived experiences. The research study will employ a
single-case methodology of off/on/off, quantitatively analyzing surveys and
qualitatively analyzing observations, interviews, and artifacts. To inform the
analysis of resulting data, the study will adopt a framework of seeking to
understand how society organizes itself along intersecting lines of gender,
race, class, and other forms of social hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed
PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices
of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines
to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.