* 2222519
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Carbon fixation in future oceans: experimental adaptation of algal and cyanobacterial CO2-concentrating mechanisms to a changing climate
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Boswell Wing, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 218,479.00

Photosynthetic marine microorganisms, or phytoplankton, use carbon dioxide to
build their &lt;br/&gt;biomass. When phytoplankton die and sink, they transfer
this carbon to the deep ocean, &lt;br/&gt;sequestering it away from the
atmosphere. This process, known as the biological pump, has &lt;br/&gt;tempered
the effect of climate change through the absorption of anthropogenic carbon
dioxide. &lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of the biological pump – and the ocean’s
continued ability to absorb carbon dioxide &lt;br/&gt;in the future – will
depend on the ability of different phytoplankton groups to adapt to effects of
&lt;br/&gt;climate change, such as warming and acidification. In order to
quantify how the cumulative effects &lt;br/&gt;of subcellular processes will
determine the amount of carbon dioxide phytoplankton use in future
&lt;br/&gt;oceans, this research tests the adaptability of different
phytoplankton groups to the expected &lt;br/&gt;conditions in year 2100 and year
2500 oceans. This project will train a postdoctoral researcher, a
&lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. student, four summer undergraduate interns, and support the
professional development of a &lt;br/&gt;female, first-time investigator, and
early career researcher in collaboration with a senior scientist. &lt;br/&gt;The
work will promote innovative solutions to societal challenges through the
operation and &lt;br/&gt;improvement of a national mentoring program designed to
increase diversity in climate related &lt;br/&gt;fields by providing students
interested in pursuing graduate degrees in climate and Earth sciences
&lt;br/&gt;with mentors to support their career development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon fixation in today’s oceans proceeds through
CO2-concentration mechanisms (CCMs) that &lt;br/&gt;improve the efficiency of
carbon fixation by increasing CO2 concentrations at site of carbon
&lt;br/&gt;fixation. CCMs have evolved independently within different groups of
phytoplankton resulting in &lt;br/&gt;distinct types of CCMs with convergent
functions. Continued anthropogenic CO2 emissions are &lt;br/&gt;forcing
phytoplankton to adapt to the impacts of climatic change at an accelerating
pace. Individual &lt;br/&gt;components of CCMs are known to respond to the
effects of climate change including pH, the &lt;br/&gt;concentration of dissolve
inorganic carbon, and temperature. The cumulative response of CCMs &lt;br/&gt;at
the subcellular level represents the organismal response of phytoplankton to
climate change, &lt;br/&gt;with direct implications for the efficiency of carbon
fixation in future oceans. The primary goal of &lt;br/&gt;this project is to
quantify the adaptive response of CCMs to the selective drivers of climate
change &lt;br/&gt;through the experimental evolution of five phytoplankton
groups with distinct CCMs, including a &lt;br/&gt;diatom, dinoflagellate, green
alga, coccolithophore, and a cyanobacterium. Specific project
&lt;br/&gt;objectives include 1) quantify the plastic and adaptive carbon
fixation response of relevant marine &lt;br/&gt;phytoplankton to multiple ‘year
2100’ climate change stressors; 2) quantify the plastic and &lt;br/&gt;adaptive
carbon fixation response of relevant marine phytoplankton to multiple climate
change &lt;br/&gt;stressors in an extreme (‘year 2500’) scenario; and 3) resolve
how the subcellular components &lt;br/&gt;contribute to the organismal CCM
response of phytoplankton that underlies the ecosystem-scale &lt;br/&gt;impact
of carbon fixation in future oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.