* 2222619
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R:  Future of Construction Workplace Health Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Mohammadmahdi Khaliligarekani, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 11/30/2022
* USD 275,000.00

Given the disproportionate rate of fatalities and injuries in the construction
industry and the potential of ambiguous health and hazardous situations with
respect to the impending technological revolution and climate change, it is
crucial to improve the health and safety of the future workforce. However, there
is a lack of an effective, objective, and continuous approach for assessing
construction workers' health status at jobsites. Although there have been
important innovations in wearable physiological sensing technologies and
artificial intelligence for objective assessment of construction workers' health
parameters, there remain fundamental challenges for establishing a worker-
centered holistic health monitoring approach with promising preventive
potentials. These challenges stem from: a) lack of a scalable and feasible
wearable sensor for continuous elicitation of workers' diverse bodily responses
to stressors in the field; b) lack of a robust interpretive data-driven
framework to process the elicited signals for automatic early detection of
physical fatigue, mental stress, and exposure to heat stress; and c) lack of
effective representation of health and safety information to workers and
managers for enabling improved task decisions by augmenting their situational
awareness. By establishing a real-time and context-aware holistic health
monitoring approach, this project will play a fundamental role in improving the
safety of close to 7 million workers in the U.S. construction sector. The
developed intelligent health monitoring system is expected to produce changes in
the quality of work and workforce policies, resulting in reduced conflicts and
enhanced quality of life. It can also be used to address workplace health issues
in other hazardous industries such as manufacturing, firefighting, and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
improve construction workforce health and safety by integrating multi-
disciplinary research in flexible, wearable sensor fabrication, artificial
intelligence, and privacy-aware information visualization to provide near-real-
time and projected future context-aware health and safety information to workers
and managers for enabling improved task decisions by augmenting their
situational awareness. The intellectual significance of this project lies in
fulfilling the goal by generating and expanding new knowledge on three fronts.
First, the project will design and fabricate a flexible wearable sensor for
continuous and noninvasive measurement of workers' bioelectric signals and
electrochemical responses at construction sites. The use of a single, flexible
wearable sensing device instead of multiple off-the-shelf sensors will
facilitate the scalability and feasibility of the proposed health sensing system
in the construction workplace. Second, the project will develop robust machine
learning algorithms and frameworks for continuous and objective assessment of
workers' health conditions in the field based on physiological, contextual, and
environmental data. For this purpose, this project will address fundamental
challenges related to traditional machine learning algorithms by developing a
novel interpretive data-driven approach robust to inter- and intra-individual
variability while ensuring data security and privacy. Third, this research will
generate a digital twin model (health and safety maps) of the construction sites
through an array of collective health analyses and develop an automated feedback
module for providing personal health-related information and corresponding
mitigation strategies to field workers. The insights into the collective health
and safety information can profoundly assist the workers and safety managers in
making a sound, far-sighted decision about the execution of field-oriented
construction operations in near real-time. This research effort will open new
doors in improving proactive health and safety management in the field through
collective visualization of workers' real-time health and safety
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.