* 2222346
* Travel: Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), to be held from June 19 to 24, 2022 in New Orleans,
Louisiana. CVPR is the premier annual conference in computer vision with over
9,000 senior, junior and student participants. It is held in North America and
attended by members of the international research community. The goal of the
Doctoral Consortium is to highlight the work of senior PhD students who are
within six months of receiving their degrees (including recent graduates), and
to give these students an opportunity to discuss their research and career
options with faculty and researchers who have relevant expertise and experience.
The opportunity to receive advice on their research work and career plans from
experts from different institutions, and with potentially different
perspectives, is often not available internally at one's own institution. The
project will support the career development of some of the brightest junior
researchers in computer vision, contribute to the research community in general
by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate student development,
potentially increasing the number of active researchers and educators in STEM,
and ensure that the computer vision community, through its recent graduates,
makes fast advances in solving problems that will benefit society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a group travel grant, this project ensures the
opportunity to participate for students at diverse institutions, including
students from underrepresented groups who would otherwise not be able to attend,
and enhances the visibility of this outreach program to all attendees. The award
covers some of the conference attendance costs for 15-20 selected US-based
graduate students. Participants and recipients of travel support are selected by
the 2022 CVPR Doctoral Consortium co-chairs. Travel awards partially cover any
admissible conference-related costs such as registration, airfare, lodging, and
board, up to $1200. The budget also includes support for a light lunch during
the Doctoral Consortium event for 60 people (student participants and mentors).
This year’s Doctoral Consortium is a hybrid event (allowing in-person and remote
participation), features a poster session, one-on-one or small group mentoring,
and panel discussion. The Doctoral Consortium aims to have representation from a
diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic background, academic
institution, and geographic location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.