* 2222482
* Engineering Societies and the Lived Experiences of Marginalized Aspirants: (Re)imaging Inclusion
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Kayla Maxey, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States continues to
struggle with achieving diversity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. To address this challenge, U.S. STEM education has
seen an increase in programs designed to broaden the participation of students
from marginalized communities. A number of these programs aim to support the
success of individual students but leave out examinations of the larger, social
barriers to STEM participation. For example, engineers who are Black,
Indigenous, People of Color, or gender diverse often describe engineering
classrooms and workplaces as difficult and unwelcoming. In engineering fields,
professional societies can provide an additional layer of support where identity
difference is expected, acknowledged, and celebrated. This study is designed to
examine connections between the lived experiences of diverse individuals, the
engineering profession, and contemporary diversity programming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the U.S. science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education sector continues to grapple with the challenges of
advancing diversity, equity, and inclusion in academic and employment sectors,
these sectors have experienced rapid increases in broadening participation
efforts over recent decades. These efforts have aspired to multiple outcomes
including increased access, belonging, and retention of students from
marginalized communities. However, these efforts focus largely on the
experiences of individual students and have left systemic barriers, such as
inequitable distributions of resources and discriminatory cultures, less well
studied. In engineering fields, professional societies including the National
Society of Black Engineers, Society of Women Engineers, and American Indian
Science and Education Society serve as centers of empowerment, belonging,
mentoring, and development where identity difference is understood,
acknowledged, and celebrated. The PI will conduct a series of case studies to
address two research questions: (Q1) What roles have engineering societies
played in the delineation of racial, ethnic, and gender ideologies of
engineering?; and (Q2) How do engineering societies influence the lived
experiences of engineering aspirants and professionals of marginalized
communities? The study is designed to examine the intentions and impacts of
engineering societies to characterize the relationship between the lived
experiences of individuals, academic and industry structures, and contemporary
diversity, equity, and inclusion programming. The project will augment ongoing
research through the Engineering PLUS Alliance's Continuous Improvement Data,
Evaluation, and Research (CIDER) unit, an NSF INCLUDES funded initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.