* 2222061
* Postdoctoral Training in STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* David Purpura, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 10/31/2025
* USD 780,896.00

This project team will establish the Purdue University Research Program on STEM
Education (PURPOSE) postdoctoral training program to support the development of
a cohort of postdoctoral scholars in the area of early STEM learning and
development in informal and/or formal learning environments such as schools,
homes, child care, and community settings. In this training program,
postdoctoral scholars will hone their research and teaching skills, build
relationships with educators, policy makers, families, and community members
that could lead to collaborations, and learn how policies are developed and
evaluated, broadening their understanding of how research is used in decision-
making at the state level. The program will support the postdoctoral scholars’
success in attaining impactful STEM education careers–where they can generate
and disseminate STEM education knowledge–through the provision of research and
professional development training experiences. Ultimately, this training will
result in well-rounded early STEM education scholars equipped for success in
academic, industry, and/or policy-relevant positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the PURPOSE postdoctoral training program is to enhance the
postdoctoral scholars’ knowledge base beyond traditional STEM skills, theories,
and perspectives, to employ new methods relevant to STEM and non-STEM skill
development, and to develop collaborations with STEM and non-STEM colleagues.
These scholars will build connections and partnerships that extend to practice
and policy, engage in holistic scholarly and professional development, and be
poised to take the next steps in their career to generate high-quality STEM
education knowledge. The training program will be built on the three pillars of
research, practice, and policy that are supported through a foundation of
professional learning, diversity, equity, and inclusion (in contexts of both
their scholarly and professional development), and mentoring (both the provision
of mentoring and learning how to mentor). It is expected that the postdoctoral
scholars will develop knowledge and skills at the intersection of early STEM
education and school readiness. Additionally, the initiative’s structure will be
evaluated, refined and used as a model for postdoctoral training that will be
maintained by the key personnel at Purdue and disseminated to others through
future conferences, professional development training, and other
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research
on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.