* 2222309
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Carryover effects of multiple climate change stressors in oysters: mechanisms and consequences across stages of ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Sarah Donelan, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 304,351.00

Climate change is exposing species to multiple stressors that affect their
ability to grow, reproduce, and provide ecosystem services that benefit humans.
However, repeated exposure to the same stressors over an organism’s lifetime may
allow some species to acclimate and avoid these negative effects, especially if
the initial exposure occurs when an individual is young. This study uses oysters
to experimentally test how early life exposure to ocean warming and low
dissolved oxygen affects oysters’ responses to these same stressors later in
life. The eastern oyster is an economically important species that provides
ecosystem services to humans such as reducing nitrogen loading to coastal
systems and protecting shorelines from storms. But oyster survival and growth
are negatively affected by declining dissolved oxygen caused by high nutrient
runoff from land and rising atmospheric carbon dioxide and temperature. The
findings will improve our understanding of how repeated stress exposure affects
species’ responses to climate change, and whether repeated exposure is a tool
that can be harnessed to improve food and job security in aquaculture and
resource management. This potential strategy will be shared with aquaculture
stakeholders throughout Maryland in a series of workshops. It will engage
graduate students and undergraduates in scientific research. It will also
introduce elementary through high school students to the concepts of climate
change and the importance of marine ecosystems to human well-being through the
development and distribution of Science-to-Go modules that provide at-home
science activity kits on topics related to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic plasticity is an important component of
organismal responses to climate change, but is typically examined only in
relation to an individual’s current environment. However, organism phenotypes
are frequently influenced by past environmental experiences such as those that
occur early in life, but little is known about how these “within-generation
carryover effects,” or the mechanisms that drive them, persist and change across
organism ontogeny. The proposed research will explore how early life exposure to
two interacting climate change stressors – hypoxia and warming – impacts eastern
oyster (Crassostrea virginica) fitness as well as the potential mechanisms and
ecological consequences of these carryover effects across multiple years and at
multiple points during ontogeny. This study involves a series of manipulative
experiments in the lab and field (on an aquaculture farm) and analyzes oyster
fitness, microbiomes, methylomes, and nitrogen content at each ontogenetic
stage. The need to understand plasticity through time and the lasting influence
of past environments on organism traits is critical to accurately predict
organismal responses to climate change. Because climate change is increasing the
likelihood that organisms will be exposed to the same stressors repeatedly over
their lifetimes, within-generation carryover effects may play an increasingly
important role in adaptive responses. Carryover effects may be a means of
quickly acclimating organisms to future environments that can be used in
conjunction with selective breeding to create more resilient organisms. This
research will thus generate data on a potential strategy for addressing effects
of climate change on aquaculture and coastal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.