* 2222586
* Modeling Tree-Thinking: Measuring Evolutionary Relatedness Understanding and Examining the Interaction of Factors that Influence Tree-Thinking
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Tina Marcroft, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetic trees are common
diagrams in biology that depict organisms and their evolutionary history. As
evolution is considered a fundamental topic that underpins much of biology,
understanding these tree diagrams is critical. The ability to read such trees is
often referred to as "tree-thinking" in the literature. Undergraduate students
often find tree-thinking very difficult. This study is designed to examine
factors that influence tree-thinking such as mental rotation and understanding
of evolution. At present, little is known about the ways these factors interact
and the ways in which students' everyday ideas about grouping organisms affect
tree-thinking. This project aims to develop assessments of student thinking.
Researchers and educators can use the knowledge gained from this study to design
better interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this study are to (A)
create an evidence-based assessment measuring multiple conceptions of
evolutionary relatedness, (B) model the different factors that may influence
tree-thinking, and (C) explore the ways in which undergraduate students scan
tree diagrams. The assessment will be created based on the findings of the
primary investigator's dissertation work. Data fit will be determined with data
from over 200 participants at two undergraduate institutions. Validity will be
determined using expert judgement, confirmatory factor analysis, and response
process testing. Reliability will be determined by examining internal
consistency and test-retest reliability. Modeling will be conducted at the same
institutions with the aforementioned instrument as well as other instruments
measuring factors such as spatial reasoning, evolution acceptance, evolution
understanding, and tree-reading and manipulation abilities. Several models will
be evaluated using structural equation modeling and later compared with model
evaluation metrics such as Akaike Information Criterion. The final phase of this
study will be exploratory where students from the aforementioned courses are
grouped using latent profile analysis. Representatives from each group will
conduct tree-thinking tasks while being monitored by eye-tracking equipment.
Students' scanpaths will be examined with respect to their tree-thinking
abilities. This study is designed to develop assessments of student thinking
that relate to evolutionary relatedness that can be used for research purposes
or in educational settings that can better explain the factors that influence
tree-thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.