* 2222206
* Collaborative Research: Electromagnet-integrated optical microscope stage with biocompatible magnetogel for investigating mechanobiology in 2D and 3D
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* James Boedicker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,691.00

An award is made to the University of Southern California in collaboration with
Brown University to develop an instrument that can be used to investigate how
mechanical forces can control or influence biological systems. Through the
research activities, the award will provide training to undergraduate students,
PhD students, and post-doctoral scholars. Notably, collaborating with the newly
started NSF Advanced Technological Education Center located at Pasadena City
College, will enable the hosting of two undergraduate community college
students, directly incorporating undergraduates into the research activities.
These students will be mentored by the PhD students and post-doctoral scholar
who will be involved in this research effort. The finding will be disseminated
through freely accessible online repositories such as the NIH 3D Print Exchange
and GitHub and through scholarly publications and conference presentations. To
increase the scientific literacy of the general public, social media will be
leveraged for broader dissemination of the research findings and scientific
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-established that chemical exposure can
modify a biological system, changing the behavior of cells and tissue. Evidence
is emerging that physical forces can play a similar role, and in some cases,
these physical effects can combine with chemical stimuli to amplify or to
eliminate a biological response. Changes in the mechanical properties of
surfaces in contact with cells and tissues also modulate biological activity.
Therefore, it is critical to understand the role of mechanical forces in
biological processes. However, only a few tools can accurately study this
complex behavior in limited settings. This award will support the development
and validation of a more broadly applicable instrument that will overcome this
cross-cutting hurdle. The technology will be compatible with a standard
fluorescence microscope, enabling simultaneous imaging and manipulation of the
physical properties of the biological system. To accomplish this goal, two new
synergistic technologies will be developed. To demonstrate relevance to current
and future NSF BIO Directorate programs, a pair of proof-of-concept measurements
in neuroscience and in bacterial research will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.