* 2222499
* Institute for Measurement Methodology in Rural STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (IMMERSE-PRF)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Irvin, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,249,871.00

The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research program which is designed to develop investigators' capacity
to carry out high quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project leverages the Institute for Measurement Methodology in Rural STEM
Education that is supported by the ECR‚Äù Building Capacity in STEM Education
Program. The project team will implement a two-year training program for three
postdoctoral fellows to prepare them to become trans disciplinary scholars who
can conduct research on rural STEM education and workforce development. The
fellows will be positioned to measure and address barriers and protective
factors relevant to rural communities and to contribute scholarship that could
influence local, state, and/or federal policy and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will provide state-of-the-art methodology
and theory training to the fellows to teach the latest advanced psychometric and
statistical techniques, theoretical perspectives critical to STEM education,,
and current software programs and applications. The postdoctoral fellows will
receive mentoring by a core of faculty scholars, in depth experience in
grantsmanship and publishing in academic journals, and instruction in using
nationally representative large databases. The fellows also will implement self-
directed research studies that align with their research interests and
professional goals. The interdisciplinary training environment and focus on
measurement science could elevate the rigor of rural STEM education research
across multiple lines of inquiry and disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed
PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices
of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines
to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.