* 2222801
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R: Embedding Preferences in Adaptable Artificial Intelligence Decision Support for Transplant Healthcare to Reduce Kidney Discard
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Cihan Dagli, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

Transplantation provides patients suffering from end-stage kidney disease a
better quality of life and long-term survival compared to chronic dialysis.
However, approximately 20% of deceased donor kidneys are discarded and never
transplanted. While some discards may be medically appropriate, others reflect
missed opportunities. Even kidneys deemed less desirable may provide survival
benefits to some patients. Organ Procurement Organizations (OPOs) have great
difficulty finding transplant centers to accept less medically desirable (higher
risk) kidneys. At their discretion, OPOs can use accelerated placement to bypass
the priority list for “hard-to-place” kidneys. However, due to a lack of data-
driven guidance, this mechanism is not systematically applied and likely
underutilized. To enable transformative change, we will integrate Artificial
Intelligence (AI) decision support into the kidney offer process for both demand
at the transplant center and supply at the OPO. Key workers include OPO staff
(organ procurement coordinators, operations directors, medical directors),
transplant center staff (coordinators, physicians, surgeons), and transplant
patients. This research is driven by a partnership between transplant and ethics
experts at Saint Louis University Hospital, behavioral scientists at the United
Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), and experts in AI and human factors from
Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building
on a FW-HTF planning grant, this project is developing an AI decision support
system for (a) transplant centers to accept/deny high-risk kidney offers and (b)
OPOs to identify hard-to-place kidneys sooner. This research will (1) measure
worker preferences to customize the support system’s operation and interface,
(2) aggregate fairness preferences as defined by diverse stakeholders to improve
fairness in the model output, (3) evaluate the effect of embedding uncertainty
and explainability into the interface, (4) develop deep learning ensemble models
that can adapt over time while being explainable, and (5) conduct randomized
control trials using UNOS Lab’s SimUNet, a realistic kidney offer simulation
platform for behavioral experiments, to estimate the impact on kidney discard.
Within the deep learning model, this project will impose trade-offs to increase
fairness without significantly reducing accuracy, enhance explainability by
converting feature relevance into linguistic expressions, and integrate new data
(such as customizing for worker preferences) through transfer learning as
conditions change in kidney transplant practices. Ultimately, this research aims
to reduce kidney discard for “hard-to-place” organs by at least 10%. In
addition, this work will support critical advancements in ethics and training,
issues that will be critical in overcoming system-level barriers to integrate AI
into healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.