* 2222476
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: The role of bioenergetic budgets in defining elevation limits and modeling geographic ranges of species
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xingli Giam, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 220,758.00

Freshwaters cover only 0.8% of Earth’s surface, yet these ecosystems harbor 31%
of global fish biodiversity. Ongoing climate change is altering the physiology
and behavior of fishes, and subsequently allowing some species to expand their
geographic ranges while driving range retraction of other species. The goal of
this project is to forecast how changing climate is shifting the lower and upper
elevation limits of fishes in mountain streams and rivers. The research will
take place along an elevational stream continuum in the southern Appalachian
Mountains—a hotspot of biodiversity harboring unique fishes that are essential
for maintaining healthy freshwater ecosystems on which humanity depends. The
research team will perform laboratory experiments to measure the effect of
temperature on fish physiology, behavior, and growth. New computational
techniques will be used to integrate data from these laboratory experiments with
a 2-year field study of wild fish populations to create detailed maps of
elevational shifts during the remainder of the 21st century. Throughout the
project, the research team will host workshops with conservation practitioners
to transform research findings into real-world tools that can immediately inform
conservation decisions. A professional development workshop will be hosted for
K-12 teachers in Knoxville, TN, and laboratory experiments will take place at a
Hispanic Serving Institution in San Antonio, TX, thus advancing societal goals
of diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop the next generation of species distribution models (SDMs)
by integrating organism-level bioenergetic budgets with community-level
predator-prey interactions. The goal is to improve understanding of how
physiological and behavioral traits as well as multiple, simultaneous
environmental factors associated with climate and land use change drive
geographic range limits. The following hypotheses will be tested: (1)
Elevational limits of species are concordant with transitions from energy
surplus to deficit along the elevation gradient. (2) Physiological and
behavioral traits of species determine the relative effects of temperature,
stream flow, and prey abundance on elevational differences in organismal energy
budgets. This next-gen SDM framework will be validated using a species
comparative approach, focusing on low- and high-elevation pairs of pelagic
(water column) minnows and benthic (stream bottom) darters. Once validated, SDMs
will be projected under future scenarios of temperature, stream flow, and prey
abundance to forecast shifts in species elevational and latitudinal limits.
Because the inputs for these next-gen SDMs are thermal reaction norms, eco-
evolutionary hypotheses based in established theory of thermal adaptation (e.g.,
countergradient variation) will be used to explore how thermal niche evolution
might attenuate future shifts in species range limits. More generally, project
findings will advance understanding of species range limits by explicitly
integrating Grinnellian and Eltonian niche concepts to elucidate underlying
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.