* 2222439
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Investigating drought and cold resistance of northeastern US trees to inform ecological modeling and forest management practices
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Dawn Lemke, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 09/30/2025
* USD 209,383.00

Climate trends and predictions in the northeastern U.S. include an increase in
the frequency of mid-summer droughts. Although forest managers increasingly
prioritize climate adaptation and assisted tree migration as management goals,
their efforts are limited by information gaps because drought impacts on
northeastern trees have not previously been a high research priority. Further,
how trees adapt to drought may affect their vulnerability to other stressors
such as extreme cold and spring frost damage, factors that will continue to be
part of northeastern winters for decades to come. This research will improve
understanding of how northeastern tree species respond to drought and how
different drought adaptations affect their vulnerability to other climate
stressors. This will be achieved by conducting extensive measurements of
drought-related plant traits across many species and site conditions in the
northeastern U.S. and at a site in Alabama that contains similar species at the
southern end of their current range. Data will be collected using a novel method
that greatly increases the number of tissue samples that can be processed.
Results will be used to improve a forest simulation model that can help forest
managers evaluate the outcomes of different management strategies. This work
will receive guidance from a stakeholder advisory board consisting of forest
managers, conservation groups and others invested in the future well-being of
northeastern forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the northeastern U.S., climate
projections include an increase in the frequency of mid-summer droughts, and
winters that are warmer overall, but with periodic infusions of arctic air that
can cause late-spring freezes and damaging cold-stress. The ability to predict
how forests will respond is limited by knowledge of inter- and intra-specific
variation in plant traits that regulate tree responses to climatic stress and
the degree to which they reflect environmental or evolutionary drivers. This
research addresses these uncertainties by (1) performing an in-depth study of
the variation and drivers of turgor loss point—a key determinant of tree-level
drought response—as well as associated cold and drought resilience traits and
(2) identifying the relationship between drought and cold resilience in the
individuals studied. The work will involve extensive field measurements of leaf
osmotic potential and turgor loss point, associated physiological plant traits
and rooting depth, as well as a manipulative experiment on genetically identical
individuals. Sampling will be conducted at sites across the northeastern U.S.
and at a site in Alabama with similar species at the southern end of their
range. The work will be guided by an advisory board made of people invested in
the forest (e.g., forest managers, conservation groups and indigenous community
members). Results will be used to improve an ecosystem model that simulates
forest growth under a range of climate and forest management scenarios. This
will benefit a range of management objectives that prioritize climate resilience
and assisted tree migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.