* 2222546
* Toward more Inclusive Undergraduate Research Experiences for Low Socioeconomic Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Emma Goodwin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,934.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need
to increase the success of students of low socio-economic status (SES) who
participate in undergraduate research experiences in life sciences. The research
focuses on students’ academic success and interest, satisfaction, motivation,
and persistence in science. To create more inclusive research opportunities for
low SES students, the specific aspects of research experiences that may
negatively or positively impact low SES student researchers need to be better
defined and understood. Therefore, this project aims to use interview and survey
methods to identify factors that impact low-SES student researchers at
universities nationwide and to understand how these factors impact these early
career scholars’ sense of belonging and integration into scientific fields. This
project will result in evidence-based training resources to help research
mentors create more inclusive and equitable research opportunities for low-SES
students, ultimately supporting low-SES students in persisting and succeeding in
science. Additionally, this project will support the training in research and
teaching of an aspiring tenure-track biology education researcher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a sequential mixed-methods study
design, which will inform the development of resources for mentors of low
socioeconomic undergraduate life sciences students. To identify the factors that
undermine and support low-SES undergraduates across multiple research contexts,
the investigator will interview low SES student researchers in field, bench, and
computer-based research apprenticeships as well as Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences. A nationwide survey will then be employed to examine the
prevalence of these factors and assess how they impact low SES students’
integration into science and their sense of belonging. The investigator will use
these findings to inform the development of evidence-based training resources to
provide mentors with tools to support low SES students. While much research on
low SES students is deficit-based, this research will instead be conducted with
consideration to the structural barriers higher education poses to this
population. This study is guided by the social psychology theoretical frameworks
of concealable stigmatized identity and background-specific strengths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.