* 2222730
* FW-HTF-R/Collaborative Research: FAIR4WISE: Future AI and Robotics for Women in Smart Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yuqing Hu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 559,757.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier Research (FW-HTF-R) grant
will develop a new robot teleoperation method based on deep learning and
blockchain certification to augment construction workers’ capability and promote
diversity, equity, and inclusiveness in the workplace. By some estimates, a
large fraction of construction jobs will be automated and teleoperated with
robots in the future. This transition can enable safe and remote work away from
hazardous construction sites with the potential to reduce obstacles for women to
join the industry while also creating an inclusive work environment. At the same
time, it is also important to improve the gender diversity of the construction
industry, where women and other minority workers represent less than 10% of the
workforce. In light of this, the project will investigate gender differences in
collaborating and teleoperating robots, and capitalize on the understandings to
develop robot learning and teleoperation methods that are accessible and
equitable across genders. A novel blockchain-based mechanism will also be
created to assess workers’ competence and performance to improve fairness and
equity in future construction jobs. This research will also measure the impacts
of developed technologies on future construction work, characterizing the
intended potential and unintended consequences on workers and organizations. If
successful, the developed technology ecosystem will help improve worker
productivity, safety, and health, and equip the U.S. workers to lead the way in
the construction industry reform in a gender-inclusive manner. This project can
break down many barriers facing women and other underrepresented workers,
opening new and equal work opportunities, helping them participate in the
workforce, and navigating them in the transitions to the era of robots and
artificial intelligence. This will benefit the construction industry and other
domains with less diversity such as manufacturing and agriculture and result in
U.S. economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team with deep and cross-cutting expertise in engineering,
computer and information science, human factors, industrial and organizational
psychology, education and adult training, and legal affairs to achieve multiple
convergent objectives. First, this project will 1) develop an inclusive robot
teleoperation interface adaptive to construction workers considering gender-
related diversity and experience to augment workers’ performance; 2) design a
federated learning mechanism for aggregating limited data from underrepresented
workers to mitigate bias in AI and robot intelligence development; and 3)
develop a blockchain-based platform in certifying workers’ skill competence and
performance for trusted and equitable recruitment, hiring, and retaining.
Second, with deep industry engagement, this research will develop a theoretical
framework and multidimensional impact models to 1) quantitatively measure to
what extent inclusive teleoperation can support gender diversity and augment
workers’ capability via job and task analysis; 2) understand the impacts on
construction work structure, job design, and worker self-efficacy and career
development with broader participation of underrepresented workers; and 3)
assess the opportunities and barriers at the organizational level for
adaptations from integrated technological, economic, social, and legal aspects.
Third, this project will develop a new platform integrating adult learning
theories, innovative engineering curricula, and the developed artificial
intelligence and robot technologies to break the boundaries for inclusive
student learning, workforce training, and industry
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.