* 2222096
* Collaborative Research: Planning for Uncertainty in Coupled Water-Power Distribution Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop approaches for the joint operation of
coupled municipal drinking water and electric power distribution networks at the
physical scale of neighborhoods or cities. Electricity-consuming water network
equipment such as water pumps can provide flexibility to electricity networks by
shifting pumping load. Flexibility provided by the water network to the power
network increases power network reliability, in turn increasing water network
reliability. Further, increased flexibility in power network operation reduces
operational costs and can help electric power distribution network incorporate
higher penetrations of renewable energy resources. The project will develop
operational planning and real-time control strategies for coupled water-power
networks under uncertainty, develop economic contracts for flexibility, assess
network resilience to new operational/control strategies and economic
mechanisms, and update these new approaches to maintain or improve upon current
levels of resilience. This research will help improve the economics,
environmental impact, reliability, and resilience of coupled water-power
systems. Further, the research will have practical impacts through collaboration
with electric and water utility partners. The team will disseminate their
results to the research community and practitioners, develop curriculum
materials, and provide multidisciplinary research experiences for
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the fields of optimization, economic contract design,
resilience modeling, electric power systems, and water networks. Task 1 will
develop approaches for advancing the state-of-the-art in coupled water-power
network modeling and solving the challenging stochastic optimization problems
that arise in the coupled operation of the two networks. Task 2 will develop
approaches to design economic contracts to ensure coordination of the water and
electric companies and incentivization of the customers. Task 3 will advance the
modeling and analysis of equity in who faces infrastructure vulnerability from
hazards. While previous work developed a general framework for measuring
inequity in the loss of essential services across a population, this has not
been integrated with detailed infrastructure performance models. This project
will make this critical linkage, advancing the ability to consider potential
inequities in vulnerability that may inadvertently arise from interventions
intended to improve system performance. This is critical to avoid having
negative, unintended consequences on vulnerable sub-
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.