* 2222580
* SBIR Phase II:  Modular And Reconfigurable Electromagnetic Navigation System For Surgical Interventions And Medical Robotics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Lev Koyrakh, RADWAVE TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 973,799.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a novel electromagnetic navigation system
offering a transformative solution for a wide range of medical procedures that
demand accuracy, efficiency, and safety. The result of this capability and its
subsequent commercialization will positively affect the outcomes of medical
procedures for millions of patients worldwide. The system will enable tracking
medical instruments over the full procedure space, improving accuracy and
reliability, and reducing patients and staff exposure to harmful radiation while
being compatible with the intraoperative imaging. The device will allow for the
creation and augmentation of navigation volumes on demand during procedures as
well as reliable detection and mitigation of electromagnetic interference. The
broader societal impacts of the technology offer a flexible and highly
customizable platform across key industry sectors important to the United States
competitiveness including biomedical, consumer, industry, and defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will advance the development of a new electromagnetic
navigation system that requires the solution of several complex problems
involving mathematics, computer science and electrical engineering. Millions of
minimally invasive medical procedures are performed annually worldwide which
include cardiac ablations, valve replacements, bronchoscopies, orthopedic
procedures, cancer treatments, etc., all with increasing robot utilization.
Electromagnetic navigation systems are widely used in these procedures providing
knowledge of locations and orientations when medical instruments are out of the
“line of sight”. Currently available systems, mostly developed before the wide
adoption of robotic surgeries, can handle only fixed navigation volumes and are
often unable to track instruments throughout the full procedure space, which may
require the use of additional harmful X-ray radiation. Current tools use bulky
field generators incompatible with imaging equipment and provide only limited
detection and correction of electromagnetic interference-induced location
distortion. This project will address these shortcomings. The electromagnetic
navigation system which will have robust detection and mitigation of various
electromagnetic interferences, will enable procedure-time adjustable navigation
volumes, will allow high location sampling rates with multiple sensors, and will
be compatible with intraoperative fluoroscopy and computed tomography (CT)
imaging, allowing for key differentiating features required for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.