* 2222250
* A PDE Framework for Sensing and Control of Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Mamadou Diagne, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2025
* USD 598,148.00

This award will allow the development of new analytical frameworks to improve
the control of metal additive manufacturing processes. Additive manufacturing
technologies have revolutionized design and manufacturing, allowing rapid
customization of production and product development by creating three-
dimensional objects from digital models. Despite substantial efforts over the
past two decades, manufacturing flaws such as geometric inaccuracy, cracks, and
micro-structural inhomogeneity often occur during the build. These issues
primarily arise from a variety of factors, including the interaction between the
laser beam and powder bed, that affect the thermal history during the
manufacturing process. This research aims to improve the manufacturing of
functional metallic final products through theoretical and experimental
investigations that will enable better regulation and control of the temperature
cooling rate and the width of the melt-pool, both are key factors in printing
complex geometries. The successful completion of this project will positively
impact the use of metal additive manufacturing for fabrication of functional
parts in high-value industries such as aerospace and defense. Through a thorough
outreach and education plan, undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in interdisciplinary learning activities that couple advanced
manufacturing with system theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing control
approaches for metal additive manufacturing processes such as selective laser
melting are built on approximate ordinary differential equation (ODE) models or
lumped parameter assumptions. These simplified approaches do not precisely
capture the spatially distributed nature of the temperature field and completely
ignore phase change dynamics, the effect of layer geometry, as well as prior
laser passes. Conversely, predictive partial differential equation (PDE) models
with phase change dynamics are too complex for real-time control. Through this
research effort, we offer control-oriented PDE-ODE models derived from
fundamental conservation laws that incorporate phase-change dynamics and enable
real-time estimation and control of process signatures. Specifically, this
project aims to create and experimentally validate a PDE-ODE model-based
approach for the design of estimators that rely on melt-front measurements alone
to estimate temperature profiles and feedback controllers that use these
estimates to robustly regulate melt pool size and cooling rates for varying
layer geometry and local thermal properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.