* 2222434
* URoL:EN: Convergence of biology and architecture: how emergent system dynamics generate adaptable, robust, and resilient forms
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Marceline Egnin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

How might buildings be designed and constructed to behave more like organisms by
responding and adapting to their environments? This project aims to take shape
design to the next level such that architecture functions in changing
environmental conditions. Likewise, the ability of complex biological systems to
thrive in changing environmental conditions depends on their ability to adapt,
altering their form and function. During development in both animals and plants,
cells must grow, take on specialized functions, and form the complex shapes of
organs. In addition, plant tissues can be induced to form unorganized cell
masses and regenerate a new organism as a form of biodiversity conservation. In
brain cancer, tumors generate new tissue forms, which then compete with the
surrounding tissue for their growth. This project tests the core hypothesis that
all of these diverse biological systems use a parallel emergent network
connecting the system with the environment—a rule of life—to achieve their
shapes, and that this same emergent network can be applied to architectural
design to generate adaptable, robust, and resilient structures. Rules of life
can be identified and tested by using a diverse set of systems, which is why
this project will examine chick hearts, plant flowers, brain cancer, plant cell
regeneration, and architectural building façades. Society is experiencing the
4th Industrial Revolution where intersections between the digital, physical, and
biological are radically altering the world. Some of the most burdensome
societal challenges—architecture in the context of climate crisis, congenital
heart defects, cancer, and food security—share the trait of defective shape
formation. By understanding the fundamental emergent networks generating
robustness, adaptability, and resilience, insights will be gained into these
intractable problems. The next generation of convergent scientists, engineers,
and architects will be trained. The public will experience the innovative
architectural prototypes generated through this project in gallery exhibitions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that the emergence
of robust forms, i.e. morphogenesis, occurs through an iterative cycle of
multicellular network interactions connecting the system with the environment.
Further, this same biologically based emergence network will be applied to
transform architecture and manufacturing to create self-assembled, adaptive, and
resilient structures. This markedly contrasts with the prevailing dogma that
biological and architectural morphogenesis is controlled via a “forward genetic”
program without iterative feedback from its biophysical environment. Each step
of the cyclical emergence network will be tested by performing the same three
experimental techniques in evolving biophysical environments across four diverse
biological systems: chick hearts, Arabidopsis flowers, brain cancer in mice, and
regenerating Arabidopsis somatic embryos. (Aim 1) Optical coherence elastography
will be used to measure the local mechanical properties of the biological
systems in 3D and over time in varying mechanical environments. The results will
test the first step in the cycle in which cells perceive both internal and
external mechanical stresses. (Aim 2) Visium HD spatial RNA-seq technology will
be used to determine how cells alter their gene expression profiles in response
to external mechanical stresses. The results will test step 2 in the cycle in
which cells adapt to stress by altering their material properties, state, and
dynamics via changing gene expression. (Aim 3) Hyperspectral multiphoton
microscopy will be used to simultaneously image about seven fluorescent markers
during shape generation in varying environments. The results will test how the
growth, division, and movement of cells adapt the form toward optimal mechanics.
This cycle is hypothesized to iterate as progressive form leads to new local
mechanical stresses and new interactions within evolving environmental
conditions. (Aim 4) These morphogenetic design rules developed in Aims 1-3 will
be modeled and employed to create a robust bioinspired load-bearing façade
system with emergent properties. This structure will mediate between fluctuating
interior and exterior climatic conditions, control structural rigidity, light,
temperature, humidity, and airflow in response to an ever-evolving environment.
How robust, resilient, and adaptable forms emerge over multiple cycles of this
emergent multicellular network will be elucidated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.