* 2222547
* Build and Broaden: Indigenous Peoples Before United States Courts: A Systematic Examination
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rebecca Reid, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The sovereignty of Indigenous Peoples and Nations in the United States is
recognized in the Constitution. However, over time judicial decisions and
legislative enactments delegated authority over indigenous policy to the states,
which benefit little from preserving and protecting indigenous rights. The
result is that Indigenous Peoples and Nations have received limited judicial
redress from courts in the United States. This project will examine the role of
federal and state courts in adjudicating indigenous issues by analyzing how
changing political contexts over time impact judicial decision making in cases
concerning Indigenous Peoples and Nations. In doing so, the project will enhance
capacity, trajectory, and career development at a Hispanic-serving institution,
and it will aid in fostering partnerships with indigenous communities in
different states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze all cases
involving Indigenous Peoples and Nations in state supreme courts, U.S. Courts of
Appeals, and the U.S. Supreme Court, from 1960 through 2020. Employing
quantitative and qualitative data and inquiry, the project will assess testable
hypotheses that capture audience-based and representative theories of judicial
behavior, as well as other hypotheses based on institutional constraints facing
courts. The projectâ€™s theoretical foundation necessarily diverges from the
extant literature, since the issue of indigenous sovereignty does not apply to
other underrepresented groups. By systematically tracing these cases across the
judicial hierarchy, the project will theoretically evaluate how courts are
exposed to disparate political pressures and institutional constraints with
respect to indigenous rights. The result will be first systematic, large-scale,
longitudinal analysis of judicial decision making in indigenous affairs. The
project will disseminate its data and research products widely to interested
parties, including scholars, indigenous community representatives, policy
advocates, and attorneys, and it will build collaborative research networks on
indigenous sovereignty and rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.