* 2222929
* MCA: Estimating quantitative genetic parameters via SNP based relatedness
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ned Dochtermann, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,214.00

Over the last twenty years our understanding of genetics has greatly increased
due to the development of genomic tools and approaches. However, because
behaviors are typically influenced by the combined effects of large numbers of
genes, our understanding of much of behavior still requires classic approaches
to estimating the genetic contributions to the behaviors we see animals express.
Unfortunately, these classic approaches are largely restricted to work done with
lab populations of animals or populations that have been extensively monitored
for many generations and, frequently, many decades. Here we will evaluate the
ability of alternative approaches to estimate genetic contributions by comparing
methods built on modern genetic approaches to known values. We will also develop
approaches to incorporate estimation error into analyses. Combined this will
allow behavioral researchers to better understand the genetic influences on
behavior and the evolutionary consequences of these
influences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary consequences, of
behavioral variation and covariation—i.e. animal personality and behavioral
syndromes—requires estimation of genetic variances and covariances in natural
populations. Unfortunately, estimating these parameters is rarely feasible
because relatedness among individuals is typically unknown in natural
populations. Consequently, our quantitative genetic understanding of behavioral
(co)variation is primarily based on laboratory studies or field studies
conducted at different hierarchical levels (e.g. among-individual variation
rather than additive genetic variation). An alternative to classic quantitative
genetic analyses is to estimate the relevant parameters based on SNP based
genomic relatedness values. This approach harnesses the power of sequencing
advances to determine relatedness among individuals and then use these
relatedness values in subsequent analyses. This allows questions about the
genetic architecture connecting behaviors to be asked in natural populations.
Unfortunately, this approach has rarely been used and its limitations are poorly
understood. In this project we will assess the ability of SNP-based estimation
of relatedness to properly estimate known heritabilities and genetic
covariances. Simultaneously, we will develop methods to incorporate relatedness
estimation error from SNPs into quantitative genetic analyses. Combined, this
project will foster the development of necessary quantitative genetic tools and
facilitate the bridging of genomic and quantitative genetic
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.