* 2222004
* MCA: New approaches to studying mast-seeding dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jalene LaMontagne, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 331,912.00

Understanding the patterns and drivers of plant reproduction is a long-standing
challenge in ecology. The number of seeds produced by perennial plants over time
shows incredible variation across species and locations, from consistent levels
of annual reproduction to boom and bust years of seed production exhibiting
extremely high temporal variability, known as ‘mast seeding’. Linking
relationships among plant reproduction, environmental drivers, and species
interactions has primarily focused on aboveground factors such as pollinators
and weather conditions; while belowground plant traits, such as root attributes
and symbiotic relationships with mycorrhizal fungal networks, have been largely
ignored. The purpose of this project is to bring together the aboveground
phenomenon of mast seeding, with belowground traits and belowground species
interactions using multiple global databases and long-term field data. This
study has the potential to reveal new drivers of annual fluctuations in
reproduction in natural and managed forestry systems. In addition to exploring
the impact of mycorrhizae on reproductive dynamics, this project may inform
forestry practices. Many forestry trees are inoculated with mycorrhizal fungi,
and this work could allow foresters to develop more efficient tree regeneration
techniques. The project will provide a mid-career scientist protected time and
interdisciplinary training. Training opportunities for an undergraduate student
and a postdoctoral researcher from diverse backgrounds will also be enable by
this interdisciplinary study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will use five
global databases on mast seeding, and mycorrhizal fungal associations and plant-
traits (e.g., TRY, FRED, MycoBD, FungalRoot), with data from a ten-year field
study of mast seeding. The investigator has expertise in mast seeding and will
work with a collaborative partner with expertise in plant-soil-microbe
interactions and structural equation modeling. The project will test hypotheses
about how belowground plant traits and mycorrhizal associations influence the
range of mast-seeding conditions (e.g., temporal variability, time-lags)
observed globally across taxa, over a range of environmental conditions.
Multivariate statistical approaches will be applied through structural equation
modelling to generate new insight into drivers of the patterns of mast seeding.
An undergraduate student will assist with exploring databases, and a
postdoctoral researcher will work with the investigator to modernize lab
workflows using GitHub and creating Shiny Apps. This work will facilitate new
conceptual and analytical possibilities to the field of mast seeding and to
plant reproduction studies more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.