* 2222880
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R: Wearable Safety Sensing and Assistive Robot-Worker Collaboration for an Augmented Workforce in Construction
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,080,000.00

Construction workers exert intense physical effort and experience serious safety
and health risks in hazardous working environments. Thus, the construction
industry is one of the highest-risk sectors in the US. A significant shortage of
skilled workers in the construction industry amplifies the need to improve
workers’ safety and health. Furthermore, the current workforce is aging and
retiring; approximately 39% of construction workers were between 45-64 years old
in 2020. Low interest among young adults and very low representation of women
workers (only 4% in 2020) is exacerbating the existing labor shortage. As a
result, there is an urgent need to develop new technology that keeps workers
safe and injury-free, makes the industry more inclusive and economically
sustainable, and eventually changes negative images that construction jobs are
unsafe, low tech, and too male-dominated. The objective of this FW-HTF research
project is to develop wearable safety sensing and assistive robot-worker
collaboration for an augmented workforce, thereby improving worker retention and
attracting women and young workers to construction careers. The researchers will
also develop a number of integrated research and education programs to attract
students from underrepresented groups into engineering and involve undergraduate
students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although robotics technologies are
increasingly used, most research focuses on how they support construction tasks
and yield economic benefits. Few studies discuss how to deploy wearable
exoskeletons to prevent work-related musculoskeletal disorders and improve
workers’ safety and health. New interventions are needed to address current
safety and health knowledge gaps, identify social and economic benefits, risks,
and barriers to the adoption of emerging technologies, and contribute to the
development of an inclusive, diverse, and sustainable workforce in construction.
Wearable devices, machine learning, and virtual-, augmented- and mixed-reality
technologies offer great promise for revolutionizing existing practices in
construction. This potential motivates the PIs to develop an integrated,
multidisciplinary approach to bring these emerging technologies to individual
workers, organizations, and the construction industry to enhance worker safety
and health, improve productivity, address gender- and age-related labor
shortages and expand employment opportunities. In this research project, the
team of researchers plans to develop wearable occupational safety sensing and
assistive robotic collaboration technology for skilled construction workers.
Specifically, this project will emphasize: (1) machine learning-enabled, real-
time worker activity recognition and pose estimation; (2) user-centered design
of soft exoskeletons; (3) mixed reality-enhanced work skill transferring and
workplace-based learning; (3) wearable safety sensing and assistive robotic
collaboration for an augmented workforce; (4) analyses of social-economic
impacts of the proposed technology; and (5) pilot studies, industrial deployment
and workforce training. Academic collaborations and multi-stakeholder
partnerships will provide the intellectual and personnel infrastructure
necessary to address the multi-disciplinary, multi-faceted challenges by
integrating best practices in construction with emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.