* 2222985
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturing Feasibility of New Radiation Shielding Fabrics
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Anna Brown, STARK STREET MATERIALS COMPANY
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 991,621.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes the reduction of lead and toxic
elements used as radiation shielding in medical, dental, and veterinary
settings. Lead and several of its salt composites have been the go-to radiation
shielding material, but there have been documented instances of lead
contamination to radiation workers. The proposed technology replaces lead and
other elements used in radiation shielding with the safe and non-toxic element
bismuth. This project focuses on the technical challenges related to molding
new, lighter weight, cleanable, flexible, and elastic radiation shielding
materials that can be used to produce garments that are much lighter and more
ergonomic for medical personnel who wear radiation shielding for a large portion
of their workday.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This technology is built on
new scientific understandings of bismuth surface stabilization chemistry and
chemical engineering in very high-density microparticle composite materials. By
tailoring the surface chemistry of bismuth particles, the material properties
change dramatically on the macro property scale. In Phase I, the company
demonstrated the feasibility of producing the final material, including the
identification of polymers, scale-up of materials, and compounding that
generated a fabric with exceptional elasticity, high X-ray attenuation, and a
very thin profile for its target weight. While composite materials with greater
than 85 % by weight bismuth particle filler requires specialized techniques and
molding requirements, it yields a superior final material that outperforms all
radiation shielding fabrics currently on the market. This project addresses a
number of these processing challenges and fabrication
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.