* 2222066
* Elucidating the myocardial energy demand-supply-production feedback system
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jason Bazil, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2026
* USD 416,955.00

The heart’s function is determined by the close interaction between the energy
demanded by mechanical and electrical work with the energy supplied by
metabolism. Metabolism in the heart requires the transport of oxygen in blood
vessels embedded in the heart tissue. Since the heart consumes nearly all the
oxygen in its blood supply, it signals to the blood vessels to dilate and
increase blood flow and oxygen delivery. While the basics of these processes are
known, the critical feedback loops required to keep the system working at an
optimal level are unresolved. This project will use advanced engineering,
modeling and experimental techniques to understand how the heart regulates its
function and maintains adequate blood flow during physiology conditions and
during stress in physiologically impaired conditions. This project will impact
society by exposing high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
engineering, computational, cardiovascular principles; lead to the development
of a new course that bridges engineering and physiology; and recruit from
underrepresented populations to improve equity. In the end, this project will
help motivate a new generation of STEM students for the betterment of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart is a well-designed system capable of
matching energy demand with energy production and energy supply. Specifically,
cardiac pump function inherently depends on energy (in the form of adenosine
triphosphate, ATP) produced by the mitochondria, which in turn depends on the
transport of oxygen in the coronary vasculature that is embedded and envelopes
the cardiac tissue. Perfusion in the coronary vasculature, however, is affected
by mechanical contraction of the heart in addition to cardiac-coronary signaling
mechanisms. As such, the heart is a closed-feedback loop system. The components
of this system each possess unique, and in some cases, general feedback
mechanisms that operate in a coordinated fashion. While great effort has gone
into studying each of these system components in isolation, we lack the
necessary insight to piece together how each component is wired and interacts
with each other when integrated together. In response, this project will combine
advanced computational modeling and experimental validation studies to elucidate
the feedback mechanisms governing the heart’s ability to regulate its function
under physiological and pathological conditions. The project will first
elucidate the primary coupling factors associated with cardiac mechanics,
metabolism, and blood flow regulation using a multiscale computational model.
Next, the relationship between microvascular function and mitochondrial
energetics will be resolved. Finally, the model will be validated using a
variety of hemodynamic perturbations using data acquired from healthy and
diseased animal models. Overall, this project will help further our collective
understanding on the feedback mechanisms operating in the healthy and diseased
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.