* 2222203
* Direct Chiro-Optical Detectors Based on Organic Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tse Nga Ng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 347,314.00

Direct Chiro-Optical Detectors Based on Organic
Semiconductors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting the polarization of light provides
critical information for biological studies, quantum optics, environmental
monitoring and navigation. However, current methods for sensing circularly
polarized light (CPL) require bulky filters or complex plasmonic nanostructures
that preclude miniaturization and scalable fabrication of CPL detectors. To
overcome these shortcomings, this project aims to create novel devices using
chiral organic semiconductors that provide the transformative capability to
directly capture CPL characteristics. The research will clarify fundamental
mechanisms that dictate polarization response in chiral semiconductors and use
the new insights to realize compact, low-cost devices that can vastly expand
implementations of polarization-sensitive detectors. The rich polarization
information will empower new analyses in scientific, medical, industrial, and
defense applications. This project will incorporate outreach activities,
including the development of new workshop materials for summer programs and
science kits for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study new device architectures to determine design guidelines for
amplifying the chiro-optical response of organic semiconductors. While chiral
organic semiconductors have shown strong chiro-optical response, the origins of
the dissymmetric interactions with CPL are still not fully understood,
particularly with respect to the contributions from mesoscopic designs. Thus the
goal of this proposal is to explain the fundamental effects of mesoscopic
ordering on chiro-optical response and increase the semiconductor sensitivity
and selectivity to a target CPL handedness. Here the proposed approach is to use
a bilayer junction which decouples the photogeneration and charge transport
processes so that the chiral absorber and the transport layer can be
independently optimized. In the first project objective, (1) the electronic
interactions between the organic chiral absorber and the oxide transport
semiconductors will be manipulated to facilitate charge injection and trigger
photomultiplication to significantly raise sensor detectivity. Next, (2) the
sensor selectivity to the CPL handedness will be enhanced by assembling chiral
mesoscopic structures for the absorber layer. Through custom electrospinning
techniques, the structural parameters can be modified precisely to identify
factors that hinder the device performance from reaching the theoretical
dissymmetry limit. For the third objective, (3) the integration of linearly and
circularly polarized devices into a super-pixel will provide complementary
signals that are crucial for extracting sub-surface features and improving depth
resolution of back-scattered light measurements. The expected project outcome is
to gain foundational knowledge clarifying the structure-property-processing
relations for chiral organic semiconductors, so this class of materials can be
engineered into portable, affordable CPL detectors to harness the rich
opportunities in polarization-sensitive applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.