* 2222723
* FW-HTF-P: Reshaping Construction Work Conventions: Endowing Collaborative Construction Robots with Social Intelligence for Contextually-Appropriate Robot Behaviors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Yong Cho, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Construction robots have demonstrated potential benefits to alleviate persistent
issues such as stagnant productivity, low profitability, high accident rates,
and labor scarcity, and the construction robot market continuously grows at a
rate of over 10%. As more and more onsite construction robots are expected to be
introduced to jobsite to work with humans, a new imperative objective for a new
workplace is to assure the safety of human co-workers. At the construction
jobsites, construction workers are constantly in contact with other workers and
equipment. To avoid safety risks arising from this dynamic environment, workers
have established a shared social norm to respect other workers' work
conventions, and every individual is responsible for other workers' safety.
However, most of the current construction robots do not understand such work-
related norms and are incapable of performing human-like actions or adapting to
dynamic human behaviors. To address this issue, this project development grant
will support the development of robot social intelligence to understand and
abide by work-related social norms in the construction work context. Such
intelligence is required to enhance robots' capacities to understand human
behaviors, adaptively act upon human behaviors properly, and in turn, acquire
trust and acceptance from human co-partners. This research can establish a
fundamental understanding of the complex human-robot interactions and trust
dynamics in the construction work context. The methods and findings resulting
from this research can be extended to human-robot collaboration in various
fields outside the construction industry to build a safe and effective human-
robot collaborative workplace policy that assures improved safety and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project development grant aims to
explore socially-appropriate robot motion planners and examine whether these
behaviors can affect the human-robot trust dynamics. The proposed activities for
this project include 1) understanding work contexts that are essential for
understanding and predicting human state and intent, 2) exploring social norm-
appropriate robot motion controllers for social navigation and collaborative
manipulation tasks, and 3) analyzing human trust via trust calibration and
negotiation. These activities will facilitate and expedite the development of
socially compliant robots to function adaptively and efficiently through
improved recognition of human workers' intentions and social norms. The team has
formed a unique interdisciplinary group of researchers across civil engineering,
computer science, and robotics to achieve this convergent research objective.
This research team will bring together diverse disciplinary perspectives to
support convergence research while contributing to their
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.