* 2222967
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Aided Part Identification for Coordinate Measuring Machines
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,10/31/2023
* BING ZHAO, OPTIC FRINGE CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 274,536.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a new generation of smart machines used in the
measurement of parts and assemblies. The team has demonstrated that this
technology can convert existing coordinate measuring machines to self-driving
autonomous machines. The ability to automatically measure parts is an important
feedback link in the process chain that will enable fully automated
manufacturing of the future. Specifically, this automation will reduce the
specialized skill required to use a Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM). The
innovation will enable workers to operate a CMM and get a precise part
measurement. This device is especially helpful as the skilled
manufacturing/metrology workforce is retiring as it gives new employees the
ability to provide accurate information with little/no training. This innovation
also gives the manufacturing companies an option to buy a new machine or upgrade
their existing coordinate measuring machine. While the focus of this proposal is
part identification, this technology has ready applications in Computer
Numerical Control (CNC) machining, robotics, and automated assembly lines. This
capability will make the US manufacturing sector stronger and more
technologically advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to develop a new technology to identify machined parts and assemblies. This
technology will be implemented on coordinate measuring machines (CMM), which are
used widely in the manufacturing sector to measure the shape and size of parts.
The proposed technology will enable autonomous measurements of parts allowing a
higher level of automation. In this identification technology, the team will use
live images from a camera, multiple solid model/Computer Aided Design
(CAD)-generated images, and advanced image processing. Applying Artificial
Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) to the image processing of part images
will ensure correct part identification. Correct identification of parts as seen
by the camera is the remaining unsolved challenge to achieving self-driven
automatic measurements of parts. Most machined parts are textureless and most of
the information is contained in the edges. Current image processing techniques
work well with texture-rich parts but are unreliable with textureless machined
parts. AI/ML enhanced image processing using edge and shape information is a
promising approach, solving this problem will lead to the birth of a new
generation of CMMs that can measure parts
automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.