* 2222087
* Collaborative Research: How to get SMAL:  Studying island dwarfism to find Shared Molecular mechanisms Across Life history traits
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Amanda Sparkman, Westmont College
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 409,472.00

Many human and animal traits are complex such that they are defined by both the
environment and many genes; such traits include body size and age of
reproductive maturity. The molecular mechanisms that determine these complex
traits in natural populations are not well understood. The research goal of this
project is to understand the mechanisms regulating complex traits, how they are
altered in natural populations, and what aspects of these mechanisms are shared
across species. This project uses the power of a natural experiment where
animals isolated on islands have become small with altered reproduction similar
to animals under selective breeding, such as dogs, cattle, and chickens. This
project will contrast mainland California and California Channel Island
populations of five reptile species to understand the changes in their genomes,
cells, and hormone physiology that alter their body size and reproduction on the
islands. In this process, novel tools will be developed to study the genetic and
hormone physiology of reptiles that can be used to understand the health of
natural and zoo populations to aid conservation efforts and in agriculture. This
project will engage over 30 undergraduate and graduate students (across three
universities) and high school teachers in the research and will support the
development of teaching modules based on scientific research. The findings from
this research will improve our general understanding of how genes and
environment determine complex traits, and more specifically will identify
mechanisms regulating body size and reproduction in natural populations that are
shared across animal species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex traits such as body
size and reproduction are inherently regulated by molecular networks that are
influenced by genetics and the environment, but the molecular mechanisms of how
complex traits are regulated in and shared across natural populations are not
well understood. Unraveling these molecular mechanisms will be a transformative
step in our understanding of how complex traits are regulated in ecologically
divergent populations. The Growth Hormone Insulin/Insulin-like Signaling (GH-
IIS) network has been extensively studied in biomedical laboratory models and
artificially selected species, for its role in growth, body size, and
reproduction, thus making it an ideal candidate network for regulating these
complex traits in natural systems. To understand the mechanistic basis for how
complex traits can be altered in natural populations and at what level these
mechanisms are shared across species, this project will contrast mainland and
island populations for five reptile species, three that demonstrate insular
dwarfism and two that do not. Data will be integrated across multiple levels of
biological organization of the GH-IIS molecular network to pursue the following
three aims: (1) quantify the relationship between GH-IIS hormone physiology and
life-history traits in natural populations; (2) evaluate genetic divergence in
the GH-IIS network; and (3) quantify divergence in cellular physiology and
intracellular signaling. This project will further the understanding of which
nodes within the network are responsive to ecological pressures in natural
populations, and which are constrained. This new knowledge integrated across
hierarchical levels of biology to identify mechanistic principals defining
complex traits in natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.