* 2222242
* FW-HTF-R: The Future of Equitable Childcare Worker Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Julie Kientz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,799,998.00

In-home childcare work is critical to society; millions of parents rely on
childcare workers who either come to parents' homes, or who provide childcare
service in their own homes. However, childcare workers face a number of
challenges such as unsafe working environments and unclear expectations, poor
access to training and social support, and low wages with minimal paid time off.
These challenges may be exacerbated by technologies increasing used for in-home
childcare, including cameras and other smart home technologies, and platforms
that match workers and families (often for short-term "gig" employment). This
project's goal is to better understand the risks and opportunities these
technologies pose and to design new technologies that benefit childcare workers
and services, parents and children, and society as a whole. The team will
develop better understanding of risks posed by technologies currently used for
in-home childcare: for instance, how existing hiring platforms and parents'
decisions affect and perhaps bias hiring decisions, or how smart home technology
may affect workers' privacy and autonomy. The team will also explore
technologies that make better matches between workers and families, as well as
technologies that improve in-home childcare workers' training and support
networks. As a whole, this project works toward a future in which childcare work
technology is consensually used and mutually beneficial for employees, children,
and childcare workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is rooted in approaches
to childcare work technology that prioritize safety, sustainability, and
empowerment among workers and employees. To that end, the project's starts with
sustained empirical research with childcare workers, families, childcare
placement services, and companies that support individual workers' business
needs. Through forums and directed research groups, the team will build a
comprehensive understanding of the existing childcare ecosystem and sustained,
supportive partnerships with these stakeholders. These findings and partnerships
will undergird the phase, which focuses on the design and evaluation of new
technologies to support stakeholders' needs. The team envisions technical
advances that improve hiring, training, and working conditions. For hiring, the
goal is to design platforms and algorithms that match workers with families to
meet both parties' needs while avoiding risks around bias that hiring algorithms
sometimes raise. For training, the team envisions using virtual reality and
virtual agents to help workers prepare for difficult or rare childcare
situations and conversations with other stakeholders. For working conditions,
the goal is to develop systems that help workers connect with other workers for
emotional support and well-being, informational support around both the work
itself and the management of the worker's business, and organizational support
toward empowering workers to improve their working conditions. The technology
work will take a research through design approach in which both iterative design
approaches and the evaluation will contribute to a more formal understanding of
the landscape of technologies to support childcare
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.