* 2222763
* FW-HTF-P: Building Upon New Learning Theories To Attract And Retain The Skilled Workforce Of The Future In The Construction Trades
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Christine Fiori, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 149,938.00

The overarching goal of this Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier
(FW-HTF-P) project is to enable the creation of technology innovations to
recruit and retain a large and diverse pool of workers, with the objective of
forestalling an acute labor shortage in the building trades. Specifically, this
Project Development award will support a pilot study to identify the barriers
associated with technology adoption and resistance to new technology within the
construction building trades. The results will be applied to create
interventions to overcome these barriers within community college and trade
school training programs, to help prepare a large, technically skilled, and
inclusive workforce -- including women and other groups traditionally
underrepresented in construction occupations -- for careers that meet individual
and industry needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct a pilot
study focused upon the construction building trades to identify the barriers
associated with technology adoption and the resistance within the trades. The
work will build upon a foundational framework developed in 2021 to elucidate the
underlying psychological factors that influence technology uptake in the British
oil and gas industry. Through interviews, field observations and nationwide
surveys, the researchers will seek to identify the psychological factors that
influence technology adoption within the construction trades. The team combines
education practice in the construction industry, an understanding of the
methodologies associated with adult learning/workforce development, experience
with the application of principles associated with the human technology
interface, and practical application of systems thinking to complex societal
challenges. The interdisciplinary approach seeks to identify transformational
learning technologies at the human technology frontier that will revolutionize
the educational methodologies used in construction reducing the labor shortage
and encourage life-long pervasive learning in the
trades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.