* 2222232
* STTR Phase I:  Development of an Innovative Ultra High Performance Concrete Foundation System with Bio-inspired Surfaces to Support Renewable Offshore Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Muhannad Suleiman, Precast Systems Engineering, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 274,956.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to develop a marketable and cost-effective U.S. manufactured
foundation system to support offshore wind turbines (OWTs). The planned offshore
wind energy production in the U.S. has been growing rapidly and the industry is
expected to be worth more than $1 trillion within the next two decades. Although
only 42 megawatts (MW) of offshore wind energy were installed in the U.S. during
the last 10 years, planned projects have been growing rapidly targeting 30
gigawatts (GW) by 2030 and 110 GW by 2050, with strong support from coastal
states. Achieving the targets of offshore wind energy requires cost-effective
and innovative components of these energy systems. One of the main costs for
offshore wind energy systems is their foundations, with costs typically ranging
from 14% to 34% of the overall project cost. OWTs are commonly supported on
large-diameter foundations, which the U.S. does not have the capability to
fabricate and instead relies on foundations fabricated abroad. Therefore, a
U.S.-manufactured foundation system to support renewable offshore wind energy
infrastructure, enhance domestic supply chains, and reduce dependency on foreign
manufactured foundations is proposed. The result of this research is a
U.S.-manufactured alternative with savings of over half the cost per meter,
enabling wider adoption of alternative energy harnessing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project
is to develop a U.S.-manufactured, bio-inspired, enhanced capacity foundation
system to support offshore wind energy infrastructure that provides technical
improvements and cost-saving to currently used systems. The proposed project
also provides: (1) ease of adoption by providing similar weight and installation
approaches to current means and methods; (2) better durability and longer
service life than currently used OWT foundations; and (3) improved speed of
construction promoting scalability. Furthermore, the proposed system will allow
for optimized design, increasing the foundation capacity and improving the
installation process. Preliminary tests show that the proposed design could
improve the foundation capacity by up to 100% compared to that of the currently
used foundation systems when subjected to long-term cyclic loading similar to
those experienced by OWTs. The proposed concept could be used as a driven pile,
suction caisson, anchors, or gravity base providing several options for the
offshore wind energy industry in the U.S. To achieve the project goal, this
research will focus on: (1) verification of key material properties for marine
environmental conditions, (2) structural design of foundation cross-sections,
(3) installation analyses on proposed foundations in marine environments; and
(4) investigations of the effects of the bio-inspired design on foundation
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.