* 2222751
* FW-HTF-P: Transforming Small and Medium-Sized Manufacturing Firms Through Participatory AI Adoption and Implementation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Thomas Fuja, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to transform small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises
(SMEs) in the U.S. by analyzing how the adoption of artificial intelligence
(AI)-based technologies impacts manufacturing SMEs’ labor force and
productivity. AI-based technologies pose a number of concerns around retraining
and replacement of workers, but also potential benefits around productivity and
the creation of new jobs, including ones that are less physically demanding and
may support workers currently excluded from manufacturing jobs. The project
focuses on SMEs rather than larger firms both because SMEs employ a large
majority of U.S. manufacturing workers and because SMEs may pose unique
challenges for the adoption of AI-based technologies in terms of the resources
and skills these firms have available to make these technologies work for them.
The goals of the project are to: (1) understand the challenges that
manufacturing SMEs and their workers currently face in adopting and implementing
new AI technologies, restructuring work and tasks and learning new skills; (2)
design a controlled manufacturing environment to support studies of workers
collaborating with AI-based technologies; (3) develop a framework that SMEs can
use when adopting these technologies; and, (4) develop connections with industry
partners and community colleges to identify ways to lower the barriers to the
adoption of new AI technologies on the factory floor and to develop a robust
workforce training program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, the
project team will build a collaboration with manufacturing firms, both SMEs and
large corporations holding multiple SMEs, in Indiana’s South Bend-Elkhart
region. A team of experts in the areas of economics, engineering, AI,
information technology, analysis and operations, and sociology will work with
these local SMEs and conduct on-site observations and in-depth interviews to
understand companies’ current technology use and needs, as well as opportunities
for AI-based technologies to meet those needs. These findings will inform a
survey to collect data on a wider range of companies’ financial situations and
production capacity, technological sophistication, management and hiring
practices, workforce composition and turnover, and work conditions. Together
this information will be used to identify promising candidate AI-based
technologies to explore further, then design a manufacturing cell that
facilitates controlled studies of workers collaborating with these technologies.
Further, the project team will develop novel approaches to training
manufacturing SME employees to allow them to be more directly involved in the
adoption and use of these AI-based technologies. This curriculum development
work will be done in collaboration with Ivy Tech, which has 40 community college
locations in Indiana and is developing a School of Advanced Manufacturing,
Engineering and Applied Science in response to the needs of the state’s
manufacturing industry. Based on these activities, the project will develop a
framework called “Participatory AI Adoption and Implementation” with guidelines
for how workplaces, workers, and AI-based technologies can productively interact
in manufacturing SMEs, focusing on ways to involve workers in the firm’s
decision process when adopting new technologies from design to
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.