* 2222933
* SBIR Phase II:  Bioelectrical Cell Enrichment, Sorting, and Recovery with On-Chip Sample Prep and Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Alexandra Hyler, CYTORECOVERY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 952,558.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a label-free, biological sample preparation
and cell isolation platform for recovery of rare cells from a variety of sample
inputs. Specifically, by carrying out sample preparation, manipulation, and
monitoring on a single chip platform for selective cell recovery, the sample
handling steps will be greatly reduced, thereby ensuring the maintenance of cell
viability, improving sample consistency, and sustaining native cell behaviors.
This recovered sample is essential for the development of cell-based therapies
in regenerative medicine and cancer management. Personalized medicine also
requires precision cell recoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop an electrically
functional microfluidic sample manipulation platform for phenotype-selective
recovery of cells, based on their biophysical attributes. Specifically,
microfluidic designs will be integrated to swap cells from complex biological
inputs into an optimized buffer to enable cell manipulation. Also,
instrumentation will be developed for on-chip monitoring of the sample during
various stages of the phenotype-selective cell recovery process. Further, a
variety of sample inputs will be validated on the designed devices to ensure
performance, consistency, and reliability for translation into commercial
product lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.