* 2222345
* EAGER: Developing Biological drones for attacking targeted bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Christie Peebles, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Biofilms are layers of cells on a solid surface that are composed of single or
multiple bacterial species. They can create a variety of human health problems.
For example, dental cavities are caused by the activity of bacterial films on
tooth surfaces. As a result of their self-protective nature, biofilms can be
extremely costly to remove and can promote the rise of antibiotic resistance
within a population. Bacteria that become resistant can share that resistance
with the community. New specific approaches that limit the time and ability for
resistance to emerge are needed. This project will focus on strategies to create
phage-based drones capable of selectively delivering multiple kill mechanisms to
the target bacteria. This will help to reduce the potential for antibiotic
resistance to build-up within the population. The project will also provide
training in phage and synthetic biology for undergraduate and graduate students,
with significant efforts being made to include members of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to develop a
novel strategy that can sense when a specific bacterium is present in the
environment and produce the kill mechanism only when that bacterium is detected.
Developing a cocktail of engineered bacteria that can recognize a variety of
bacteria which could be delivered in a variety of ways depending on the location
of the biofilm is a major objective of this project. This approach could be
employed in attacking biofilms in a variety of contexts such as those biofilms
found in pipes, on cargo ships, in food processing plants, and in healthcare
settings. The immediate goal of this project is to demonstrate the production of
a phage-based drone capable of killing Staphylococcus aureus. Specifically, a
minimal phage genome for delivery of bacterial killing mechanisms will be
developed and its efficacy measured. This work will develop new strategies to
target the destruction of specific bacteria within the biofilm. This work will
enhance understanding of phage biology and will create new biotechnological
applications for phage use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.