* 2222530
* Professional Informatics in Support of Inclusive and Equitable Teaching Practices
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Tricia Ngoon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;College instructors often receive
little to no feedback about their teaching or teaching strategies. Moreover,
stark gender and racial disparities in STEM classrooms point to issues of
inequality and uneven quality of learning experiences. This research project is
designed to explore the use of sensing systems such as cameras and microphones
in classrooms to collect data about how instructors teach. That data can then
form the basis for personalized feedback on teaching practices. This overall
program of investigation aims to reframe personal informatics, the use of self-
tracked data to achieve one’s goals, as professional informatics (Pro-I) that
can help STEM instructors improve their craft and, in so doing, create more
equitable learning experiences. Such improvements hold promise especially, to
increase STEM participation among students who are underrepresented in their
participation in STEM fields of study. This research also has the potential to
contribute to a general understanding of the use of sensing technologies in
classrooms as a teaching aid and provide materials that aid self-reflection and
improvement that could benefit many faculty.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator seeks to use Pro-I technologies to help STEM instructors further
develop their professional practice with a view towards creating more equitable
learning experiences in their undergraduate courses. Prevalent sources of
feedback to faculty about their teaching, if received at all, are based on human
observations, which do not always scale well. This project is designed to use
classroom sensing systems to collect multimodal data such as movement patterns,
gaze, facial expressions, and audio to provide a nuanced picture of teaching
behaviors. The resulting data will be the basis for multimodal analytics
designed to help instructors reflect on their teaching practices and derive
actionable insights for improvement. This research could extend two existing
technologies: EduSense a computer-vision based classroom sensing system and
Edulyze an analytics pipeline for processing and visualizing multimodal
classroom data. This project is comprised of three studies. First, educational
stakeholders such as instructors, students, and administrators will be
interviewed about their perceptions of privacy, agency, and adoption of Pro-I
data and systems. Second, classroom data will be collected through EduSense and
examined through Edulyze with particular attention to how analyses influence
instructors’ self-efficacy and motivation to improve their teaching. Analyses
will also examine the design of data visualizations for multimodal classroom
data. Third, based on the results of the first two studies, a prototype Pro-I
system will be developed and deployed for a semester to examine the effects of
reflecting on the resulting analyses. This research has the potential for
important contributions: increased understanding of the perceptions of privacy,
agency, and adoption of Pro-I systems as they relate to the ethical design of
classroom sensing systems; empirical evidence of how Pro-I data can impact
instructors’ self-efficacy and motivation to improve their teaching; and the
Pro-I technology that is intended to scaffold instructor reflections about
classroom data as a means to further develop professional vision for equitable
teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM
Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to
enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in
STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines to advance their
preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that advances
knowledge within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.