* 2222766
* FW-HTF-P: Augmenting First Responders' Cognitive Performance for Responses to Electric Vehicle Emergencies
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Krishna Shah, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 149,999.00

The wide adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) provides significant benefits to
society, including a cleaner environment, lower running costs, reduced noise
pollution, and reduced carbon emissions. However, the adoption of EVs also
brings challenges to the existing civil infrastructure system. For example, EV
fires burn hotter, longer, and take more resources to extinguish than fires
involving vehicles with traditional combustion engines. The first responders’
current work standards, training protocols, and training methods related to EV
emergencies are dangerously outdated. In this project development award, an
interdisciplinary team of researchers and multiple public agency partners will
define and test the feasibility of an immersive and intuitive training platform
that would augment first responders’ decision making when responding to EV-
related fires. The knowledge generated from this study will provide valuable
information to the first responder communities and help EV automakers design
“responder friendly” EV systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) planning research
project is to test the feasibility of the immersive training platform’s
framework for future EV-related emergency responses. There are three major
objectives: 1) To conduct a nationwide survey followed by focus group meetings
to understand existing EV-related emergency response workflows; 2) To design and
develop the framework of the immersive training platform that can augment first
responders’ cognitive performance; and 3) To share the initial findings with
researchers and other stakeholders to test the viability of the proposed
training framework and formulate a detailed roadmap for future
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.