* 2222498
* FW-HTF-P: Envisioning Public Procurement for a Sustainable Future
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Shirley-Ann Behravesh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,982.00

The United States (U.S.) public sector constitutes the single largest
marketplace across the globe, accounting for 24% of U.S. GDP. Therefore, the
decisions of the public sector play a significant role in sustainability, which
affects environmental, social, and economic outcomes. The public sector also
creates enormous opportunities to leverage its purchasing power to advance
sustainable public procurement and sustainability in general. However, at the
local level, only one-quarter of U.S. cities have adopted sustainable public
procurement, and of these, only about half indicate that their efforts have been
successful. A critical factor affecting sustainable public procurement success
is the extent to which procurement managers adopt existing, emerging, and future
digital technologies to acquire and integrate accurate data into their current
procurement processes, and to understand how sustainability impacts of their
purchase decisions. These technologies play a pivotal role for supporting
decision making, engaging stakeholders, gathering information in multi-tier
supply chains, and monitoring and measuring progress towards achieving
sustainability goals. Even so, the integration of digital technologies into
public procurement to advance sustainability objectives remains uncharted
territory. This planning project will define and provide recommendations on how
complex digital technologies can transform public procurement to improve
sustainability outcomes. The findings will be relevant to managers by providing
insights on the training and education procurement workers will need in their
future roles. The findings will also inform and improve public procurement and
the broader public policy emphasis to leverage the massive purchasing power of
the public sector to advance broader sustainability
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on how public procurement
managers can leverage existing, emerging, and future technologies that comprise
the digital ecosystem to achieve their sustainability goals. It begins to
uncover public organizationsâ€™ perception of sustainability and the extent to
which they currently balance economic, environmental, and social concerns. The
diverse team will integrate different theoretical approaches to offer clarity
around the disruptions created by emerging technologies to the procurement
process, and how these technologies are likely to redefine the skillset of
future PP managers. It does so by collecting qualitative data from technology
developers, leaders of public organizations, and procurement managers to
identify the initial theoretical constructs needing further development and
leading to high-impact, fundamental research questions and testable research
hypotheses that are anchored in convergence theories. This research will: (1)
identify the emerging socio-technological landscape of public procurement and
assess the factors needed to support and empower managers; and, (2) assess the
opportunities/barriers for integrating sustainability objectives into
procurement. Both factors have significant implications to the future work of
public procurement managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.