* 2222870
* FW-HTF-P: LEAP: Learning, Accelerating, And Empowering Embodied Robot Technology Use Within The Construction Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Matthew Spenko, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,543.00

The construction industry employs millions of workers in the United States and
is a cornerstone sector for the US economy. Unfortunately, productivity growth
has stagnated compared to other economic sectors, with the stagnation often
attributed to low productivity rates, labor shortages, an aging workforce, and
highly dissimilar tasks. Although the attributed features make the sector rife
with potential to capitalize on robotic automation, the effective integration of
robotics into construction has not yet occurred, an outcome-driven by the highly
variable nature of construction tasks, minimal industrialization of construction
processes, challenges in the scalability and adaptability of technology, and
stakeholders’ systematic resistance to change. The question arises: how do we
efficiently make this transition with the fewest barriers to entry? To address
this question, this project, coined LEAP, studies the acceptability of robot
technology. LEAP is based on the idea that the future of work lies in promoting
harmonious growth between technology and workers’ capabilities, addressing
misalignment between the implementation of innovations and the current
allocation of work, thereby fostering the advancement of automation in labor-
intensive sectors. LEAP posits that the best path for success is to
incrementally empower workers to leverage the human-technology partnership. The
project’s results will facilitate the development of upskilling models with
technology for the engineering workforce, a scope that falls under NSF Big Idea
of FW-HTF. Lessons learned from designing and administering the technology
demonstration may apply in many other industrial manufacturing
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s vision is to promote a gradual and
smooth transition to a human-technology partnership that sees automation
integrated alongside human workers. The project studies the acceptability of
robot technology through the embodiment of human-technology interactions,
embodiment refers to the coupling of an object and a (human) agent’s body such
that control can be exerted to operate on the environment. Using an exploratory
(pilot) study, LEAP looks for understanding the underlying cognitive mechanisms
of embodiment and their effects on acceptance of robotics by construction
workers. LEAP explores the worker’s visual perspective and haptic sense with a
focus on inhibitors and stimulators to inform changes in social attitudes toward
robots. The research will advance and benefit the FW-HTF by pioneering the
exploration of embodiment in workers’ tasks for future robot-worker
interactions. LEAP will explore the understanding of robotic capabilities for
construction site operations and build new principles for robotic-technology
acceptance and compliance in the construction industry. Ultimately, LEAP will
increase the understanding of the workers’ individual differences and develop a
transformative framework for individual workers’ strategic changes to current
operations. Results are expected to contribute to the acceleration and growth of
robotic-technology use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.