* 2222940
* I-Corps: Comprehensive tool to capture spatio-temporal variations in social media health risk communication for COVID-19 and other health risks
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Arif Mohaimin Sadri, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 16,014.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform that may be integrated into crisis management
systems such as public health (WHO, CDC), emergency management (FEMA), and
transportation (DOT) agencies to facilitate the transmission of correct
information and provide the option to notify social media providers of
identified misinformation. It is becoming increasingly important for government
agencies, policy makers, and emergency management officials to be capable of
addressing major crisis scenarios under acute time and resource constraints.
Using social media platforms more efficiently would be a critical step towards
this vision. For example, such communications platforms could to be leveraged to
better communicate the COVID-19 risk. The goal of this project is to understand
and validate the need for this capability in civilian or emergency management
agencies, and federal, state, or city level government agencies. The proposed
technology also may be useful in other natural and man-made disaster contexts in
which public health risks become major concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a comprehensive tool to capture
spatio-temporal variations in social media health risk communication (i.e.,
information or misinformation) at different scales. The project will also
integrate data-driven methods for user-friendly predictive analytics and
infographics to anticipate citizen needs and crisis responses. The proposed tool
will be grounded on state-of-the-art network science, social science, and data
science theories and concepts. Using the Application Programming Interface (API)
of publicly available social media platforms such as Twitter, large-scale crisis
communication data has been collected in the emergence and outbreak of the novel
coronavirus. These data may serve as proof-of-concept for the ability to develop
and operate publicly-available, novel social sharing platforms to automatically
and passively detect and control information tipping points to facilitate better
response in pandemics and other societal emergencies. As such, the proposed
approach will provide holistic support to detect information overload, turnover,
user reaction, and response in socio-technical systems during a major
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.