* 2222841
* RUI: Protein-Protein Interactions of Protein Kinase C During Polarized Growth in Filamentous Fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Terry Hill, Rhodes College
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2025
* USD 244,566.00

This project seeks to increase our understanding of how fungi grow. Fungi are
microorganisms which are used to produce commercially and medicinally valuable
products, while others cause disease and result in major financial losses due to
crop damage and spoilage of stored foods. Understanding their growth helps to
advance technologies involving their use and aids in developing strategies to
control their spread in harmful contexts. Fungi exist in two different forms;
spherical, single-celled organisms and elongated, multicellular organisms, which
are called filamentous fungi. This project focuses on growth and cell division
in filamentous fungi. In order to grow and colonize their hosts, filamentous
fungi extend into their environments by adding cellular materials at the tips of
growing filaments, and they divide by constructing cross-walls, called septa, at
evenly spaced intervals along the filaments. This project builds on previous NSF
funded research in this laboratory which identified proteins involved in
filamentous fungal growth and cell division, and began to determine which
growth-related proteins form physical complexes that are involved in growth and
division. Ongoing work will expand growth and cell division protein complexes by
identifying new proteins which are involved, and it will further define how
these complexes function. This research will be carried out by two senior
scientists at Rhodes College (Memphis, TN) working with undergraduate students
enrolled at Rhodes and students attending Historically Black Colleges in the
Memphis region. Undergraduate students will be integrally involved in the work,
and this research experience will strengthen their scientific education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the function of protein kinase C
in filamentous fungal growth and cell division (septation). Using the
filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans as a model organism proteins involved in
growth and cell division, including the A. nidulans homolog of protein kinase C,
PkcA, have been identified. Previous research by the primary investigators of
this project used techniques including in vivo microscopy of fluorescence
labeled proteins, immunoprecipitations followed by mass spectrometry and
proteomics analyses, and yeast two-hybrid assays to identify several proteins
that physically interact with PkcA including the formin SepA, three Rho-type
GTPase orthologs, a chitin synthase ortholog, a glucan synthase, and two
important scaffold proteins - A. nidulans IQGAP ortholog SepG and an A. nidulans
paxillin ortholog PaxB - which appear to have roles in PkcA’s localization to
septation sites. This project will determine if these proteins or a subset are
PkcA substrates, and if phosphorylation events play important roles in growth
and cell division. The mechanisms by which PkcA protein complexes coalesce will
be explored by identifying key domains of PkcA and complexed proteins that
facilitate protein-protein interactions among them. Not only will this research
be of value to the filamentous fungi community, but it will also benefit the
broader cell biology community, as it will shed light on the factors that affect
protein kinase C recruitment (and protein recruitment in general) to protein
complexes and how protein networks function subsequent to
recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.