* 2222245
* Ship-based Science Technical Support in the Arctic (STARC)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,528,868.00

This project provides NSF with Ship-based Science Technical Support in the
Arctic (STARC) to satisfy two main functional requirements: (1) to plan,
coordinate and deliver scientific technical support onboard USCGC Healy in a
manner that augments the role of the USCG marine science technicians, and (2) to
coordinate with NSF, USCG and the academic community to provide for the
operation, maintenance and upgrade of science equipment installed or used on
Healy. The awardee will employ an approach based on best practices within the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) tailored to the
support needs of Arctic research projects. The spectrum of research enabled by
the proposed technical support collectively achieves far-reaching broader
impacts through the training and learning of students, increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in research, disseminating results that
enhance scientific and technological understanding, and informing policy making
for the benefit of society. STARC technicians train and educate cruise
participants and Coast Guard technicians and share new tools and techniques with
colleagues throughout UNOLS, thus broadening the technical knowledge base that
supports U.S. oceanographic research. The technical services will also support
the acquisition and appropriate dissemination of shipboard data, in concert with
national resources such as NSFâ€™s Rolling-Deck-To-Repository program, so that
shipboard data will be submitted to US national data centers in a timely manner
and made broadly available to the academic community and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A STARC Arctic Coordinator at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography (SIO) will coordinate seagoing research support needs of Arctic
projects scheduled on USCGC Healy with researchers, the USCG and NSF, and will
be supported by a team of technical experts from Oregon State University (OSU),
University of Washington (UW) and SIO. As projects are identified for the
upcoming field season a lead technician will be assigned to each seagoing
project to organize and execute requisite technical and logistical activities
for each cruise leg. The Arctic Coordinator will develop staffing schedules for
each deployment, as well as pre- and post-deployment activities and off-season
maintenance. By distributing project support across qualified lead technical
staff, the Arctic coordinator can continually advance long lead time
improvements to science equipment in coordination with NSF, USCG, and the
academic community. These activities will be planned and provided in close
coordination with the USCG and with approval from NSF. Under the supervision of
the Project PI, the Arctic Coordinator will develop an annual program plan and
annual reports that will be submitted to NSF for
approval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.