* 2222648
* SBIR Phase I:  Serially Customized Security Films Harnessing Color-shifting Microstructures
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Caleb Meredith, CHROMATIR TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,919.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project relates to the development and commercial
utility of color-shifting security films. Such security films produce color from
light reflections in three-dimensionally designed microstructure-arrays.
Approximately 5% of the world trade is estimated to be impacted by counterfeit
or pirated products, negatively affecting a broad range of markets while putting
the safety of consumers at risk. There is a need and market opportunity to
implement new, effective strategies and technologies to counteract
counterfeiters and communicate authenticity to end users. The value of the
technology developed in this project is based on a distinguished optical
mechanism that enables the creation of tunable and visually distinctive color
changing appearances that can not be imitated or copied. Outcomes include the
development of roll-to-roll manufactured structural color film with colors that
are serially customizable. The initial target market is focused on consumer
brand protection and supply chain security. Target customers include security
feature provider companies through joint-development, direct sales, and/or
licensing. Potential annual revenue in year three is estimated between $1M-$3M.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project will pursue two technical aims in the research development of
microstructured color-shifting security films. The first technical objective is
to increase total reflectivity without compromising color saturation. Overcoming
this hurdle is necessary to ensure that the films are eye-catching under a range
of non-optimal lighting conditions. A combination of simulations and
experimentation will be used to design and optimize the reflective efficiency of
the films. Roll-to-roll fabrication of the optimized structure geometries will
be demonstrated. The second technical objective is the demonstration of serial
color patterning for customized printing of iridescent films. Serial
customization of color, for instance with bar codes or numbers, will enable
integration of the films with digital security platforms. Evaluation of
microstructure geometry and processing parameters will be conducted to determine
color consistency and repeatability while achieving high spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.