* 2222418
* UROL:EN Emergent Energetic Regulation in Dynamic Biological Networks
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Michael Rubenstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,999,187.00

Regulation mechanisms are essential for keeping systems within desired working
conditions. For instance, body temperature in humans is regulated by a complex
network of neurons and hormones that control heat production (e.g., through
metabolic activity) and loss (e.g., through sweating) to avoid fatal hypo- or
hyperthermia. Typical biological and engineered regulation mechanisms take the
form of circuits that connect sensors to actuators in a predictable way (e.g., a
thermostat in an air conditioning system). However, systems that are composed of
many loosely connected and mobile units (e.g., a colony of ants or a fleet of
autonomous robots) rarely exhibit long-lasting connections that could support
such rigid regulatory circuits. In this context, this collaborative research
brings together biologists, theoreticians, and engineers to achieve two goals:
understand how highly plastic collective systems regulate themselves in the face
of changes (using energetic regulation in ants as a model system), and derive
general principles to engineer artificial distributed systems that can
autonomously regulate their collective activities to maintain function in
uncertain environments. The project will also give students ranging from K-12 to
Ph.D. an opportunity to learn how social systems succeed and fail at regulating
themselves, and how fundamental knowledge of natural processes can lead to new
technological developments and applications in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three complementary
components. In Component 1, the researchers will perform laboratory experiments
with ants to investigate whether biological collectives exhibit energetic
regulation in response to both weak and strong variations in energy demand and
availability, and how this impacts their biological productivity. These studies
will combine computer vision-assisted behavioral observations to measure the
individual and collective behaviors of the ants and physiological measurements
to determine the dynamics of their energetic states. In Component 2, the result
of the laboratory experiments will be used to develop a network-theoretic
framework to elucidate and engineer energetic regulation in distributed and
highly dynamic collectives of self-organizing units. The goal will be to design
generalizable abstractions that allow for theoretical analysis to determine what
behavioral rules lead to successful collective regulation or to its failure.
Finally, in Component 3, the researchers will design engineering solutions for
collective energy management in robotic swarms and evaluate their efficiency in
simulations and in experiments with actual robots. The goal is to build a swarm
that will be capable of optimally balancing energetic supply and demand, even in
dynamical and unpredictable working environments. Ultimately, this effort will
lead to establishing a new paradigm for better understanding how loosely
connected units can nonetheless collectively maintain function and homeostasis,
despite experiencing fluctuations in their energetic requirements and/or their
ability to exploit resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.