* 2222063
* Workshop on Grant Proposal Writing at the 2022 Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference; Baltimore, Maryland; 31 May to 3 June 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* James Guest, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,536.00

This award will support a Grant Proposal Writing Workshop to be held in
conjunction with the 2022 Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference in
Baltimore, Maryland, 31 May to 3 June 2022. Early career researchers typically
have limited exposure and experience with grant proposal writing and the
proposal review process. This workshop aims to provide early career researchers
with opportunities to learn about the National Science Foundation (NSF) and its
merit review process and engage in a series of interactive sessions with recent
NSF awardees discussing best practices and strategies in proposal writing. An
emphasis will be placed on recruiting women and underrepresented minorities in
engineering to participate in the workshop. By providing clarity, guidance, and
feedback, the workshop will support the next generation of engineering
researchers in improving the quality of their future proposals and, ultimately,
the quality of research and broader impacts guided by clearly defined
objectives, plans, and mechanisms to assess success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
series of interactive seminars, panels, and other activities will be held in
this workshop with the goal of improving the quality of future proposals from
participating early career researchers. Participants will include senior
doctoral students, postdoctoral researchers, and early career faculty. Speakers
and panelists will feature recent NSF awardees, including awardees from NSFâ€™s
Faculty Early Career Development Program. Session topics will include the
following: (i) an overview of the NSF, the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation Division, and the Merit Review Process; (ii) best practices and
strategies in grant proposal writing; (iii) shared experiences from recent grant
awardees; and (iv) small breakout sessions providing participants the
opportunity to ask detailed questions and receive feedback on project summaries
that may serve as the basis of a future proposal. Additionally, participants
will be encouraged to present a poster of their choice for display during the
workshop. A key feature of the workshop is that it will be linked with the 2022
Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference, which will provide opportunities for
the early career researchers to network and discuss their research with
researchers from academia, national laboratories, and industry, while also
ensuring that workshop discussions and feedback will be directly relevant and
accessible to participants from the community of engineering mechanics and civil
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.