* 2222062
* 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Tribology: Understanding Sliding Interfaces to Master Tribological Systems Across Length Scales; Lewiston, Maine; 25 June to 1 July 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Seong Kim, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides funds for students and early-career researchers to attend
the 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Tribology: Understanding Sliding
Interfaces to Master Tribological Systems Across Length Scales; Bates College,
Lewiston, Maine; 25 June to 1 July 2022. Tribology is the science of friction
and wear at the sliding contacts. Research and engineering efforts in tribology
address the physical and chemical mechanisms underlying friction and wear, and
aim to design materials, processes, and devices such that new solutions to
technological challenges become available. Advances in tribology help to reduce
energy consumption by lowering friction, to prolong the lifetime and enhance the
safety of mechanical systems by reducing wear, and to decrease harmful emissions
in applications from vehicles to manufacturing through reduction of energy use.
Tribology also impacts the life of humans and animals that move on earth. The
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Tribology is a forum to exchange results of
cutting-edge research amongst an interdisciplinary group of scientists and
engineers who are at the forefront of addressing fundamental and applied
challenges in this field. This award will promote participations of students and
early-career researchers from diverse backgrounds at the GRC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This subtitle “Understanding Sliding Interfaces to Master
Tribological Systems Across Length Scales” reflects the fact a comprehensive
understanding of tribological phenomena requires multidisciplinary knowledge
encompassing a range of classical fields in science and engineering, including
chemistry, physics, mechanical engineering, and materials science over multiple
length scales. Most tribologists are trained in one of these areas with emphasis
on either microscale (atomic, molecular, nano) or macroscale (system-level)
phenomena or methodologies and then exposed to other fields or scales of
tribology as they make transitions from schools to real-world situations.
Realizing the multidisciplinary and multiscale challenges in tribology is
believed that the next significant breakthroughs are likely to be found at the
interfaces between the classical trainings. To achieve these breakthroughs, the
very diverse tribology community needs to come together to learn and discover
together. The 2022 GRC will provide a venue for this discussion and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.