* 2222051
* Collaborative Research: Anthropogenic Impact on the Geochemical Cycle of Lead (Pb) since the Industrial Revolution in Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Griffith, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,824.00

Lead (Pb) is a highly toxic heavy metal with negative and irreversible effects
on children’s development and behavior, and also with a number of health effects
in adults. Even though Pb has been used for millennia, it was not until the
Industrial Revolution and later when leaded gasoline was introduced in Europe
and North America in the 1920s that Pb from human activities surpassed its
natural and preindustrial contribution by about two orders of magnitude.
Anthropogenic Pb emissions have decreased in North America and Europe since the
1970s with the introduction of emission controls and after leaded gasoline was
phased out. However, this has not been the case in Asia. Polar and high-altitude
glaciers preserve records of climate and environmental changes, and thus allow
to study past and present atmospheric Pb levels. This project will determine the
sources of Pb found in ice cores from Tibet and the Himalayas. It will provide
information to policy makers to develop strategies to reduce Pb emissions. The
results will also be shared through classes at the undergraduate and graduate
levels and to the general public by outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the role of human activities on the Pb geochemical cycle from pre-
industrial times to the present in Asia, a region that is currently undergoing a
number of drastic environmental changes and is poorly studied, the isotopic
composition of Pb in ice cores from three different sites, the Guliya ice cap in
northwestern Tibet, the Puruogangri ice cap in central Tibet and the Dasuopu
glacier in the Himalayas will be reconstructed. The Pb isotope ratios will
allow: (1) the establishment of a pre-industrial Pb isotopic background in Asia;
(2) the determination of how human activities have modified the Pb geochemical
cycle after the Industrial Revolution in Asia; and (3) the assessment of whether
Pb from human activities in North America have reached
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.