* 2222228
* STEM Ed PRF: Understanding and Improving Undergraduate Computer Science Regulation, Performance, and Motivation Using Digital Traces and Technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Hye Rin Lee, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 385,799.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral fellowship
research project will focus on leveraging educational data mining to understand
how undergraduate students in introductory Computer Science courses draw on
their motivational resources and regulate learning. The study seeks to explore
ways in which students’ motivation interacts with self-regulated learning.
Initial findings are then expected to inform the creation of a just-in-time
learning intervention designed to improve study patterns. This project also aims
to increase participation for women and students of color in Computer Science by
enhancing student learning and motivation which may result in greater rates of
persistence and degree attainment in the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Student
learning is a dynamic and context-specific process. Current interventions
designed to promote persistence and performance in STEM capture student learning
in broad contexts rather than in the moment students engage with their
coursework. This project aims to gain a more accurate and comprehensive view of
undergraduates’ learning in Computer Science using multiple data sources,
including digital trace data. These data have the potential to capture the
dynamic nature of student learning and motivation. The postdoctoral fellow has
chosen to position her work within the framework of the “Metacognitive and
Affective Model of Self-Regulated Learning” (Efklides, 2011). The fellow will
then explore connections between motivation, behavior, and learning at both the
task and person level and contribute new insights into that foundational theory
that consider the interplay between motivation and self-regulated learning
across levels of interaction. In addition, this project will use A/B methods to
test an intervention created as part of the project that focuses on just-in-
time, self-regulated learning support to improve study patterns. The A/B testing
of motivation and self-regulated learning messages may allow for stronger claims
to be made about the links between constructs and performance. Combining these
methods within the same project has transformative potential for the effective
use of learning analytics by Computer Science undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.