* 2222806
* FW-HTF-P: Adapting to the Future of Robotic Surgery: Understanding Training and Design Environments for Human-Robot Teams
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Anjali Joseph, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,913.00

Robotic-assisted surgical devices (RASD) enable surgeons to use computer and
software technology for advanced visualization and control of surgical
instruments for a variety of procedures, decreasing the invasiveness of the
procedure compared to traditional surgery. However, the successful adoption of
this innovative technology into surgical environments requires consideration of
worker training, workflow, and other potential barriers to acceptance. This work
establishes a foundation for the future integration of surgical robotic
technology into human-robot teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project development
proposal involves a multidisciplinary team who aims to 1) understand attitudes,
barriers, and facilitators of current human-robot work systems; 2) integrate
expert perspectives on challenges and opportunities for enhancing the adoption
of RASDs; and 3) validate a training model based on statistical learning; and 4)
create a framework for future development of RASD integrated work systems.
Understanding attitude and needs of all workers in a surgical setting is
critical for implementing and evaluating human-robot collaborative teams to
improve surgical safety and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.