* 2222625
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Personalized Wearable Cooling for Workers under Heat Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Yongho Ju, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 82,000.00

Approximately 30 million U.S. workers are employed in occupations where the
human body is regularly exposed to severe heat stress. Heat stress can result
from extreme environmental conditions and from high levels of metabolic activity
often involved in these exposed occupations. Heat stress can substantially
impair cognitive function, degrade physical performance and endurance, and
elevate the risk of injury, illness and death. Although human workers are
expected to continue to play major roles in these exposed occupations,
technologies to mitigate their heat stress have not received much attention. To
address this, the investigators explore the development of novel wearable
cooling devices and will obtain preliminary data that will help assess and
improve the efficacy, acceptability, and usability of the devices. The research
team will engage other stakeholders to examine the socioeconomic impacts of the
cooling devices and the potential needs for policy and other interventions to
facilitate their widespread and equitable adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work helps validate past discoveries in the field of thermoregulatory
physiology: body heat is not lost to the environment equally from all body
surfaces. A better understanding of regional differences in heat loss has
implications for wearable technologies that can be used to prevent or treat heat
stress in a way that is both feasible, effective, and accessible. The ultimate
aim is to develop a disruptive technology for wearable cooling that is readily
scalable. The proposed work will also help advance fundamental understanding of
the materials, thermodynamics, and heat transfer in a flexible cooling device.
Programs to broaden participation of undergraduate and graduate students,
especially from economically disadvantaged and underrepresented groups, are an
integral part of the proposed efforts. The research project should serve as an
attractive platform to encourage and excite K-12 students to pursue further
education in science and engineering, given its significance in applications
that can directly impact human lives, especially those employed in exposed
occupations and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.