* 2222254
* The Paleoarchean: A Pivotal Time in Earth Crustal Evolution--the View from the Zimbabwe and Sao Francisco Cratons.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeffrey Vervoort, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2025
* USD 273,218.00

The creation and growth of Earth’s continents is a topic that has captivated
geoscientists—and engendered spirited debate—for decades. Questions about the
formation and evolution of stable continents during Earth’s earliest history
have been vigorously debated in the literature for over 50 years and continue to
be a focus of current research. Archean rocks (those older than 2.5 billion
years) represent nearly half of Earth’s history, but only occur in a few areas
on the continents. Rocks from the Paleoarchean (3.6 to 3.2 billion years) and
Eoarchean (4.0 to 3.6 billion years) are considerably more rare and represent
only a small percentage of all preserved Archean rocks worldwide. These
Paleoarchean and older rocks represent windows into the early Earth and the
formation, nature, and evolution of the ancient continents. This proposal seeks
to study the record of crustal formation, modification, and stabilization of the
Zimbabwe and São Francisco (Brazil) cratons, two of the best preserved and
exposed fragments of Paleoarchean continental crust on Earth. The study of the
early Earth, as well as questions regarding the time and processes involved in
the initiation of modern plate tectonics, have been included as a priority in
several community-based documents, including the “Challenges &amp; Opportunities
for Research in Tectonics” (Huntington &amp; Klepeis, 2018) and, “A vision for
NSF Earth Sciences 2020-2030: Earth in time” report of the NSF (National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020). The integrated approach
taken in this proposal will enhance the geographic coverage of studies on
Archean cratons and improve the record from the earliest history of the Earth
and will contribute to the understanding of the whole picture of the early
Earth. This proposal will also contribute to the building of a more diverse
geoscience community by supporting women in science with one PhD Latinx student.
Collaboration with Brazilian and South African colleagues is an integral part of
this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposal
seeks to integrate isotope geochemistry and geochronology to study the 3.65-2.70
Ga Zimbabwe and São Francisco (SF) cratons, two important Archean terranes that
have received relatively little attention despite their extensive Archean
geological record. The Zimbabwe and SF cratons are two of the best preserved and
exposed portions of unmodified Paleoarchean continental crust on Earth. These
cratons also preserved dome and keel structures, archetypal of Archean crust.
The aim of this research is to constrain the evolution of the central portion of
the Zimbabwe craton and the Gavião block and gneiss complexes from the northern
and southern SF craton. The approach in this research is to: 1) determine the
timescale of crust formation through the Paleoarchean in these areas; 2)
determine the Hf and Nd isotope record of these cratons and how they have
evolved through time; and 3) evaluate the Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd isotope systematics of
the gneiss complexes to determine if they have faithfully recorded and preserved
their initial isotope compositions. This work will be done using an integrated
approach of in-situ U-Pb age and Lu-Hf/Sm-Nd isotope analysis of zircon,
titanite, and other REE-rich accessory phases, combined with solution Lu-Hf and
Sm-Nd isotope dilution analyses of bulk rock samples. Where possible, garnet Lu-
Hf and Sm-Nd geochronology—in conjunction with age and isotope data from
accessory phases—will be used to document post-magmatic tectono-thermal events.
This integrated geochemical and geochronological approach will provide a
timeframe of crust formation events and a robust Hf and Nd isotope record of the
Zimbabwe and SF cratons. This, ultimately, will help the community to evaluate
processes of crust formation, modification, and stabilization in the
Paleoarchean—a pivotal time in Earth’s crustal evolution. This proposed research
represents a continuation of the work that has been done by the PI, students,
and post-docs in Greenland, in the Acasta Gneiss Complex, and what has been done
(and is still ongoing) in the Pilbara Craton of NW
Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.