* 2222965
* SBIR Phase I: UpDraft Tower Technology for Geothermal Power Generation and Rankine Cogeneration
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Rod Nash, POWERSILO INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,966.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of technology that unlocks
the use of abundantly available geothermal hot dry rock energy for reliable
renewable energy. This technology will be economically feasible and provide an
optional zero emission cogeneration configuration for harnessing cooling loop
waste heat from zero emissions thermal electric power plants. The additional
benefits, broader impacts, and market opportunity for cogeneration applications
create an increase in power generation efficiency and capacity. Increases in net
zero emissions power will also be available at utility scale. This technology
will reduce water use during wet cooling in power plants by replacing the iconic
supplemental cooling towers for thermal electric power plants worldwide with
cogeneration. Some larger and long-term societal impacts of this research
include: a more stable power grid due to reliable geothermal renewable energy
generation and a cleaner environment especially for populations living close to
traditional power plants and industrial infrastructure. Global technology
licensing applications include: grid flexing and resiliency, water
desalination/filtration, green hydrogen production, and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop
software that uses computation, measurement, observations, and computer models,
based on sound theory to find operational boundaries, validate key performance
metrics, and optimize functional parameters for more efficient power production.
This research includes the examination of critical technology functions and
elements that determine peak operational efficiencies. The goal of this research
will be to produce analytical computer models to look specifically at: 1) air
intake velocity for a given set of pressure differentials, 2) air intake
impedance, 3) thermal/pressure gradients generated by heat exchange activity, 4)
air flow impedance generated by heat exchangers, and 5) expected exhaust air
flow given idealized intake, heat exchange configurations, and designs.
Anticipated results will provide quantifiable and measurable data tables
including system sizing, energy input requirements, and mechanical and organic
inlet air flow with emphasis on modeling of data analysis and determining
specific energy inputs and power outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.