* 2222762
* FW-HTF-R: A New Bridge to the Digital Economy:  Integrated AI-Augmented Learning and Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michael Rinsem, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,816,000.00

The digital economy remains a powerful locus of opportunity, but most
information technology (IT) jobs in this sector are open only to workers with a
university degree. Working with Pittsburghâ€™s largest community college, the
project team is designing and deploying new AI-augmented learning technologies
to accelerate student learning in community college IT courses. By providing a
blueprint that could be used in community college IT degree programs across the
country, this project could help address shortages of workers with key technical
skills, while creating cost-effective, accessible pathways to living wage
digital economy jobs for workers who previously lacked those opportunities. The
tools and knowledge created by this project could eventually be applied to other
STEM-focused community college degree programs across the nation, potentially
impacting the lives of millions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
investigating how a theoretical framework developed by learning scientists can
be used to align knowledge components in community college IT courses with the
most effective AI-driven educational technologies to enhance and accelerate
learning. The team is exploring the extent to which intelligent tutoring systems
(ITS), computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) systems, and example-
based learning increase subject mastery, decrease the time needed to achieve it,
and enable a wider range of learners to succeed. The project is also exploring
how collaborations between community college students in 2-year information
technology degree programs and the professional staff of partner firms on real-
world (cloud computing) problems may be effected through capstone projects and
internships, and if the AI-augmented curricular pathway created by this project
moves students into IT jobs relative to students in the standard course
pathways. The project team is applying rigorous methods including in-class
experiments to assess learning gains, and impact evaluation using propensity-
score matching and randomized controlled trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.