* 2222582
* STTR Phase II:  Scaling the Purification of Mycosporine-like Amino Acids to Replace Chemical Ultraviolet (UV) Filters and Protect Human and Environmental Health.
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Taylor Weiss, Heliobiosys, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2025
* USD 937,595.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II
project will be to bring a new class of full spectrum Ultraviolet A and B (UVA
and UVB) protective materials to market. Current chemical sunscreen ingredients
raise health concerns for consumers. Additionally, some ingredients are banned
for causing potential damage to coral reef ecosystems. Consumers increasingly
want products that are safe for them and for the planet, and that are
aesthetically pleasing. This project will explore ways to meet the growing
demand for better sunscreen ingredients that are produced sustainably. This team
will investigate methods to cost-effectively extract naturally-occurring
materials from photosynthetic bacteria that can replace current chemical and
mineral sunscreen active ingredients. These will also replace a significant
portion of the UV filter ingredients. Sunscreens and other related products that
might use these naturally occurring, safe, and effective ingredients will help
people reduce UV damage to their skin and help reduce skin cancer (including
deadly melanoma) and ameliorate skin aging. The project supports the US economy
by creating jobs in the algae biotechnology field and in the cosmetic industry
including testing, manufacturing, distribution, and sales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation at the core of this
proposal is to improve the yield and reduce the cost of extracting mycosporine-
like amino acids (MAAs) from a complex mixture of compounds contained within
cyanobacterial cells (or other MAA producing organisms). Small volumes of MAAs
are currently obtained using expensive and hazardous solvents and expensive
equipment. The innovation is focused on the use of synthetic nucleotides
(aptamers) to selectively bind to the MAAs and purify them from a cell lysate.
Mycosporine-like amino acids arose on early Earth to protect microbes from
harmful UV radiation. Their prevalence and longevity substantiate their value in
protecting cells from UV radiation and other forms of oxidative stress. Their
presence in the Earthâ€™s oceans for millennia speaks to their safety in marine
ecosystems and suggests their safety for use on human skin; Safety will be
verified using standard pre-clinical tests. Technical hurdles include the
isolation and identification of the specific MAAs produced, identifying aptamers
that are highly specific for the MAAs produced, determining MAA yield from
several purification processes and assessing process scalability. These data
will be compared to other isolation techniques (filtration and chromatography)
to assess comparative yields and economic performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.