* 2222891
* Factors affecting provisioning and foraging in rapidly changing landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Erin Riley, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 02/28/2026
* USD 329,849.00

Foraging decisions affect nutrition, social relationships, and between-
population encounters. Humans and animals may come into conflict over shared
resources, affecting subsistence in both cases. Despite significant research on
what leads to specific foraging decisions, little is known about how recent,
rapid, dramatic changes in landscape affect what an individual chooses to eat
and where. Individual differences interact with cultural variation in
provisioning to affect the costs and benefits of specific foraging decisions in
such contexts. To understand these complex dynamics, this project uses
theoretical models from biocultural anthropology to investigate the factors
affecting decisions to forage and provision in a rapidly changing social and
ecological landscape. The project supports early-career researchers based at two
minority-serving institutions, multi-institution collaborations, and student
training. It disseminates research broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences and develops statistical software and educational curricula to
facilitate knowledge generation and spread. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers focus on how primates and people interact and mutually impact one
another’s behavior in contexts where agricultural intensification is rapidly
modifying traditional landscapes. Specifically, the project goals are to: 1)
determine how human-modified habitats shape macaque behavior; 2) examine
people’s motivations to engage in interactions with macaques; and 3) develop
novel statistical methods to examine social networks and behavior. To accomplish
these objectives, the project team collects longitudinal data on macaque social
and ranging behavior, human-macaque interactions, and forest food availability
data, and conducts ethnographic interviews. This research can advance knowledge
and understanding of collective decision making, how primates adapt to expanding
anthropogenic pressures, and the factors driving human-wildlife
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.