* 2222719
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Using Technology to Transform Makers into Creative Entrepreneurs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Laura Dabbish, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 145,543.00

More and more individuals are commercializing their skills in crafting physical
goods by selling them in online markets. These “makers” turn their hobbies into
income generating activities, however they often have no formal business
training nor social support. For these makers to earn a sustainable livelihood,
they must find their footing not only as craftspeople, but also as
businesspeople—they must become “creative digital entrepreneurs.” In this
project, the research team will interview and observe the work practices of
makers attempting to create a business based on their craft using digital tools.
Ultimately, this research project will inform the development of new
technologies that can help makers effectively run a business and obtain social
support as they form their identity as creative entrepreneurs. The research team
will particularly focus on the needs of makers who are women, underrepresented
minorities, and those in low-resourced regions, to aid them to become successful
maker entrepreneurs, providing financial independence and broader representation
in the creative economy. There is potential for this project to increase the
income and wellbeing of people who are underemployed or unemployed but have
craft skills that they could leverage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project,
the interdisciplinary research team will conduct ethnographic research to better
understand the needs of makers transitioning to entrepreneurship. This project
works with a broad definition of “makers” as people who conceptualize, design,
and produce physical goods. While maker domains will be diverse, this project
will specifically focus on makers who have commercial intent and those who are
primarily using online channels to monetize their goods, i.e., those attempting
to become creative digital entrepreneurs. This research will develop new
theories and understandings of how people become creative entrepreneurs in
digitally enabled online platforms. The results will contribute to the
understanding of entrepreneurship, organizational studies of work, occupational
identity, computer-supported cooperative work, and human-computer interaction.
This research will develop knowledge on how makers interact with digital
technologies and peer networks to create goods and reach customers, and how
technology, including new interfaces and interaction modalities, can support
business operations, occupational identity development and entrepreneurship
education. This project’s contributions will help shape a theory of creative
entrepreneurship that identifies and explains the factors critical to creative
entrepreneurs’ success in business, practice, and industry in online
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.