* 2222122
* Build and Broaden 3.0: Assessing the Effects of a Publicly Engaged Scholarship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Merolla, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

This project seeks to learn the impact of publicly engaged scholarship and
contribute to diversifying the academic community. The study will measure the
social and research impact of public engagement, or scholars communicating
beyond academic audiences and sharing their expertise with a broader, more
general audience. There is a small but growing academic literature that shows
scholarship that is publicly engaged can have greater academic and societal
reach, but there is little empirical evidence of this relationship between
engagement and reach when it comes to social science research. To examine
whether and the extent to which there is such a relationship, this study will
use a randomized controlled trial involving different public engagement
strategies that publicize social science scholarship and measure indicators of
academic and societal reach. The study will include a survey experiment in which
participants are randomly assigned to read about research shared via public
engagement tools. The survey questions will measure public confidence and trust
in science and scholarly experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
uses intersecting interventions to measure the impact of publicly engaged social
science and builds on the small but growing evidence-based literature on how
scholarship that is publicly engaged can have greater academic and societal
reach. The study includes a randomized controlled trial to measure the relative
impact of multiple public engagement strategies (e.g., blog posts, Wikipedia
entries, social media shares, etc.) that publicize social science scholarship,
measuring indicators of academic reach, such as citation counts, as well as
societal reach, such as Altmetric scores. The study’s post-treatment survey
questions will assess participants’ views of the research being discussed and of
science and scholarly experts more broadly. This study will provide evidence of
how public engagement strategies can improve policy impact and public trust in
research. The public engagement work done for the randomized controlled trial
will also bring research findings to the broader public and in a way that is
accessible to a lay audience. This work will be supported by a new training
program for advanced undergraduate students. Undergraduate fellows will receive
formal training in research methods in one academic term and then complete a
research apprenticeship in the following academic
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.