* 2222007
* FORTE - FORest ciTizenship for disaster rEsilience: learning from COVID-19
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Colleen Scanlan Lyons, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2025
* USD 199,552.00

The COVID-19 pandemic had a disproportionately large negative impact on
traditional rural societies with little access to modern health care. This
research project will study how forest-dependent indigenous people of the Amazon
forest engaged in citizenship to exercise their rights to influence institutions
and political processes that increased their resilience and reduced their
vulnerability to COVID-19. The study will use existing data to quantify the
mechanisms through which these communities reduced their vulnerability in the
past by being more engaged citizens. The research team, consisting of scientists
from Brazil, the UK, and the US, will also collect new data using interviews
with people living in traditional rural communities, to better understand the
opportunities and barriers to their engagement. The research results will be
disseminated to stakeholders, including local, state, and federal governmental
agencies, and policy makers in Brazil. The results of this research could
provide guidance on policies to strengthen inclusive democratic governance,
reduce unequal access to health and other resources, and increase resilience to
crises. The results of this research have global application, hence will help
establish the US as a global leader in disaster resilience.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Citizenship from below, a process through which
marginalized peoples self-organize to claim recognition and rights, is crucial
to disaster recovery, resilience, and societal renewal. This project assembles
an international team of social scientists from Brazil, UK, and the US to study
how the forest people of Brazilian Amazonia have used collective action to
mitigate the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and strengthen disaster
resilience. The study will: (1) quantify linkages between forest citizenship and
COVID-19 resilience; (2) investigate various practices of forest citizenship
that were employed during the COVID-19 pandemic; and (3) disseminate learning
experiences of the forest people on how to promote forest citizenship and
enhance disaster resilience across Amazonia and other parts of the world. The
research project will address these questions through three interlinked projects
---quantitative analysis of secondary health, governance, and environmental data
(entire Brazilian Amazon), qualitative fieldwork in selected municipalities in
Amazonia and Acre State, and action-research. The results of this research could
provide guidance on policies to strengthen inclusive democratic governance,
reduce unequal access to health and other public resources, and increase
resilience to crises. The result of this research is scalable, hence can help
establish the US as a global leader in disaster
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.