* 2222468
* FW-HTF-P: Enabling Multifaceted Collaboration between Humans, Robots, and Remote Workers for Future Distributed Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Maury Nussbaum, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The overarching goal of this Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier
(FW-HTF-P) project is to advance the state-of-the art of human-robot teams
collaborating across distributed locations, in order to promote improved safety,
flexibility, and productivity for the future manufacturing workforce. The result
will mitigate the growing manufacturing skills gap in the US, caused by an aging
workforce, lack of work-life balance, and geographical mismatches between job
demands and skills programs. Specifically, this Project Development award will
support the creation of a conceptual framework and realistic experimental
testbed that will, together with guidance gathered from industrial stakeholders,
enable studies of mixed teams of on-site human and robot workers collaborating
with remote human workers, with rigorous assessment of the associated impacts on
operations and organizational performance. These new modes of human-robot
collaboration allow expert workers to remotely collaborate with on-site
employees, facilitating the inclusion of underserved communities of workers with
less training or reduced physical or mental capacity. They will provide hands-on
supervised learning opportunities to allow newer workers to enhance their skills
and increase their professional value. The use of robot teammates for physically
stressful work tasks will reduce musculoskeletal injury, and thus improve
quality of life and extend productive careers for manufacturing workers.
Additionally this award will support hands-on cross-disciplinary research
experiences for engineering and social/behavioral science students, and provide
educational opportunities for groups under-represented in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Project Development award are to
1) generate a fundamental understanding of the promoters of and barriers to the
adoption of Human-Robot-(remote Human), or HR(H), collaboration in manufacturing
environments, to support the design of future work that will most benefit from
HR(H) collaboration processes; 2) create a conceptual framework and a physical
testbed that will support exploration and assessment of HR(H) collaboration with
different work designs and interfaces; and 3) evaluate representative
manufacturing collaboration scenarios (e.g., vehicle and aircraft maintenance
and repair) to understand factors affecting trust, performance, and safety of
HR(H) collaboration. Primary contributions of this work are threefold. First,
direct knowledge and perspectives from industry partners (manufacturing industry
stakeholders and robot manufacturers) will be obtained to examine the
feasibility and benefits of using HR(H) collaboration in future distributed
manufacturing. Second, the development of an HR(H) testbed will support
assessing HR(H) collaboration in future work designs, including various work
interfaces and work tasks, to gain fundamental knowledge of HR(H) collaborative
technologies. The testbed will foster opportunities to gain multidisciplinary
knowledge of multi-human and multi-robot collaboration in terms of robotics,
human factors, biomechanics, and psychology. Third, key factors affecting worker
performance, productivity, and safety and health within the HR(H) collaboration
will be investigated, via initial representative manufacturing collaboration
scenarios with varying degrees of collaboration between humans and robots. These
project development activities will substantially advance the knowledge and
state-of-the-art in realizing HR(H) collaboration in future distributed
manufacturing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.