* 2222322
* URoL:EN: Understanding the rule of life facilitating the proliferation of toxic cyanobacterial benthic mats in flowing freshwaters
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Rosalina Christova, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,997,766.00

Rivers and streams make up less than 1 % of the total surface freshwater
available on earth, but are of enormous ecological and societal significance.
Recently, biofilm forming toxic cyanobacteria, commonly known as benthic harmful
cyanobacterial blooms, have become widespread in many rivers and streams. These
cyanobacteria produce toxins as secondary metabolites which are harmful to
humans and other animals when consumed. Species from the benthic cyanobacterial
genus Microcoleus (formerly Phormidium) can form thick mats in flowing
freshwaters which produce cyanotoxins in spatial and temporal patterns that are
challenging to predict. Microcoleus benthic mats have become widespread and
exhibit intriguing emergent behavior. Toxic strains of Microcoleus co-exist with
its non-toxic counterparts and other cyanobacteria. Many metabolic pathways of
toxic Microcoleus species operate differently from conventional pathways of
other cyanobacteria. Through a combination of laboratory and field scale testing
using a suite of genomic and modeling tools, this project seeks to understand
the spatial and temporal dynamics of Microcoleus and the rule of life
controlling the dynamics and emergent behavior of Microcoleus genera leading to
toxic benthic mats. The results are expected to open new opportunities in the
ecological science of benthic toxic mats in freshwater streams and to be
applicable to cyanobacterial bloom mitigation. This project will broaden
participation and promote student training in environmental biology, data
science, ecological engineering, chemistry, mathematical modeling and computer
science with an emphasis on training students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite recent findings that toxic and non-toxic strains
of Microcoleus synergize their metabolic efforts to facilitate each other during
colonization, how nutrient concentrations, riverbed type, and other
environmental factors play a role in the Emergent Rule of Life governing the
colonization and toxin production in Microcoleus are not well understood.
Therefore, the rule of life this project aims to investigate is how mat
formation and toxin production by Microcoleus emerge from its interactions with
its non-toxic counterparts and other coexisting bacteria in the benthic mats.
The project will study (1) how within-mat species interactions and
biogeochemical conditions facilitate Microcoleus growth and toxin production in
low-nutrient streams, (2) the molecular mechanisms (e.g., gene expression level)
by which toxic non-heterocytous (e.g., Microcoleus) and heterocytous
cyanobacteria (diazotrophs able to fix atmospheric nitrogen gas, e.g., Anabaena)
flourish in nitrogen and/or phosphorus deficient flowing waters and, (3) develop
models to predict the occurrence and dynamics of toxic Microcoleus at river
scales and quantify how cyanobacterial community dynamics and abiotic
environmental conditions drive benthic cyanobacteria and toxin production over
the growing season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.