* 2222218
* Examining and Promoting Math Engagement for Families with Young Children
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Mary DePascale, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Family engagement in early math
can include daily activities and interactions that relate to numbers which are
important for young children’s learning and development. However, there is
significant variation in the amount and types of this kind of family engagement.
Understanding how to promote engagement in early math is critical, especially
for children from disadvantaged backgrounds. The goals of this project are to:
(a) examine how families engage in math and (b) work with families to design and
implement an intervention to promote family engagement in math. The findings
from the project have the potential to contribute to the fields of STEM
education, early childhood education, and developmental psychology. The project
is also designed to build family interest and engagement in early math, which
can support children from socioeconomically diverse backgrounds in pursuing STEM
studies and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there is increasing evidence
that family engagement in early math starts children on a positive math learning
trajectory, more work is needed to understand how to promote engagement in early
math, particularly for children from disadvantaged backgrounds. This project
takes a strengths-based approach to examining family math engagement, with three
primary objectives. First is to examine how families currently engage with math
in their daily routines and what factors contribute to engagement. Second is to
design and implement a family engagement intervention, building upon families’
experiences and opportunities to engage in math in their daily routines. Third
is to examine the role of the intervention in terms of parental beliefs about
math, family math engagement, and child math interest and performance. Resulting
analyses have the potential to deepen understanding of math development and for
developing evidence-based tools and guidance to support children’s learning and
interests in math. The study design will use multiple methods, including focus
group interviews, naturalistic observations of family math engagement, and the
co-design of an experimental intervention with families recruited from Head
Start preschool classrooms. Overall, the project aims to extend prior research
on family math engagement including naturalistically-informed and rich family-
reported perspectives. The project has potential for direct applications for
families and educators that may further ongoing efforts to support children from
socioeconomically diverse backgrounds thereby better positioning them to pursue
future STEM studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to
the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that
aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent
doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines to
advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field. The project is also partially supported by
the NSF’s EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:
BCSER) program which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out
high-quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.