* 2222038
* Conference Support for the 19th U.S. National Congress on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics; Austin, Texas; 19-24 June 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Chad Landis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 48,000.00

This grant provides support for the 19th US National Congress on Theoretical and
Applied Mechanics to be held in Austin, Texas, 19-24 June 2022. This conference
is held every four years to foster and promote the exchange of ideas and
information among the various disciplines in the field of the theoretical and
applied mechanics, and to chart future priorities in mechanics related research,
applications, and education. The objective of the Congress is to bring together
researchers from across the United States as well as internationally who are
interested in the broad area of applied mechanics and primarily separated into
the sub-disciplines of solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, and dynamics. Research
in theoretical, computational, and experimental mechanics will be highlighted in
the classical fields aligned with solid and fluid mechanics and dynamics, as
well as in emerging technologies and applications such as additive
manufacturing, renewable energy and batteries, bio-inspired propulsion,
mechanotransduction in cells, and the mechanics of soft matter and architected
materials. The Congress serves as a conduit for the dissemination of knowledge
between active researchers and the students who will become future scientists.
The four Plenary Speakers that will deliver the featured presentations at the
Congress include three women and one African American man. The high visibility
of these outstanding researchers at this venue will be a driving force for
increasing diversity and equity in the field of theoretical and applied
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This conference is being held over five days.
The conference is bringing together over 750 researchers from around the world.
Of the attendees, 300 are students, representing a very high level of student
participation. Each day begins with a presentation by a plenary speaker, with
Friday’s presentation centered around the contributions of Theodore von Kármán
to the field of applied mechanics. The morning plenary sessions are followed by
nearly 800 presentations across 63 minisymposia throughout the week.
Presentations on cutting edge research are 40 minutes for invited talks and 20
minutes for accepted talks. Additional activities include a student poster
session where students present their research in a poster format and a Women’s
Networking Event on Career Development. The conference will foster the training
of students, the development of new collaborative research activities, and it
will inspire new scientific ideas and research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.