* 2222661
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: The Future of Geriatric Care: Immersive Virtual Patient Training for Nursing Assistants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Salam Daher, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 110,000.00

There is currently a staff shortage in assisted living and nursing homes, a
shortage exacerbated by COVID-19. Certified Nursing Assistants (CNAs) play a
significant role in providing care for older adults, but insufficient training,
poor pay, and inadequate support for their physical and emotional needs can
affect their attitudes toward working with older adults and limit the
effectiveness of their caregiving. Although public and private organizations
provide nursing assistant training, many do not specifically emphasize how
attitudes towards the geriatric population can affect care. The proposed
training will expose CNAs to a realistic interaction with a virtual geriatric
patient in order to facilitate positive attitudes, perceptions, and effective
communication among healthcare workers in long-term care settings or hospitals.
Training that improves communication and fosters positive attitudes is important
to both the experience of healthcare workers and the well-being of patients.
This project will enable existing and future workers to engage in professional
learning opportunities to improve quality of life for both workers and
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to develop an Augmented
Reality/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) training with virtual patients where the
patient, an older adult, is represented digitally using 3 dimensional graphics
on a screen or head mounted display. CNAs will be interviewed to identify
workers’ needs and workplace challenges. The data from the CNA interviews will
be used to inform a new generation of human-like virtual patients (i.e., 3D
computer graphics models that have a human-like body and animations, are aware
of their surroundings and conversations, and are displayed in an immersive
environment) in order to develop relevant communications and attitudes training.
CNAs will care for a virtual geriatric patient in repeated encounters to
simulate and practice real-life interactions. The virtual patient remembers the
conversations and is aware of its surroundings, which increases the
interaction’s similarity to reality. Research will assess the feasibility and
usability of the technology, as well as CNA’s attitudes and
perceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.