* 2222220
* MCA: Environmental Drivers of Snow Algae Bloom Dynamics, Physiology, and Life-Cycles
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Robin Kodner, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 01/31/2026
* USD 265,680.00

Snow algae, a group of photosynthetic microorganisms that are adapted to live in
frozen habitats, are the major group of primary producers in alpine and polar
snow ecosystems. These organisms have complex life cycles intimately connected
to environmental conditions and seasonal habitat transformations. When snow
algae bloom on the top of snow, their high biomass darkens snowfields due to
red-colored protective pigments produced inside the algal cells. Snow algae
blooms increase melting of snow and glaciers, promoting more growth due to the
availability of liquid water, and resulting in a positive feedback loop. Despite
their ecological importance, we still do not know how blooms form. This project
is studying the dynamics of snow algae blooms by addressing the relationships
between snow algae physiology, growth and reproduction, and their environment
using field and laboratory-based experiments. This research is also providing a
primarily undergraduate institution with a new, powerful instrument for
simultaneously measuring photosynthesis and carbon fixation in algae that can be
used in the field and facilitate field-based experiments. The results of this
study build capacity for further studies that will help predict snow algal
environment-biology interactions into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
connection between snow algal bloom dynamics, life cycle, and environmental
conditions represents an opportunity to study ecosystem responses to climate
warming in a tractable system. This project lays the foundation for
characterizing the fundamentals of carbon fixation and primary productivity in
snow algal blooms. It also increases our understanding of the fundamental role
that snow algae physiology plays in the growth and reproduction of snow algae
across life stages adapted to different habitats. The proposed field and
laboratory methods will allow the development of an experimental design to
simultaneously measure habitat conditions, primary productivity, and carbon
fixation in natural populations and serves as a launch point for future studies
and continued collaboration. The snow algal system presents an opportunity to
study the evolution of climate-ecosystem feedbacks in environments threatened by
significant habitat loss over the next century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.