* 2222043
* EAGER: Electrically pumped transient charge-carrier dynamics of metal halide perovskite light-emitting diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Barry Rand, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2023
* USD 134,855.00

Metal halide perovskite light-emitting diodes (PeLEDs) hold potential for a new
generation of display and lighting technology, featuring high color quality,
energy efficiency and low manufacturing cost. Additionally, perovskites are
deposited from solution, meaning that they can be deposited on virtually any
substrate, including silicon. However, the slow operation speed of PeLEDs limits
their potential for a wider scope of applications, such as interchip and
intrachip optical communications, which are dominated by more expensive
technologies using III-V semiconductors. In this project, the PI proposes to
study transient charge-carrier dynamics of PeLEDs under ultrashort electrical
excitation. If successful, the proposed investigation will advance the
understanding of the intrinsic speed limitations in these materials, and can
begin in earnest for less well developed aspects of halide perovskite
optoelectronic applications, such as in optical communications integrated on-
chip. Currently, such applications are restricted due to unknowns regarding
perovskite LED switching speeds, and this proposed project will fill these
knowledge gaps. The research will strengthen technological leadership of the
U.S. and prepare the next generation of STEM graduates, including women and
underrepresented groups, to follow a STEM career. The PI will continue to engage
with the public and students, and is particularly involved in active learning
activities to establish role models across generational gaps. At the
undergraduate and graduate level, the PI will, via lectures, practical labs,
research and courses, stress applications and the benefits of science on society
and include guest lectures in order to inspire a new generation of STEM students
and allow students to see the rewards of a STEM
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probing transient charge-carrier dynamics in real
devices is important to understand their operation mechanisms. However, reported
studies on charge-carrier dynamics so far, as far as can be understood, have
been constrained by optical pumping. No studies have ever been conducted to
probe the transient charge carrier dynamics under electrical excitation, which
is closer to the real device operation conditions. On the other hand, electrical
excitation is considerably distinct from optical pumping, and this likely is due
to interface or bulk electrochemical processes that couple transport equations
with chemical processes. The proposed study will investigate transient charge-
carrier dynamics of PeLEDs under ultrashort electrical excitation and
investigate how additional electrochemical processes will cause the differences
between optical and electrical pumping with respect to recombination processes.
Then, the PI will investigate and understand how the various perovskite
compositions will influence the transient charge-carrier dynamics under
electrical pumping, and disclose dominant factors governing the transient device
response and make faster PeLEDs possible. Two scientific goals that will allow
for future applications are: 1) advancing the understanding of the intrinsic
speed limitations in PeLEDs; 2) a better appreciation for differences between
optical and electrical pumping with respect to recombination
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.