* 2222074
* Organotypic whole hemisphere models to probe structure-function in neurodevelopment and neurological disease
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Elizabeth Nance, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2026
* USD 443,766.00

The brain is our most complex organ and governs everything from cognition and
emotion to movement and stress response. Much of the brain’s function is
determined by interactions of cells with their surrounding local environment
within the brain. The precise interplay between brain microenvironment and brain
function is still not well-understood, limiting our ability to know when and how
changes in the brain microenvironment are compensatory, reparative, or
pathological. The proposed work develops a brain tissue platform to study the
changes in brain microstructure in different ages, sexes, brain regions, and in
response to different stimuli. Successful completion of the proposed work will
provide new insights into changes in the brain microenvironment that impact
function of cells in the brain and lead to disease onset or progression. Machine
learning application to the data generated via studying changes in brain
microstructure and function will be used to predict disease-dependent changes in
the brain. This research will also impact education and outreach through
development of validated open-source software that can be broadly applicable to
tissues other than the brain, other diseases, tissue probes, or
datasets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The interplay between brain microstructure and
brain function is still not well-understood, although connections between brain
microstructure and function are prospective markers for aging, neurological, and
psychiatric disorders. Investigating this relationship is challenging - the
brain microenvironment is dynamic and variable region to region within the
brain, and current imaging platforms are limited in spatial and temporal
resolution, in access to all brain regions, and in tailoring to different ages
or disease models using the same platform. To address these current limitations
and to provide greater insight into the spatiotemporal changes in
microstructure, the principal investigator will use an organotypic whole
hemisphere brain slice (OWH) platform that retains in vivo cellular and
extracellular parenchymal physiology, allows study of multiple brain regions in
a single slice, is responsive to different stimuli, and can be produced for
different ages and species. The investigator will use their established multiple
particle tracking (MPT) technology in a newly proposed OWH model of
neurodegeneration to study diffusion as a measure of microstructure and apply
molecular biology and functional assay tools to identify associated mechanisms
of microstructural changes. Expertise in machine learning model application to
MPT data will be used to build a neural network model to predict functional
disease state. The use of tailorable OWH brain slice models with MPT and
molecular biology tools will enable high spatiotemporal probing and
quantification of regional microstructure-function relationships in development
and in response to injury/insult. The proposed platform and integrated
technologies can find great utility throughout diverse fields, including
neurobiology, drug delivery and screening, neurological disease, tissue
engineering, and data sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.