* 2222572
* FW-HTF-R: DEMOLISHING BARRIERS TO DEMOCRATIZE FUTURE CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS BY PROVIDING MULTI SENSORY CAPABILITIES FOR EFFECTIVE REMOTE WORK
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Burcin Becerik-Gerber, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,799,999.00

Teleoperation (i.e., operating a machine from a distance outside the operator’s
line of sight) is an emerging technology in construction that has many potential
benefits, such as increasing workplace safety and engaging a more diverse
workforce. There is limited understanding of how to implement teleoperation
effectively and safely into dynamic construction worksites despite increasing
adoption in practice. Teleoperation will require new skills for construction
workers, especially regarding the use of computers and more complex interfaces
to control the machines. Moreover, given that construction workers spend almost
no time in front of a computer in traditional construction settings, impacts on
physical and cognitive well-being must be considered when teleoperation is
implemented. The project aims to fill this knowledge gap by focusing on what
sensory information is required for teleoperated demolition work in construction
and by developing a validated worker-centric workstation by examining how
sensory features should be modified to promote effective, safe, and healthy work
environment for different tasks and diverse workers (e.g., female workers,
differently abled workers, older workers). A primary intellectual contribution
of the project will be a stakeholder-engagement methodology for developing or
selecting technology that will improve upon current practice of adopting new
technology out of hand until there is a problem or accident. The project has
potential to improve teleoperation in construction and revolutionize the field
by increasing workplace safety by reducing fatalities and severe injuries,
improving workers’ quality of life by eliminating long commutes or extended
stays away from home, engaging a more diverse workforce by inclusion of
traditionally marginalized groups in construction and increasing the
competitiveness of American construction companies in international markets by
allowing operations using an in-house workforce. The project will also enhance
the infrastructure for research and education by incorporating findings into the
curriculum across multiple disciplines and disseminating findings via
publications, presentations, and other media. It will also involve
underrepresented students in research, which will encourage diversity in science
by encouraging these students to pursue careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and validate a sensory-
enhanced teleoperation workstation for demolition work in construction, while
validating a stakeholder-engaged process for addressing emerging needs of
increasingly diverse workers, workplaces, and work within the construction
industry. The stakeholder-engaged process will be facilitated by ongoing
collaboration with an advisory panel and direct involvement of construction
workers in development, testing, and feedback. First, the advisory panel will
assist in identifying features required in sensory-enhanced workstation to best
support real-world work contexts and tasks (Task 1). The advisory panel and
demolition workers will be involved pilot testing combinations and types of
sensory features in a development phase (Task 2), and up to 90 construction
workers will participate in a randomized trial to test a prototype sensory-
enhanced workstation versus a standard workstation (Task 3a). Participants will
operate a demolition robot to interact with structural and non-structural
elements with different ground conditions and slopes. Operator skills,
demolition skills, safety behaviors, and ergonomic factors will be examined.
User experience with the sensory-enhanced workstation and adaptations for “just-
right” sensory feedback during different types of demolition tasks will be
examined in a user experience study (Task 3b). A series of stakeholder focus
groups will generate insight into the facilitators, challenges, and
opportunities for the implementation of sensory-augmented teleoperation in
construction work, as well as how adaptions needed to increase diversity in the
construction workforce (Task 4). The advisory panel will assist in interpreting
the trial, user experience, and focus group findings to develop ideas for
widespread implementation of teleoperation and adoption of the stakeholder-
engaged process for the construction industry to support technology
implementation in construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.