* 2222293
* Learning through Failure: Exploring how Setbacks in Science in the Context of Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences can Lead to Self-knowledge and Resilience
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Sandhya Krishnan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral research
fellowship project seeks to redefine what it means to fail in the sciences
through investigating the potential for failure to be seen as a positive
experience that results in increased learning for undergraduate science
students. The investigator will implement a large-scale study that pursues three
lines of inquiry. First is to investigate how failure may lead to science
learning in an undergraduate research setting. Second is to examine what
strategies instructors use to discuss and support students during failures.
Third is to identify how those interactions may impact students’ resilience and
approach to future science challenges. The project will inform the redesign of
science curricula to help students learn more through the process of scientific
failure. It will also inform how to support students’ growth as creative and
critical thinkers, to expand the scope of success beyond their being good test-
takers. More broadly, building student resilience will directly support the
development of a globally competitive and diverse workforce consisting of
scientists who can navigate failures thoughtfully to find creative solutions
when tackling global challenges such as pandemics and climate change. In
addition to conducting research, the investigator proposes to build professional
self-competencies in quantitative research and analysis, mentoring students,
teaching, and networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
study students’ experiences of research-based failure in course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) to better understand how these
experiences can impact student learning and development of positive
intrapersonal attributes. Intrapersonal constructs contributing to resilience,
such as fear of failure, goal orientation, student-instructor trust, and coping
are non-cognitive attributes that are known to impact the undergraduate learning
experience, persistence, and success in STEM. These attributes are also highly
likely to be influenced by students’ failure experiences. The investigator will
recruit CURE students from diverse institutions such as predominantly
undergraduate institutions, community colleges, and research-intensive
institutions, to participate across four semesters in this two-year mixed-
methods study. The investigator will integrate quantitative and qualitative
approaches to develop and test a novel explanatory model of how the above
intrapersonal constructs may change through experiences of research-based
failure in CUREs. Quantitative approaches will include binary logistic
regression models, and qualitative study will include multiple analytical
approaches such as hermeneutic methodology to deeply examine students’
experiences. The integration of quantitative and qualitative work as part of the
mixed methods design will yield a richer understanding of students’ failure
experiences that will enable explanation of both current trends and predict
future ones. Through the focus on failure, the project could elucidate the
circumstances in which failure contributes to STEM attrition and help explain
what supports and resources would support vulnerable populations of students in
navigating failure experiences. This knowledge could be used to develop
interventions to mitigate the psychosocial impact of failure while
simultaneously creating opportunities for constructive epistemological
“failures.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.