* 2222450
* I-Corps: Data-Driven Robust Optimization Technology for Battery Storage System Management
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Grani Adiwena Hanasusanto, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a data-driven, distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
methodology to address real-life decision problems under uncertainty arising in
energy systems with renewable integration. Specifically, the proposed technology
implements the DRO model to optimize battery storage unit operations in
residential areas equipped with rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. The
model is designed to minimize the long-run electricity costs under uncertain
electricity usage, photovoltaic engery generation, and electricity prices. The
technology will be integrated into an intelligent home system that automatically
controls the optimal battery storage unit operation and electricity purchase
decisions, and will be implemented in the embedded controller unit to enable
real-time decisions. The aim of the project is to establish the feasibility and
verify the real-world performance of the proposed DRO model, particularly in the
field of energy systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of new models and algorithms for residential photovoltaic
(PV)-battery system operations using the distributionally robust optimization
(DRO) paradigm. The proposed scheme automatically controls the operation of the
battery storage unit to optimally determine when to store the excess amount of
PV generation or to discharge the stored amount to satisfy the household energy
demand. Prior systems unrealistically assumed a known probabilistic description
for the uncertain electricity prices, PV generation, and energy consumption. In
most real-life situations, this description is never available. The decision-
makers only have access to historical data that may be used to infer the
underlying probabilistic description. The DRO scheme addresses this fundamental
shortcoming by first constructing a set of plausible distributions consistent
with the available information and then optimizes for battery storage operations
that perform best for all distributions in the set, safely anticipating
potentially adverse outcomes. The proposed scheme may mitigate overfitting to
the data and yield high-quality battery operations in out-of-sample
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.