* 2222328
* ORCC: Determining the synergistic effects of global warming on tropical insect herbivore fundamental vital rates, fitness, and predation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Carlos Garcia-Robledo, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2025
* USD 606,102.00

Predicting how organisms will respond to novel temperatures remains one of the
main conceptual challenges in ecology. Identifying the principles involved in
population persistence or extinction in novel temperature environments is also
an urgent conservation issue, as all organisms on earth are facing rapidly
changing climates. One group of organisms facing extinctions are tropical
insects. Current extinction models are based on physiological responses, which
invariably overestimate thermal tolerance. To more accurately estimate
organismal responses to future temperatures, this study will determine the
effects of temperature on insect survival, fecundity, and the speed at which
populations will grow or decline. Using a well-studied group of insect
herbivores in a tropical rain forest, this proposed research will determine the
synergistic effects of diet and temperature on population growth in insects with
generalist and specialist diets. An even more ambitious goal of this project is
to determine the indirect effects of global warming on insect herbivore fitness
through interactions with predators and parasitoids. This study will improve our
knowledge on how global warming will indirectly affect populations by disrupting
the connections among organisms in the web of life. A broader impact of this
project is the integration of concepts and discoveries in two online educational
modules. These modules will be used during workshops in the field, where
undergraduate students will learn concepts and explore methodologies related to
the estimation of biotic responses to global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the fact that extinction is a demographic
process, our understanding of the direct consequences of global warming on
insect survival, longevity, fecundity, and fitness is extremely limited. An
additional complexity is that warming most likely will concomitantly affect the
abundance and composition of predators and parasitoids. Young leaves of plants
in the order Zingiberales – the banana-like plants – form rolled-leaf habitats,
which are colonized by herbivores in the genus Cephaloleia (Chrysomelidae:
Coleoptera) and their associated predators and parasitoids. This research
focuses on the direct and indirect effects of warming on fitness in generalist
and specialist Cephaloleia herbivores associated with Zingiberales. Using an
experimental demography approach for ten insect species, this study will
determine if generalist herbivores are more resilient to warming than
specialists. If this scenario is true, insect communities will become dominated
by generalist species. Heating experiments in the field will determine if
predators are less tolerant to increasing temperatures than their prey, and if
warming will generate enemy free space for herbivores. If warming reduces prey
abundance, warming will generate trophic cascades. Demographic models will
integrate the effects of temperature and diet on fundamental vital rates, and
the effect of predation on population growth for each herbivore species. This
study addresses one of the least understood effects of global warming: the role
of biotic interactions in organismal responses to climate change. The resulting
models will increase our predictive power to determine at which temperatures
insect populations will reach tipping points to
extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.