* 2222928
* EAGER: CAS-Climate: Revitalizing Iron Hydroxide Electrode for Energy-Efficient Green Batteries by Promoting Ferrous- and Ferric- Hydroxides Redox
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Xiaowei Teng, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 201,681.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Xiaowei Teng of the Department of
Chemical Engineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute is developing new
classes of iron hydroxide layered materials with interesting redox properties.
This research aims to exploit the characteristics of iron hydroxide layered
materials, which can be used as the anode in iron-nickel alkaline batteries or
iron-air alkaline batteries. The project lies at the interface of inorganic
material, materials chemistry, and energy storage and is therefore well suited
for the education of scientists at all levels. This project enhances education
and outreach efforts by this group to increase scientific engagement and
participation from underrepresented groups through a range of activities aimed
at the public, high school students and teachers, undergraduate students, and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the fourth most abundant element in
the earth's crust, iron (Fe) potentially satisfies nearly all criteria for a
green battery, such as various oxidation states, geographic accessibility, low
cost, and environmental benefits. However, Fe anode materials face challenges in
modern energy supply systems due to insufficient charging efficiency and poor
discharge capability. Notably, the discharge of Fe(OH)2 forms Fe3O4, which
impedes the redox process and causes cyclability loss. This project aims to
probe the interplay between layered Fe(OH)2 material with anion (e.g.,
carbonate) and water molecules to answer the following questions: 1) how to
control the local structure (e.g., structural defect) and long-range order
(e.g., interlayer distance) of Fe(OH)2 materials to favor the reversible
insertion and extraction of the divalent anions (carbonate)? 2) how does the
anion insertion into Fe(OH)2 interlayer region impact the oxidation state of Fe
species to encourage the Fe2+/Fe3+ complete conversion by FeOOH formation and
discourage Fe3O4 formation? 3) how to control the interaction between Fe(OH)2,
anion, and water molecules to maintain a stable layered structure during the
long-term cycling?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.