* 2222427
* Interdisciplinary Research on New Immigration and Curricula Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Amber Reed, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,736.00

Social studies classrooms play a critical role in teaching students about
countries outside of their home country, and yet there is very little
comprehensive information on what and how students learn about the home
countries of new immigrants. This project investigates how lessons about the
home countries and regions of new immigrants are taught to students in the
country that receives these new immigrants. The PIs use a city with a rich
history of both immigration and civil rights activism to situate their case
study that examines the sociological and anthropological implications of
incorporating lessons about new immigrants' home countries into pedagogical
practices of the classroom. Additionally, the project will investigate the
impact of an interdisciplinary methods workshop at four historical black
colleges/universities (HBCUs) that will bring researchers from across the
country to collaborate and exchange methodological
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses interdisciplinary methods
to assess the following: 1) how lessons on the home countries and regions of new
immigrants are designed and articulated in the middle school curricula of the
country that receives these new immigrants; 2) how teachers actually present
this material in their middle school classrooms; 3) how students are receive
lessons on these countries and regions; and 4) the impact of an
interdisciplinary workshop on undergraduate students at three minority-serving
institutions. Both qualitative and quantitative methods, including interviews,
surveys, and ethnography, will be used to address these research questions. This
project will advance knowledge in the fields of sociology, anthropology, and
education. It will also provide research training and scientific publishing
opportunities for underrepresented students at an all-women's MSI and foster
interdisciplinary collaborations among faculty at three other MSIs. The research
will contribute to broader national conversations on inclusion and curricula,
and will be disseminated nationally through the development of curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.