* 2222610
* Incorporating Quantitative Analysis and Digital Database Use in Structure and Tectonics Research and Teaching: Proposal for a Summer School
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 99,798.00

Meeting society’s tectonics-related challenges will require that the next
generation of professional geologist to be far more quantitatively and
computationally literate than past generations. The ever-increasing amount of
digital geologic data available via the internet, such as digital elevation
models, earthquake data, digital geological data (e.g., StraboSpot digital data
system), etc., is transforming the science. Quantitative skills are critical for
all aspects of research in the 21st century, as is basic facility in data
manipulation. To address this demand, we need to develop high-quality
instructional material on quantitative reasoning, computer modeling, data
analysis, and digital mapping. The grant supports two seven-day summer schools,
to be taught in summer 2024 and 2025. The summer schools will focus on teaching
quantitative methods and computing skills in structural geology and tectonics.
The target audience are junior faculty, as the instructors aim to “teach the
teachers”, although post-doctoral fellows and advanced graduate students will
also be included. The same material presented in the summer schools will be
subsequently covered in publicly available internet videos, to further
disseminate the results. This proposal is aimed at facilitating participation,
by an entire scientific community, in the digital revolution taking place in the
sciences and throughout society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator and associated faculty will offer field courses during two
consecutive summers, following a summer of preparation. Summer School Year 1
(2024) will be focused on vector and linear algebra, and Summer School Year 2
(2025) will be focused on spatial statistics. Attendees will learn by doing,
rather than by passively listening, with educational activities that involve
collection and analysis of their own data at a field location in eastern
California. The mobile technologies to be used by the participants are improving
efficiencies for field mapping, and will enhance their knowledge of how to
maximize the learning of new mobile methods and field strategies that will be
the norm for the next generation of professional geoscientists. Two webinars
that will run the following summer and videos of the recorded lectures will
allow broad dissemination of the materials beyond the participants of the summer
school. The grant also funds two graduate students to be teaching assistants for
these summer schools, thus facilitating their professional development in an
important STEM discipline relevant to societal needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.