* 2222495
* Tools4Cells:EAGER: CRYO-EM ANALYSIS OF THE CHLOROPLAST CLP PROTEASE SYSTEM THROUGH AFFINITY PURIFICATION OF ENDOGENOUS COMPLEXES
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Klaas van Wijk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Protein-protein interactions and protein complexes are critical for cellular
viability. Single particle cryogenic electron microscopy (Cryo-EM) has
accelerated the pace of high-resolution structure determination of these nano-
size protein complexes. Cryo-EM has mostly been used on protein complexes
generated in bacterial expression systems to obtain large amount of these
proteins for Cryo-EM analysis. However, structural analysis of complexes
obtained from their natural environment would be beneficial since these
represent the most natural state of the complex. Indeed, the few examples of
Cryo-EM of endogenous complexes (i.e. complexes obtained from their
physiological environment) is limited to proteins of high relative abundance.
Successful tool development and application of Cryo-EM to low abundant
endogenous complexes affinity purified from its natural cellular environment
will greatly impact biological discoveries, including for plants such as
Arabidopsis thaliana. This project is focused on structural analysis of the Clp
protease-chaperone system in chloroplasts of Arabidopsis thaliana. This Clp
system is central in chloroplast protein homeostasis; insufficient Clp activity
is detrimental to the plant. The proposed research will unravel the structural
details of this unique plastid Clp chaperone-protease system and help understand
its evolutionary adaptation to the chloroplast environment. The Broader Impacts
of the work include the intrinsic merit resulting from the biological importance
of the protease system, as well as the potential application of the developed
methodology for other projects which require structural data from low abundant
endogenous complexes in plants. Additionally, the project will provide training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to determine the structural organization by Cryo-EM of the
endogenous Arabidopsis chloroplast ~1000 kDa Clp protease-chaperone complex
(ClpPRTC) consisting of a tetradecameric barrel-shaped protease (P,R,T subunits)
that dynamically associates with hexameric chaperone rings (C and D subunits).
The full complex is stabilized by WalkerB mutations and will be affinity
purified from transgenic Arabidopsis plants followed by Cryo-EM. These
(sub)complexes cannot be obtained by heterologous (e.g. E. coli) overexpression
because more than a dozen subunits need to be assembled in the right order and
stoichiometries, involving also post-translational modifications and protein
activators. This project is built on extensive prior investments in biological
materials (transgenic Arabidopsis plant lines expressing affinity-tagged ClpP3,
ClpP5, ClpR4, ClpT1,2 and ClpC1-TRAP) and expertise in chloroplast protein
biochemistry, mass spectrometry and Cryo-EM. Since the Clp complex is of very
moderate abundance (~100x lower than the Rubisco holocomplex), demonstration
that one can determine its 3D structure by Cryo-EM will have a big impact on
plant research because it demonstrates that one does not need to use
overexpression of protein complexes in heterologous systems. Furthermore,
chloroplast proteolysis and protein homeostasis are critical in plant stress
response, agriculture and molecular farming and synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.