* 2222518
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Carbon fixation in future oceans: experimental adaptation of algal and cyanobacterial CO2-concentrating mechanisms to a changing climate
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Sarah Hurley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 713,951.00

Photosynthetic marine microorganisms, or phytoplankton, use carbon dioxide to
build their biomass. When phytoplankton die and sink, they transfer this carbon
to the deep ocean, sequestering it away from the atmosphere. This process, known
as the biological pump, has tempered the effect of climate change through the
absorption of anthropogenic carbon dioxide. The efficiency of the biological
pump – and the ocean’s continued ability to absorb carbon dioxide in the future
– will depend on the ability of different phytoplankton groups to adapt to
effects of climate change, such as warming and acidification. In order to
quantify how the cumulative effects of subcellular processes will determine the
amount of carbon dioxide phytoplankton use in future oceans, this research tests
the adaptability of different phytoplankton groups to the expected conditions in
year 2100 and year 2500 oceans. This project will train a postdoctoral
researcher, a Ph.D. student, four summer undergraduate interns, and support the
professional development of a female, first-time investigator, and early career
researcher in collaboration with a senior scientist. The work will promote
innovative solutions to societal challenges through the operation and
improvement of a national mentoring program designed to increase diversity in
climate related fields by providing students interested in pursuing graduate
degrees in climate and Earth sciences with mentors to support their career
development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Carbon fixation in today’s oceans proceeds
through CO2-concentration mechanisms (CCMs) that improve the efficiency of
carbon fixation by increasing CO2 concentrations at site of carbon fixation.
CCMs have evolved independently within different groups of phytoplankton
resulting in distinct types of CCMs with convergent functions. Continued
anthropogenic CO2 emissions are forcing phytoplankton to adapt to the impacts of
climatic change at an accelerating pace. Individual components of CCMs are known
to respond to the effects of climate change including pH, the concentration of
dissolve inorganic carbon, and temperature. The cumulative response of CCMs at
the subcellular level represents the organismal response of phytoplankton to
climate change, with direct implications for the efficiency of carbon fixation
in future oceans. The primary goal of this project is to quantify the adaptive
response of CCMs to the selective drivers of climate change through the
experimental evolution of five phytoplankton groups with distinct CCMs,
including a diatom, dinoflagellate, green alga, coccolithophore, and a
cyanobacterium. Specific project objectives include 1) quantify the plastic and
adaptive carbon fixation response of relevant marine phytoplankton to multiple
‘year 2100’ climate change stressors; 2) quantify the plastic and adaptive
carbon fixation response of relevant marine phytoplankton to multiple climate
change stressors in an extreme (‘year 2500’) scenario; and 3) resolve how the
subcellular components contribute to the organismal CCM response of
phytoplankton that underlies the ecosystem-scale impact of carbon fixation in
future oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.