* 2222815
* FW-HTF-R: US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: ARISE: Assembly and Robotics Innovation in Steel Building Erection
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Arturo Schultz, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier Research (FW-HTF-R) grant
will promote science and national health, prosperity and welfare by considering
the Intermeshed Steel Connection (ISC) as new quick, snap together connection to
construct buildings with the existing work force and possibly on-site robotics.
The research unites micro-economists, robotics experts, and computer scientists
with structural engineers and site-safety leaders in the United States, Northern
Ireland, and the Republic of Ireland. This tri-partite team will consider the
introduction of a new structural steel connection through the multiple lenses of
design, manufacturing, distribution, erection, and performance with respect to
cost, safety, schedule, and sustainability metrics. The project critically
considers two seminal questions: “What are the technical and human prerequisites
and optimal conditions for automation of structural steel assembly in the
field?” and “What is the best market entry point for such a disruptive
connection?”, in light of the fundamental mismatch between the decision makers,
the payees, and the beneficiaries in most large construction projects. Finally,
this activity offers an innovative outreach program with broad-based technical
dissemination through webinars and workshops, and educational outreach for K-12
students by means of national-level, student
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant seeks to reap the benefits from
advanced manufacturing, robotic assembly, and artificial intelligence (AI) for
on-site steel building erection. Automating robotic site erection requires a
rethinking of educational and training systems, technology dependence, and
safety due to the closer proximity and interactions between humans and machines.
The micro-economics behind this new connection and erection approach will also
need to be rethought with respect to economies of scale and needed skills. This
will be done by developing a quantitative model of technology adoption and
diffusion; identifying educational, economic, and technical needs in the
structural steel sector; creating accurate, validated numerical models that
characterize the non-linear behavior of ISC column-to-column connections under
various load combinations; developing a knowledge base on ISC connection design
and performance, including physical data for column-to-column connections;
evaluating performance using a full-size building testbed; documenting safety,
ergonomics, and productivity factors observed through multiple assembly and
disassembly of full-size frames; identifying viable routes to on-site
construction automation including the influence of high erection tolerances and
use of autonomous robots equipped with cameras and AI-based perception; and
using virtual reality and augmented reality to develop Computer Vision and AI
training to control a Robotic Manipulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.