* 2222647
* Human Tutoring Augmented by Artificial Intelligence (AI): A Tutoring Analytics and Performance Support Model to Improve the Work and Professional Growth of Future Tutors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* James Martin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

This research project addresses the urgent national need to dramatically enlarge
the tutoring workforce, which is primarily comprised of paraprofessionals with
limited formal training as educators. Human tutoring has been repeatedly shown
to produce large impacts on student learning, and is now poised to become a core
structural part of daily schooling. Tutors can play an important role in
addressing widening achievement and opportunity gaps as well as in attending to
students’ increased social-emotional needs. As the tutoring workforce expands,
new technologies and professional learning models will be critical to preserve
and enhance tutoring's learning benefits for students, including students from
historically marginalized groups and low socio-economic backgrounds. This
project will develop an AI-augmented professional support model for on-the-job
training that centers personalized, data-driven feedback in order to enhance
tutors’ practices as well as their professional growth. This project will
contribute vital new knowledge towards building capacity for tutors to provide
high quality instruction to all students and for tutoring to serve as a pathway
into education professions, potentially helping to address the dire national
shortage of qualified teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together an interdisciplinary team of researchers from the University of
Colorado Boulder working with practitioner partners from Saga Education. The
former group has expertise in deep learning for speech and language processing,
human-computer interaction, mathematics education, teacher learning and
coaching, educational policy, and behavioral science. Complementing these
perspectives, the latter group offers extensive experience in developing,
organizing, and supporting mathematics tutoring programs in Title I public
schools. The specific work context for this research will be an existing in-
school, mathematics tutoring program provided by Saga Education. The project
will develop and study an innovative tutoring analytics system, along with a
toolkit that supports the learning of effective pedagogical skills as tutors
engage in their everyday work. The system will enhance tutors’ pedagogical and
relational skills by providing near-real-time feedback on the discourse
strategies they use when working with students. More specifically, deep learning
models will be used to automatically analyze tutor-student dialogues and
recognize important discursive events. Multimodal feedback interfaces will
provide tutors with personalized information related to each tutoring session.
This multilayered approach will also include resources that support tutors’ and
supervising coaches’ use of the feedback for reflective noticing and goal-
setting during professional learning sessions. Research will investigate the
extent to which this model changes the nature of work (tutoring interactions and
practices) and leads to the professionalization of workers (tutor efficacy and
work engagement).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been funded by the
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to
promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing the design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.