* 2222174
* Identifying the Role of Mind Wandering in Stress Related Changes in Executive Attention and Inflammation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Banks, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

The ability to sustain attention is impaired by chronic stress. Chronic stress
also results in inflammation in the immune system. Thus, chronic stress is
likely to impact multiple bodily systems, from psychological to biological, in
ways that are only partially understood. This research project uses theoretical
insights from cognitive psychology to shed light on the precise relationships
among chronic stress, cognition, and inflammation among individuals who
experience a variety of day-to-day stressors. It further analyzes whether and
how mindfulness mediates the relationships between stress and inflammation and
between stress and attention. It trains students at a minority-serving
institution, disseminates results broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences, and provides insights that are relevant to clinical health
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project collects measures of stress,
cognition, and inflammation during multiple time periods, including a baseline,
low-stress period and one associated with an ecologically valid chronic stressor
to investigate the following hypotheses: 1) the impact of chronic stress on
measures of executive attention and inflammation is mediated by rates of
negatively valenced, off-task thoughts; 2) higher rates of mindfulness and
baseline measures of executive attention predict reduced negatively valenced
mind wandering during stress, reducing the effects of stress on executive
attention and inflammation; and 3) individual differences at baseline will
predict rates of mindfulness and mind wandering, affecting the degree to which
these mediate relationships between stress and inflammation. The findings from
this study provide a missing link between the impact of chronic stress on
cognitive functioning and inflammation and identify factors that can be used in
interventions seeking to limit the negative impacts of chronic stress on health
and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.