* 2222247
* Wayfinding in Children: Developmental Pathways, Supporting Cognitive Processes, and Gender Differences
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yingying Yang, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2025
* USD 335,050.00

Wayfinding is critical to everyday existence. Although it begins to develop
early in childhood, mastery is achieved at different ages and the pathways by
which mastery is achieved differ among children in relation to gender,
neurological profiles, and other characteristics. While general pathways are
well described, how heterogeneity in child development contributes to mastery is
less understood. This project provides a more complete cognitive model of
wayfinding development in children by studying how it develops among children
with diverse social and demographic characteristics. The project contributes to
broadening capacity for research at a minority-serving institution, trains
graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented populations, and
disseminates results broadly to academic and public audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on four research questions: 1) Do
wayfinding skills develop sequentially in stages or in overlapping or parallel
ways? 2) How well do virtual-reality wayfinding skills capture the development
of wayfinding in ecologically valid environments? 3) What roles do verbal and
spatial processes in children play in the development of wayfinding skills? 4)
What roles do gender and other social and demographic characteristics play in
how wayfinding unfolds across development? To investigate these questions, the
investigators recruit children from ages 6-10 with varying social and
demographic backgrounds to complete wayfinding tasks in virtual-reality and
real-life environments. The children further complete a series of cognitive
tasks that measure verbal and spatial skills that allow investigators to examine
the relationships among socio-demographic characteristics and verbal, spatial,
and wayfinding development. The research provides a much-needed, holistic
understanding of the development of a life skill that is critical to ordinary
functioning across livelihood domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.