* 2222272
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: The role of adaptive plasticity in coral response to climate change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Carly Kenkel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 767,109.00

Climate change threatens populations because an organism’s physical
characteristics, or phenotype, may be ill-suited to new conditions. Ultimately,
whether organisms persist or go extinct will depend on their ability to shift
their phenotypes in an adaptive direction. For long-lived, broadly dispersing
organisms that experience predictable environmental fluctuations, like coral,
plasticity, or phenotypic changes produced within an individual’s lifetime, is
predicted to play a significant role in the response to climate change. This
project aims to address key questions on the causes and consequences of
phenotypic plasticity in a foundational Caribbean coral species, Acropora
cervicornis. Knowledge of the role of phenotypic plasticity in driving the
success of coral transplants is also essential information for reef
practitioners and managers working to conserve and restore reefs. This is
because the restoration of reef ecosystems in US jurisdictional waters and the
broader Caribbean relies heavily on clonal or “vegetative” propagation of select
coral genotypes, or genetically unique individuals, which are then transplanted
to new environments. Through direct collaboration with one of the leading reef
restoration organizations in the world, Mote Marine Laboratory, results of this
work will be applied to ongoing restoration of reefs in the Florida Keys, USA.
Findings will also be communicated to the broader stakeholder community through
the PIs' roles in various advisory groups. Finally, the project will directly
involve high school students, undergraduates and graduate students in primary
data collection and translation of this work, providing opportunities for
education, training and broader community engagement with coral science and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to generate quantitative
empirical data on the role of morphological plasticity in the eco-evolutionary
dynamics of a foundation species in nature. Clonal replicates of A. cervicornis
genotypes that are known to exhibit variation in their capacity for plasticity
will be used to: (1) Investigate the mechanistic basis of adaptive morphological
plasticity through a lab-based water flow manipulation experiment to test the
hypothesis that variation in morphological plasticity is driven by underlying
changes in calcification and fine-scale structural variation in skeletal
deposition; (2) Quantify costs and/or trade-offs that may limit the evolution of
morphological plasticity through a combination of field and lab-based
experiments testing for context-dependent trade-offs in the response to climate
stressors (temperature and acidification) and reproductive investment; and (3)
Evaluate the ecological consequences of plasticity at the community and
ecosystem levels by creating A. cervicornis reefs that differ in their capacity
for morphological plasticity and quantifying changes in the resulting
composition and diversity of fish and invertebrate communities, as well as the
function of the reefs in terms of their production and calcification. Taken
together, this work will fill an empirical gap in our understanding of
plasticity and its role in climate adaptation through investigating the effects
on environmental adaptation across levels of biological
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.