* 2222337
* The Science and Mathematics Education Research Collaborative Postdoctoral Program
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,248,524.00

This project will support a cohort of postdoctoral fellows within the Science
and Mathematics Education Research Collaborative (SMERC), an interdisciplinary
group of STEM education researchers from physics, biology, mathematics,
chemistry, science communication, and engineering at the Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT). The postdoctoral fellows will work with mentors on a wide
range of interdisciplinary research topics, and participate in professional
development that includes research, classroom practice, and community
involvement activities. The research and professional development opportunities
are designed to help the postdoctoral fellows develop the knowledge and skills
to conduct foundational research in STEM education. The interdisciplinary focus
of the program will also help to bring together researchers from different
disciplines, breaking down traditional academic silos and thus better preparing
the fellows to conduct interdisciplinary STEM education research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A distinguishing feature of this postdoctoral training
effort is its commitment to developing an interdisciplinary community of STEM
education scholars. Research and professional development activities include
opportunities for fellows to participate in research projects from a variety of
single- and multi-disciplinary topics, to work with mentors from various
disciplines, to gain knowledge of and skill with a variety of research methods
(e.g., quantitative stochastic modeling and network analysis of large
institutional data sets, and various qualitative methods), to participate in
existing RIT affiliated programs that share SMERCâ€™s core interdisciplinary
philosophy, and to gain teaching knowledge and skills working with faculty
instructors. The program also serves to build significant capacity for the RIT
to develop into a regional hub of discipline-based education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program, which is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.