* 2222327
* Geographies of Migration and (In)Security
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Marie Price, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,155.00

The goal of the project is to tackle the complex challenges created by the
increase in the number of refugee-migrants. This phenomenon has led to the
tightening of national border policies to deter and exclude refugee-migrants,
and increased violence as organized crime responds to shifting policies. By
engaging border patrol and refugee-migrants on both sides of the border, the
team will examine how recent and changing policies have radically transformed
the border and impacted migrant patterns and vulnerability to organized crime.
The research team will utilize findings and research to shape future policies
that will reduce violence and crime while maximizing human rights and protection
for people on both sides of the border. While integrating graduate research
assistants in the project, PIs will collect data on both sides of the border,
map migrant journeys, document aspects of organized crime, and incorporate a
service-learning component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses border
security through a focus on organized crime and migrant vulnerability via
innovative, policy-oriented research that engages with policy makers at the
nation's capital and with those impacted by changing policies and shifting
responses of organized crime at borders. It will contribute to the fields of
feminist geopolitics, migration and border studies, and critical security
studies through four key innovations: (1) leveraging new developments in
geospatial technologies to map and narrate migrant journeys (2) contributing to
migration and refugee studies by unveiling root causes of (in)security and the
(un)intended consequences of asylum policy that has reproduced precarity and
vulnerability for migrants, (3) examining how policies of expulsion are
reshaping borders in materials ways, and (4) contributing to critical security
studies by analyzing how asylum policies of expulsion empower organized crime
and paradoxically threaten national security
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.