* 2222524
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: LIVING WITH EXTREMES - PREDICTING ECOLOGICAL AND EVOLUTIONARY RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN A HIGH-ALTITUDE ALPINE SONGBIRD
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Erika Zavaleta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,179.00

The ability of wildlife to cope with climate change depends on the capacity to
do one or more of three things: move to suitable areas, adapt through evolution,
or adjust behavior and physiology. Climate change can force mountaintop wildlife
onto an “escalator to extinction” as temperatures rise, because no higher-
elevation options exist. This project examines how two related mountaintop
songbirds, the Brown-capped Rosy-Finch and the Sierra Nevada Gray-Crowned Rosy-
Finch, have combined these strategies to specialize and persist in extreme
alpine environments over time. It uses museum specimens to establish a pre-
climate change baseline and field surveys to explore how current coping
strategies vary across the high-elevation range of each songbird. The project
integrates these findings with climate change projections to forecast future
responses through an integrated statistical model incorporating movement,
evolutionary, and behavior changes such as shifts in annual timing of parenting
and diet. Absence of basic information about Rosy-Finches (RF) currently hinders
management by state and federal agencies. The project will deliver tailored
reports and data products to partner agencies in the western United States to
enable uptake of findings and model approaches into decision-making. The project
will also provide summer field research internships to four undergraduate
students each year through the UCSC Doris Duke Conservation Scholars Program and
Center to Advance Mentored, Inquiry-based Opportunities (CAMINO), which serve
students from marginalized backgrounds in STEM, and train a graduate student and
two postdoctoral fellows as scientists and effective mentors for diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While reports of extirpations and range
contractions in high-altitude species are increasingly widespread, less
attention has been paid to the potential roles of gene flow and local adaptation
in extinction avoidance, and of behavioral responses that could both allow
individuals to cope and influence their eco-evolutionary responsiveness.
Correspondingly, while the methodology for determining the capacity for range
shifts through species distribution modeling has developed steadily over the
last several decades, the ability to incorporate the capacity for adaptation,
plasticity, and distributional shifts into a unified framework for forecasting
species responses to environmental change remains limited. The integration of
statistical, genomic, and ecological approaches across two Rosy-Finch subspecies
will address fundamental eco-evolutionary questions: How does natural selection
operate across space and time to constrain species distributions? What are the
roles of ecological and evolutionary constraints on climate change response in
extreme-environment specialists? The project will integrate spatial data with
historical data from museum specimens to build a mechanistic, hierarchical model
of genetic, phenotypic, and ecological responses to climate change and feedbacks
among them. The work will also help identify biomarkers for understanding
climate tolerance across high-alpine bird specialists. Finally, the project will
inform Rosy-Finch as well as broader wildlife management under climate change by
refining tools to forecast species distributions and abundances and including
spatial and temporal organismal variation in considering management
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.