* 2222630
* STTR Phase II:  Probabilistic and Explainable Deep Learning for the Intuitive Predictive Maintenance of Industrial and Agricultural Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Andrew Zimmerman, PERCEV LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II is to improve schedule-based maintenance programs to
ensure that industrial and farming equipment can function 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week. The downtime associated with such high productivity equipment can result
in significant lost revenue, and research shows that the average manufacturer
deals with 800 hours of downtime per year. The proposed technology seeks to
effectively reduce or eliminate this downtime, creating value for manufacturers.
This project proposes a novel deep learning approach to predicting bearing
failure in rotating industrial equipment and enable maintenance teams to
confidently plan optimal maintenance activities around equipment that is in the
process of degrading. This solution also aims to cost-effectively use a patented
methodology to monitor industrial material handling systems with a combination
of stationary and mobile battery-powered wireless
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase II project proposes a novel deep learning approach to machinery
prognostics. Many existing deep learning approaches focus on the most likely
failure scenarios given a set of training data. Monitored equipment may not
exbibit behavior covered in that training set, leading to low-confidence
predictions. The proposed approach may not only predict the remaining useful
life of a machine component, but also seeks to quantify the uncertainty of a
prediction through an ensemble of models and a temporal fusion of predictions.
As a result, maintenance decisions may be made from a risk-based perspective,
eliminating unnecessary maintenance stemming from low-confidence predictions.
Additionally, many existing deep learning approaches also lack the ability to
intuitively explain their predictions to human users. In critical applications
where poor predictions have serious consequences, maintenance personnel must
understand and trust an artificially intelligent predictive maintenance partner.
The proposed solution produces an intuitive visual explanation for the modelâ€™s
prediction by highlighting and animating the segments of a raw data signal that
are contributing most significantly to the prediction. This technology may allow
trained personnel to quickly make optimal maintenance decisions by fusing data-
driven insights with their existing domain expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.