* 2222876
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R: The Future of Robot-Assisted Nursing: Interactive AI Frameworks for Upskilling Nurses and Customizing Robot Assistance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 121,714.00

The specific objectives of the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
program are (1) to facilitate convergent research that employs the joint
perspectives, methods, and knowledge of computer science, engineering, learning
sciences, research on education and workforce training, and social, behavioral,
and economic sciences; (2) to encourage the development of a research community
dedicated to designing intelligent technologies and work organization and modes
inspired by their positive impact on individual workers, the work at hand, the
way people learn and adapt to technological change, creative and supportive
workplaces (including remote locations, homes, classrooms, or virtual spaces),
and benefits for social, economic, and environmental systems at different
scales; (3) to promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-
technology partnership to advance societal needs by advancing design of
intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human workers,
including consideration of how adults learn the new skills needed to interact
with these technologies in the workplace, and by enabling broad workforce
participation, including improving accessibility for those challenged by
physical or cognitive impairment; and (4) to understand, anticipate, and explore
ways of mitigating potential risks arising from future work at the human-
technology frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nursing is a discipline of knowledge
and practice focused on delivering patient-centered care. As the healthcare
providers who are with hospitalized patients 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
registered nurses are crucial for ensuring patient safety and delivering
patient-centered care. Alarmingly, however, the U.S. is experiencing a dire
nursing shortage, which is projected to significantly worsen in the next decade.
As a result, nurses have limited time for patient-centered care. To continue
providing high-quality patient care, healthcare leaders are scrambling for
solutions, often turning to technological aids such as artificial intelligence
(AI) and robots. On one hand, AI-enabled robotic assistants hold the potential
to support nurses in some routine tasks, allowing them to spend more time on
patient care and improving patient outcomes. On the other hand, the introduction
of robots also brings forth several areas of concerns such as increase in
nursing workload due to required training and maintenance to use these complex
systems. This planning project will develop a multi-disciplinary research agenda
to systematically introduce nurses to AI-enabled robotics technology, with the
goal of ensuring that the integration of robots in the future of nursing brings
long-term positive impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seamless integration of robotic
assistants in the nursing workflow requires (a) careful scientific study of the
impact of robots on nursing workload, (b) design of nurse-centered frameworks
for customizing robotic assistance, and (c) continued development of nurse
training content and practices. To develop a research agenda that expands on
these thrusts, the project will involve three main planning activities. First,
the project will bring together technologists, healthcare professionals, social
scientists, and educators through workshops and stakeholder meetings. These
meetings will facilitate cross-disciplinary collaborations and formation of a
convergent research team. Second, through participatory design, the project team
will create a testbed for robot-assisted nursing, where multiple disciplines can
brainstorm, prototype, and evaluate solutions for robot-assisted nursing. Third,
the project team will use the testbed for generating preliminary data to assess
the impact of robotic assistants on nursing workload. The data collection will
be conducted with the help of nurse volunteers of varied experience, and in a
combination of simulated and physical environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.