* 2222375
* Conference: Young Topologists Meeting 2022
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Haynes Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

The Young Topologists Meeting (YTM) 2022 will be held at the University of
Copenhagen from Monday, July 18, to Friday, July 22, 2022. The YTM consists of
two major components: three mini-courses by distinguished researchers on the one
hand, and a line-up of forty short talks and twenty poster presentations, mostly
by graduate students, on the other. Being one of the largest conferences in the
world dedicated to early career researchers in the field of Algebraic Topology,
the YTM provides a unique opportunity for junior topologists to gain experience
giving conference presentations to a wide audience, broaden their horizons by
learning about subfields not represented at their institutions, expose their
work to the international topology community, and develop collaborations with
other early career researchers. Furthermore, the YTM seeks to promote diversity
by featuring graduate student speakers from underrepresented groups and from
universities that are less well-represented in topology and by providing a
friendly and welcoming community for students from all backgrounds. By providing
funding for US participants, the NSF is promoting the exchange of scientific
ideas between the US and the international topology community, in particular
providing a setting for students and other topologists from the US to make
research connections and develop relationships with their future international
colleagues, as well as supporting a culture of diversity and inclusion.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The three mini-courses this year will be on: (1)
symplectic homotopy theory by Andrew Blumberg, which will provide an
introduction to Floer stable homotopy theory with an eye towards his recent
breakthrough with Mohammed Abouzaid on the Arnold conjecture; (2) stratification
and descent by Natalia Castellana, revolving around a recent series of papers by
her and coauthors on the support-stratifications of module categories over
cochains of various spaces of interest in algebraic topology and representation
theory; and (3) cellular sheaf theory by Robert Ghrist, which will be a crash
course on sheaf theory in applied topology, starting with basic materials on
cellular sheaves and moving on to various use-cases in topological data
analysis. These mini-courses offer introductions into major subfields of current
active research, and serve as a gateway into these fields even for early
graduate students. Participant-contributed talks and posters will cover a wide
range of topics in topology, spanning across higher algebra, homotopy theory,
geometry, and applied topology. More information can be obtained from the
conference website https://www.math.ku.dk/english/calendar/events/ytm2022/&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed
worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit
and broader impacts review criteria.