* 2222991
* SBIR Phase I: A novel platform for virus enrichment and isolation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Nestor Perea Lopez, Virolock Technologies Limited Liability Company
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,459.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will be the creation of a virus capture technology that may
improve the reliability of diagnostic tools needed to detect viral infection in
humans, animals, and plants. The proposed device will be designed to be easy to
use, portable, and cost-effective, and could accelerate virus detection,
providing superior analytical and clinical performance. Early and accurate
diagnosis of infectious diseases is critical to curbing the spread of viral
infections, improving health outcomes, and reducing economic losses. This
technology is a platform potentially applicable to a wide range of target
viruses and could be functional in different scenarios like virus surveillance,
identification of emerging viruses, and detection of virus mutations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to validate the technical
feasibility of this technology for direct virus detection methods such as
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunoassay, and next generation sequencing
(NGS), to improve the virus to host ratio and allow for faster results. The
project aims to develop a portable sample processing platform that enables high-
efficiency virus trapping and purification from field samples (from cotton swabs
or tissue biopsy) without using antibodies. This technology uses carbon nanotube
arrays to trap virus particles by size discrimination while segregating host
contaminants. This technology could be integrated into standard virus diagnostic
protocols to achieve a faster, simpler, and more accurate diagnostics compared
to traditional processes for virus sample preparation, such as
ultracentrifugation and membrane filtration. Currently available state-of-the-
art technologies present limitations in extracting pure virus particles from the
host material, especially when the viral content is low, usually leading to
false negative results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.