* 2222602
* SBIR Phase I:  Boosting Industrial Bio-Fermentation with Microbial Stem Cells
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Nikolai Mushnikov, ASIMICA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,100.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reimagine bio-manufacturing with a novel platform technology that
could boost the yields of many products, including food additives, biomaterials
precursors, biofuels, and pharmaceuticals. The technological advancement
addresses a fundamental issue that limits conventional bio-fermentation, which
is that producing cells suffer limited health and viability in exchange for
higher yields. In this proposal, genetic tools will be used to divide the labor
of cell reproduction and product synthesis into two different cell types, called
stem cells and factory cells. As older factory cells become exhausted,
productivity is maintained by new factory cells, which are born from the stem
cell population. The approach may be particularly well suited to biofuels and
other molecules that are difficult to produce in large quantities by
conventional bio-fermentation because the product is toxic to the cells that
make it. It could be applied toward increasing the profitability of existing
bio-processes and also for bringing new products to market, which are currently
too difficult to produce. In this project, the team seeks to demonstrate the
benefits of producing a fuel (limonene) and a dairy enzyme (chymosin), as proof
of its application in biofuel and agricultural sectors. Broad industrial
implementation will advance bio-manufacturing toward the ‘green’ revolution,
contributing to the development of cleaner industries and decreasing US and
global reliance on fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to solve
two major limitations of microbial fermentation processes: metabolic exhaustion
and genetic drift. These are nearly universal problems in the industry. Highly
producing cells can become inactive due to the lack of metabolic resources,
cytotoxic effects of products, and mutations that break the biosynthetic
pathway. In this project, Microbial Stem Cell Technology (MiST) uncouples growth
and production by establishing a multicellular system. One cell type is
dedicated to product synthesis (factory cells), while another (stem cells) is
responsible for cell division and the generation of new factory cells. As older
factory cells lose productivity, the bioreactor is continuously replenished with
new factory cells, derived from the stem cell population. By maintaining an
active factory cell population, MiST-supported cultures are expected to exhibit
increased production longevity and higher overall yield than conventional bio-
fermentations. This project aims to validate the technology in E. coli
engineered to produce limonene, a precursor for biodiesel and other useful
chemicals. In the factory cells, T7RNAP will drive high-level expression of a
suite of biosynthetic enzymes. Since limonene has a cytotoxic effect on
producing cells, MiST-supported factory cell replenishment is expected to
increase productivity by more than 2-fold compared to the conventional limonene-
producing strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.