* 2222838
* FW-HTF-P: Interactive Multi-Human Multi-Remote-Robot Operations for the Future of Construction Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Dongming Gan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The overarching goal of this Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier
(FW-HTF-P) project is to create a collaboration framework for multiple human
workers to team with multiple remote construction robots of various types. These
human-robot teams have the potential to improve operational efficiency and
scalability and thus anticipate imminent problems challenging the future of the
construction industry, including a shortage of skilled labor, an aging
workforce, occupational safety challenges, and stagnant productivity. However,
realizing the best outcomes will require new approaches for human-robot
collaborative operations in constrained and complex construction workplaces.
Potential benefits to the nation are significant, given the critical economic
and societal roles of the construction industry. Activities under this Project
Development award will include development of a proof-of-concept worker-in-the-
loop interface to support preliminary studies with industry partners at
construction sites with varying work environments and operation scenarios. The
preliminary studies will be supported by workshops, focus groups, training
sessions, and surveys. Expected outcomes of the project include improvements to
work efficiency, overall work productivity, worker safety and well-being, and
recruitment and inclusion of a diverse workforce, including older workers.
Ultimately the project has potential benefits for the fields of construction
engineering, artificial intelligence, robotics, learning sciences, and workforce
training, as well as architecture, engineering, construction, and human and
social science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will build an interdisciplinary
team of academic researchers and industry stakeholders with a deep understanding
of the applicability and potential of multi-human-multi-remote-robot (MHMRR)
collaboration, toward the goal of an innovative and interactive MHMRR
collaboration framework with Avatar Construction Workers able to collaborate
with remote heterogeneous construction robots through transparent and reliable
on-site knowledge transfer. Two project development activities will be conducted
to achieve this goal. First, the research team will build a prototype of a
worker-in-the-loop MHMRR interface that is reconfigurable for various
construction operations and integration of different new and emerging
technologies. Second, the research team will draw upon partnerships with
relevant stakeholders in both the construction and technology industries to
design and conduct preliminary studies of MHMRR collaborations under a
representative selection of realistic conditions. Experimental design and
recruitment of additional partners will be accomplished through multiple
activities, including workshops, focus groups, training sessions, and surveys.
The Project Development activities supported by this award will result in the
formation of an integrated team including academic researchers, engaged industry
partners, specialized research infrastructure, a foundation of supporting
preliminary results, and a research agenda tailored to advancing the critical
field of MHMRR for construction. The outcome has the potential to revolutionize
existing construction industries and to provide convergent solutions for
technical and workforce bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.