* 2222161
* SBIR Phase I:  Semi-active magnetic bearing for flywheel energy storage systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* alessandro stabile, MAGMA SPACE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to implement a high-efficiency, low-power
magnetic bearing that will enable the successful development of high-speed
flywheel energy storage systems (FESS) both for space and terrestrial
applications. FESS are mechanical batteries that overcome some of the
limitations of lithium-ion batteries, such as the loss of energy capacity over
time and the need for stringent temperature control. In space, FESS could reduce
the overall mass associated with the battery pack and extend the mission life of
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites. On earth, FESS can take over some of the
applications that are required to deliver high power for a short amount of time,
such as electric vehicle charging stations or hospital back-up power units.
Ultimately, FESS will help alleviate the demand for lithium-ion batteries while
providing reliable, long-lasting energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of integrating the
proposed magnetic bearing into a carbon-fiber flywheel. The complexity of this
task comes from having the three main parts of the flywheel (composite rim,
metal core, and magnets) created using different manufacturing processes. The
magnetic materials need to be protected as they will not withstand the high
speeds of FESS. De-risking this manufacturing process is crucial in continuing
the development of this technology and in scaling up. Another challenge is that
the high speeds of FESS are expected to cause high gyroscopic torques during
satellite maneuvers. Therefore, investigating ways to increase bearing stiffness
(e.g., by changing magnet size and position, or modifying coil shape), while
assessing the effect of gyroscopic torques through numerical models, will be
paramount. Finally, the magnetic bearing has the distinctive feature of being
able to tilt the flywheel (within its gap tolerances), without requiring an
external gimbal actuator. This feature could possibly allow the technology to be
used for dual purposes, and its implications will be investigated at a system
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.