* 2222903
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Reducing Finished-Product Waste through Augmented Design Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 121,531.00

In the US, enough clothing is manufactured or imported for every person to
purchase around 90 new garments per year – about 28 billion in total -- the vast
majority of which are rarely or never used. In this project, the research team
seeks to build tools to help designers produce clothing that is more likely to
be used in order to minimize unsold merchandise, returns, and underused
purchases. To do this, the research team will investigate the information that
is used by designers and consumers in making decisions and identify areas in
which computer intelligence can support designers: for instance, by giving
designers more access to information about consumers’ preferences, or by
recommending which among millions of potential designs might be ones most likely
to be worn. The overall goal of the project is to reduce the amount of clothing
that is produced but never ends up in regular use by a consumer, charting a more
sustainable future for work in the clothing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project development award will map the problem space and develop preliminary
tools to support a future larger-scale project that integrates a broad array of
industry stakeholders. An in-depth qualitative investigation of clothing
designers’ current design practices will be used to identify and formalize
decision-making processes in order to identify areas in which decision-support
tools could have a transformative impact. Information needs in these areas will
be formalized, and early prototype decision-support tools will be developed in
collaboration with professional designers. A dataset of consumer preferences and
product attributes will be collected and used to develop methods of assessing
the impact of decision-support tools. The economic impacts of these tools will
be modeled to help understand and predict effects of major changes to design
practice on other workers in the supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.