* 2222688
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid, End-to-end Sample Preparation for Sequencing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Ryan Montes, MICROPURE GENOMICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 274,199.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project consists of advancing methods for preparing
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) for sequencing. Prior to sequencing a biological
sample, DNA must be liberated from cells and separated from proteins and other
unwanted debris, and then mixed with specialty buffers and chemical agents. This
skilled task is currently carried out by trained scientists using largely manual
manipulations of the samples and expensive equipment. The alternative method
proposed in this project will speed-up diagnoses from genomic sequencing by
significantly reducing preparation time while also making preparation more
reliable through automation. Notably, the proposed approach is expected to
prepare DNA without reducing its length; consequently, the process should be
ideally suited for preparing samples for emerging long-read sequencing
technologies. These improvements have the potential to decrease the burden and
costs associated with DNA sequencing, hence expanding the benefits of DNA
sequencing technology to wider segments of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project relies upon a process
for trapping genomic material in a small flow cell through which an electric
field and pressure-driven flow are simultaneously applied. The process is highly
selective towards strands of DNA or (ribonucleic acid) RNA; proteins and other,
unwanted debris that enters the flow cell passes through. Also, the process is
relatively gentle, so the length of sample should not be shortened as a result.
This project will advance the technology to the marketplace by: (1) Completing
cartridge design details and fabrication, including evaluation of material
options; (2) Building a custom research and development platform for interfacing
with the cartridges; (3) Developing methods for DNA sample extraction and
transfer; (4) Developing the library preparation protocols using mixing and
heating while toggling the Electro-Hydrodynamic Trapping; and, (5) Integrating
the entirety of the preparation process into a single cartridge and validating
the process performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.