* 2222147
* STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellows in Participatory and Community-Engaged Research
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joshua Drew, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 128,764.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Education Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship program funds postdoctoral awards designed to enhance the
research competencies of recent doctoral graduates in STEM, STEM education, and
related disciplines to prepare them to engage in STEM education research that
advances knowledge in the field. In alignment with that goal this project
partners Michigan State University, the Center for Native Peoples and the
Environment at the State University of New Yorkâ€™s Environmental Science and
Forestry campus, and the Sustainable Development Institute of the College of
Menominee Nation with two objectives. First is to build STEM education research
capacity and advance knowledge in STEM education; and second is to broaden the
participation of people of color in the STEM workforce. The project will bring
to bear the institutional resources and expertise of the collaborating partners
to prioritize the support of six Indigenous STEM education researchers in
developing professional knowledge and competencies, preparing them to undertake
research that will generate new understandings about best practices in STEM
education that serve to increase Indigenous representation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project activities are framed around nine
research-based competencies for supporting the comprehensive development of
postdoctoral fellows as highly prepared independent STEM education researchers.
The complementary resources and roles of the three institutional partners will
deliver a blend of traditional and unique experiences customized to support the
growth of Indigenous STEM education researchers, especially in the use of
participatory community-engaged research methods. The partnership will afford
immersion experiences in Indigenous communities for fellows and faculty mentors
to further their cultural competence and provide opportunities to engage in
authentic participatory research studies investigating STEM education issues of
importance to Indigenous people. The involvement of faculty mentors in these
activities will expand their perspectives on research and foster the
transformation of their STEM and education departments toward environments more
welcoming of diverse scholars. The project holds high potential for generating
new models for supporting Indigenous scholars, strategies for transforming STEM
departments to be more inclusive, and insights on approaches for successfully
engaging in research with diverse communities to improve their representation in
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.