* 2222381
* Social Psychological Intervention to Increase Gender Diversity in Tech Companies
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gregg Muragishi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
conduct a postdoctoral research fellowship at the University of Washington
Seattle that includes conducting a research project and implementing a
professional development plan. The research focuses on micro inclusions in the
workplace - that is, respectful treatment from others that include women and
their contributions to shared work goals, and whether such micro inclusions can
increase women’s sense of fit and improve outcomes in the STEM companies where
they work. This research offers a novel framework of what inclusion can be at
work. Inclusion is not only being well represented or having inclusive policies.
It also means being able to contribute skills and expertise and being treated in
ways that allow those contributions. The study will provide the foundation for a
new class of interventions and strategies that focus on small everyday behaviors
to improve employee and company outcomes. In doing so, the project holds promise
to shed light on how companies can become more attractive to a wider and more
diverse population of applicants interested in joining and staying in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has three aims. The first
aim is to test whether micro inclusions improve organizational outcomes for
women, including those of color, in STEM companies, and show that this is
mediated by sense of fit. In a correlation survey design, the investigator will
assess how often employees from real-world companies experience micro inclusions
from their managers and test whether such experiences are correlated with
employee job satisfaction, motivation, company trust, and turnover intentions.
The second aim is to distinguish micro inclusions from other positive
treatments. In online experimental designs, the investigator will manipulate
whether participants receive a micro inclusion or other forms of positive
treatments (e.g., being invited to a team happy hour) and assess their sense of
fit and organizational outcomes. The third aim assesses whether a randomized
control trial video intervention can increase managers’ use of micro inclusions
with their team. This work will demonstrate a novel interpersonal strategy
(i.e., micro inclusions) that companies can immediately begin to use to
supplement their diversity and inclusion efforts. Additionally, this work may
offer insights on how to begin to create company culture change. If micro
inclusions are shown to improve company outcomes, and the intervention
successfully changes managers’ behaviors, future interventions might establish,
convey, and reinforce norms of micro inclusions to increase gender diversity at
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.