* 2222996
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Warning Triangle System (aWTS) for Emergency Stopping
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Ece Mutlu, CONNECTED WISE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 274,553.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to ensure the secure transfer of goods and/or passengers in
commercial motor vehicles (CMVs) and prevent the likelihood of secondary
incidents when a commercial motor vehicles (CMV) has made an emergency stop on a
highway. All CMVs need to comply with traffic safety regulations and deploy
emergency warning devices (e.g., safety triangles) during an emergency stop.
Without the presence of a human driver, an automated CMV should also be able to
automate emergency warning device placement. Proper placement of these warning
devices can be life-saving for drivers of non-automated vehicles on a highway.
The proposed project will increase the safety of external drivers by preventing
any secondary incidents associated with the lane/shoulder blockage due to a CMV
malfunction and protect drivers of non-automated and/or semi-automated vehicles
by assisting in the deployment of emergency warning triangles on highways. This
project aims to remove barriers to higher-order automated technology adoption
due to lack of standardization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in
the design, research, and development of an affordable, after-market, reliable,
and safe autonomous Warning Triangle System (aWTS) to ensure the safety of the
automated and semi-automated commercial motor vehicles (CMVs) during an
emergency stop without requiring human assistance. aWTS consists of three low-
cost autonomous triangle reflector devices which are planned to optimally fit in
a charging dock/enclosure where they will be safely stored during stand-by mode.
When activated by the emergency signal transmitted from the CMV, the autonomous
triangles are designed to move successively to their pre-determined destinations
on the highway. The research and development activity during this Phase I
project includes, but is not limited to: reviewing safety codes and regulations,
investigating different highway scenarios and associated challenges, and
performing computer simulations; developing proof-of-concept hardware that can
demonstrate the proposed systemâ€™s technical feasibility and its integration to
automated CMVs; determining the optimal placement and assembly of the autonomous
reflective triangles by collaborating with auto manufacturers; investigating the
potential cyber-security risks to develop secure communications between CMV and
aWTS; and identifying the operational challenges and the design targets while
considering the cost of deployment, lifecycle costs, functional use, and
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.