* 2222478
* URoL:EN: Emergence of function and dynamics from ecological interaction networks
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Melanie Moses, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 09/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Biological systems at virtually all levels of organization are defined by
diversity – diversity not only of their constituent units, but also of the
interactions among those units. Understanding how the core functions of these
systems emerge from such diverse interactions is a fundamental challenge that
cuts across fields ranging from physiology and medicine to ecology and
environmental engineering. Scientists have long sought to simplify biological
interactions by classifying them as either negative (e.g., competitors vying for
resources) or positive (e.g., cells cooperating within tissue). Yet, upon close
inspection, biological interactions regularly defy this simple dichotomy, and
are instead “multivalent”: they involve many different types of interaction
occurring simultaneously. Examples include bacteria that exchange genes
conferring antibiotic resistance while competing for limiting nutrients, or
trees that share carbon through mycorrhizal networks even as they compete for
light and water. Multivalent interactions such as these appear to be ubiquitous
in biology, but they are not easily incorporated into the conventional network
models that are widely used to study system-scale dynamics. This project aims to
reveal the Rule of Life that governs how function and dynamics emerge in systems
of multivalent interactors. The researchers will decipher this Rule using a
model ecosystem: coral reefs. In coral reefs, consumption of algae by fish
drives dynamics of diverse fish populations and promotes a coral-dominated
ecosystem state. The project team will rigorously measure how multivalent
interactions among fish species scale up to influence ecosystem dynamics. In
doing so, the team will develop data collection technologies and mathematical
tools that will provide a generalizable methodology for measuring and
understanding one of the most elusive, yet fundamental aspects of complex
biological systems: biological interactions themselves. The project’s findings
will inform management of coral reef ecosystems vital to over 500 million people
worldwide. Moreover, the project will create a technical undergraduate
internship program for students from historically underrepresented backgrounds
and an international reef monitoring program that empowers local citizen
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through three aims, the project team will
develop methods that discover hidden structure in complex networks of ecological
interactions and exploit that structure to understand ecosystem-level function
and responses to environmental change. The first phase of the project will use
field experiments, new camera technologies, and computer vision to directly
measure ecological interactions among species, along with a novel algorithmic
modeling framework to describe interaction behaviors based on quantitative
behavioral traits. The second phase will use manifold learning methods to search
behavioral trait data for “functional clusters” of species and exploit this
structure to derive coarse-grained dynamical models of the system. These models
will be used to evaluate how the structure of interactions drives emergent
ecosystem function. In the third phase, the team will use data-driven dynamical
models to project how system function and state will respond to future
environmental change. Coarse-grained ecosystem models will be developed to
understand long-term, system-scale responses to environmental perturbations.
These models will incorporate empirically derived evolutionary rates to evaluate
the capacity for evolutionary rescue to influence how ecosystems will respond to
change. The high-throughput data-collection technologies, dimension reduction
tools, and dynamical modeling methods developed in this research will help
provide a novel toolkit for data-driven discovery of the dynamical structure of
interactions and their consequences in complex biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.