* 2222339
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Trophic phenotypes as eco-evolutionary mediators of resilience to climate change
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Michael Kinnison, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 406,044.00

As lakes and other habitats continue to change in response to a warming climate,
it is important to identify which ecosystems and organisms will be most
vulnerable or able to persist. The thirteen populations of Arctic charr in
Maine, USA, are the most southern remaining populations of this cold-adapted
species and are expected to face challenges from climate warming and species
invasions. We hypothesize that the ability of such populations to shift their
diets and feeding traits may be especially important to their future
persistence. This study investigates four of these charr-bearing lakes to
determine how their habitat and food webs differ, and how this relates to
specific Arctic charr behaviors and feeding traits. Electronic tags that emit
sound will be used to track the movements of individual charr at fine scales.
Twenty years of genetic samples will help determine how charr traits might
change from adaptation or other processes. Quantitative models will be used to
predict how differences in diet and habitat affect growth and population
productivity, and subsequently the resilience of Arctic charr populations to
continued warming and changes in habitats. Studying Arctic charr in Maine will
help the conservation and management of not only this species, but also assess
theory relevant to other species at the southern edge of their ranges. The
project scientists will work closely with conservation groups and management
agencies to ensure knowledge gained is quickly and effectively communicated for
benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many trailing-edge populations of fishes and
other taxa inhabit small refuge habitats that are isolated and thus presumed
vulnerable to interacting abiotic and biotic factors that could compress their
niche to the point of collapse. This project tests an organismal-eco-
evolutionary framework for assessing the role of trophic trait diversity and
change in resilience to climate change, linking the genetic and plastic
components of trophic trait variation to population demography, habitat and
community contexts, and ultimately eco-evolutionary potential for persistence.
Landlocked Arctic charr in Maine, USA, are the most southern populations of this
species in North America. Moreover, there is evidence among Maine Arctic charr
populations that populations are trophically divergent and that trophic trait
variation can change in response to changes in resources. This project will
integrate information on Arctic charr genotypes, phenotypes (morphology), diet,
and movements (acoustic telemetry) with limnology and food web structure
information to generate potential mechanistic links among variation in genotype,
phenotype, and communities. Genetically inferred pedigrees and whole genome
sequencing approaches will be integrated with phenotypic data and long-term (20
year) mark-recapture analysis of charr to estimate genetic and genomic
parameters affecting trait lability and population dynamics in contemporary
time. Individual-based models will simulate the bioenergetics and persistence of
charr across trophic traits under a variety of temperatures, fish community
compositions, and lake ecosystem types. Collectively, this research will improve
the ability to predict the fate of trailing-edge populations through the lens of
complex ecological feedbacks among climate change, intra- and interspecific
interactions, and phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.