* 2222152
* Building Capacity for Collaborative Interdisciplinary Research on Water and Society
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Heejun Chang, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,530.00

Water and society are inherently interconnected, making the topic well-suited
for interdisciplinary research that brings together social and natural science
research approaches. This research uses an interdisciplinary approach to
investigate water-society interactions, focusing on questions of governance,
environmental justice, socio-environmental change, and infrastructure systems.
The research supports participation of underrepresented undergraduate and
graduate students by providing student training and career development. The
project cultivates research partnerships and community-based networks, including
hosting an interdisciplinary conference on water and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enhances research productivity
through a cross-disciplinary research collaboration between scholars in the
fields of geography, environmental studies, applied linguistics, and
anthropology. Scholars collaborate around four research themes: water values,
water histories, water futures, and water risks. The project uses an
interdisciplinary approach that views water as a complex system that has
interrelated social, ecological, and technological aspects. The research
supports graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented communities
by recruiting a cohort of research interns to form an interdisciplinary lab
group. Undergraduate students will be supported through team-taught
interdisciplinary coursework and graduate student mentorship. Graduate and
undergraduate students will gain hands-on research experience, present research
findings, build networks and professional development skills, and gain
understanding of interdisciplinary studies. Students will learn a variety of
qualitative and quantitative research methods such as interviews, Q-sorts,
document analysis, surveys, and other social science techniques. Additionally,
the project cultivates research partnerships with other research institutions in
the region and with the broader community. The project includes an
interdisciplinary conference on the topic of water and society in which
students, early-career researchers, and community-based organizations will be
invited to present their work and develop research synergies among participants.
A Community Advisory Board will be formed to advise students and ground the
project within the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.