* 2222092
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Assistive Artificial Intelligence for Diversifying and Reskilling the Disaster Management Workforce of the Future
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Denise Simmons, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Disaster impacts, which have become more frequent and severe due to climate
change, disproportionately hurt vulnerable populations, including women,
communities of color, people with disabilities, income-challenged communities,
and more generally those who are not able to advocate for themselves. People
from these populations are also poorly represented in the disaster-management
profession. This fact raises risks that disaster-management practices do not
align with the needs of the broader community, and that biases in hiring and
resource allocation will reinforce these vulnerabilities. The goal of this
project is to increase disaster-management job opportunities for people from
these vulnerable groups. Through connecting residents, community leaders, and
state and local authorities, this project will result in new knowledge about how
human-centered artificial intelligence (AI) can transform the disaster-
management profession by contributing to the diversification and reskilling of
the workforce, ultimately augmenting human capabilities, and leading to
culturally sensitive teams and equitable disaster-management
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project center around
a series of interconnected planning activities that foster a convergent research
roadmap, develop fundamental research concepts, and stimulate research capacity
that address technological, human, societal, and economic dimensions of the
field of disaster management. The project team will study, formalize, and
demonstrate the potential of AI to promote diversity and inclusion in disaster-
management workforce and practices. Through active participation of stakeholders
who will form an advisory board, the project team will engage residents and
leaders from disaster-prone communities, state and local disaster-management
agencies, and domain experts and researchers to develop a comprehensive roadmap
that will guide the design, testing, and dissemination of assistive AI
technologies for the disaster-management profession. Planning activities will
include a workshop on diversity and inclusion in disaster management, a
stakeholder meeting and demonstrations, and research working groups and
collaboration meetings. Together, these activities will help meet three research
objectives: (1) Facilitate multidisciplinary research and stakeholder
partnerships that employ the joint perspectives, methods, and knowledge of
disaster management, learning sciences, computer science, engineering, workforce
training, and the social sciences; (2) Impart deeper understanding of human-AI
partnership in disaster management that can augment (not replace) human workers,
including consideration of workforce diversity and how to impart skills needed
to interact with AI; and (3) Understand, anticipate, and explore ways of
mitigating potential technological and societal risks resulting from AI
integration into disaster-management workforce training and
reskilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.