* 2222853
* FW-HTF-P: Towards Preparing Future Machinists: Exploring Tacit Knowledge in Machining with Artificial Intelligence and Extended Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kylie Peppler, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,999.00

This project investigates how to capture and pass on tacit knowledge in
machining. Experienced machinists have a great deal of tacit knowledge that is
essential for their decision-making, but such knowledge is personal, context-
specific, and consequently difficult to acquire, as well as to formalize and
communicate to others. This both complicates training new machinists and risks
losing this tacit knowledge entirely as experienced machinists born in the post
World War II baby boom retire. To address these challenges, the project team
will investigate to what extent, and how, tacit knowledge in machining can be
identified, understood, and transferred with the help of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and Virtual/Augmented Reality (XR). The work in this project development
grant will lead to a better understanding of experienced machinistsâ€™ tacit
knowledge and how it is applied in their work. It will also generate new ideas
for AI techniques that recognize tacit knowledge and XR-based training systems
and evaluation metrics; these will form the basis of future research that
supports U.S. strategic plans around preparing the workforce for manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand a convergent team of
researchers from multiple disciplinary backgrounds, including engineering,
learning sciences, computer science, game design/gamification, psychology, and
workforce development. The proposed research is structured around three
fundamental thrusts: (1) A human-subject research pipeline will be developed and
applied to key stakeholders to understand the types of tacit knowledge and the
ways in which tacit knowledge is acquired and utilized. (2) AI and XR techniques
will be explored to understand, identify, and transfer tacit knowledge. (3)
Cognitive models will be established to evaluate human performance in XR
training and the credibility and acceptance of the training. The project team
will pay special attention to developing ideas that can make the machining
occupation more accessible to populations that are currently under-represented
in this field, working with partners at a nearby school that teaches machining
to deaf and hard of hearing students. The overarching goal of this research is
to deepen the understanding of tacit knowledge in machining and support new
directions for machining training, while developing the techniques in general
ways that might be applied to training in domains beyond
machining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.