* 2222849
* RAPID: Examining the Performance of Historic Masonry Structures after the December 2021 Midwest Tornadoes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Thomas Boothby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 96,237.00

On December 10-11, 2021, the “Quad-State” tornadoes damaged structures across
Kentucky, Arkansas, Missouri, and Tennessee. This Grant for Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) will conduct a four-day field survey to document damaged and
undamaged masonry structures from this event in Mayfield, Kentucky, with the
goal to provide new knowledge and data about the performance of masonry
structures during tornadic loading. Many historic masonry structures are
presently excluded in recent versions of tornadic building code requirements.
The detailed textual and image data collected during this research will
contribute to understanding the relationship between masonry construction types
and building damage during tornadoes, can help communities to better prepare for
and be resilient from natural hazard events, and can inform future building code
requirements. Data collected from this award will be archived in the National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This award
will contribute to the NSF role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is 1) to
evaluate the efficacy of retrofit and adaptively reused masonry structures, 2)
to elucidate potential weaknesses in other historic structures across the United
States, and 3) to identify resilient masonry connection typologies for future
retrofits and additions. This research will provide new knowledge and data
concerning certain types of masonry structures (Risk Categories 1 and 2) during
tornadic loading. This knowledge can lead to improving the performance of
historic masonry structures, as many historic masonry structures are not
addressed in recent additions to tornadic building design criteria (American
Society of Civil Engineers 7-22, Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria
for Buildings and Other Structures). The field reconnaissance will generate a
unique data set that will include ground-based and drone-based photos and
ground-based detailed structural surveys focusing specifically on connection
typologies due to retrofitting or building additions. Data will be collected
using field equipment from the NSF-supported NHERI Reconnaissance (RAPID)
Facility at the University of Washington. The merit of this work lies in the
detailed data set generated, which will encompass 3D point cloud models, images,
and architectural drawings for 50 masonry structures. This more detailed data
set will help quantify the efficacy of different retrofitting and strengthening
methods to inform future solutions and building code
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.