* 2222529
* Comparative Study of Demographic Variation in Judiciaries
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Josephine Dawuni, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 425,000.00

A judiciary in which the composition of courts reflects the makeup of the
populace is vital on the grounds of fairness, nondiscrimination, justice, and
legitimacy. An inclusive judiciary helps to inspire public trust, support, and
confidence. Examining the demographic makeup of courts is key to understanding
the mechanisms that facilitate a representative judiciary. This research project
will collect data on and analyze the demographic variation in judges in eight
countries. This study examines the trajectory, experiences, and obstacles of
jurists with various demographic characteristics may encounter across countries
and world regions. The broader impacts of this project will be to strengthen law
and social science research collaborations at minority-serving institutions, and
increase research opportunities for communities that are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of this research are to
examine the factors that contribute to a representative judiciary. The PIs will
collect quantitative data on descriptive representation in eight countries. The
data on descriptive representation in the judiciary will be made accessible to
journalists, students, scholars, and policymakers. Using a mixed methods
approach, the PIs will conduct interviews with judges with different demographic
characteristics in the same eight countries. The PIs will use the quantitative
and qualitative data to determine which aspects of demographic variation may be
distinct to a country and those that may be shared across countries. This
project will contribute to social science research by providing empirical data
and evidence that contribute to our understanding of descriptive representation
in judiciaries, the rule of law, and gender equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.