* 2222713
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-R: Mobilizing Nonprofit Resources and Talents with a Community Tool for Purpose-Driven Work
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Yunus Telliel, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,169,914.00

This project is iteratively designing, assessing, and refining a community tool
that provides a new way for nonprofits to obtain the necessary resources and
talents to support their purpose-driven needs. This platform can increase the
collective impact of small-to-medium nonprofit organizations that provide
critical social and human services, particularly for historically marginalized
and low-income communities. Partnering with nonprofits, this project integrates
the experiences of impacted workers into the iterative design and assessment
process. Through a collective impact framework, the project aims to ensure that
the platform remains a community tool that honors the time and talents of
nonprofit workers and enables nonprofit organizations to share talents and
resources in an inclusive, scalable, and fair way over time. The research team
is measuring its transformative impact on workers, nonprofits, and the community
and is studying nonprofit workers’ inter-workplace mobility experiences, pursuit
of meaningful work, and sense of belonging and
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project convergently brings together
expertise in domains including mechanism design, community engagement,
collective impact, applied ethics, nonprofit leadership, combinatorial
optimization, and law. New mechanisms are being developed to conduct recurrent
multilateral combinatorial exchanges, enabling nonprofits to temporarily acquire
new resources by mobilizing their own in conjunction with stored credits. These
are being informed by rigorous rules of engagement that are inclusive, fair, and
scalable. Each recurrent episode features an exchange of offered resources,
using combinatorial optimization to reallocate both resources and credits in a
way that maximizes collective community value. Rules of engagement are being co-
designed using community-based participatory action research. An inclusive
development process iteratively integrates both quantitative technology feedback
and qualitative feedback reflecting the experiences of mobilized workers and
nonprofit leaders. In addition, a framework is being developed to measure the
transformative impact and to illuminate the influence on workers’ sense of
belonging and purpose, as well as workers’ confidence in their roles as change
agents and their pursuit of meaningful work; the extent to which nonprofits’
capabilities for organizational priority-setting and planning are transformed;
and how enabled inter-workplace mobility can lead to new professional
development opportunities and talent retention in the local community. Finally,
this project is exploring the potential for technology to serve as the backbone
support for the theoretical framework and engender further cooperation within
the nonprofit community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.