* 2222512
* Collaborative Research: Reimagining Policing by Making Neighborhoods Safe and Strong
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Natasha Pratt-Harris, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 07/31/2025
* USD 373,670.00

The project will build on and adapt the Police and Community Engagement (PACE)
program to study the conditions that build safe and strong communities. Through
the cultivation of collaborative and sustained dialogues between the police,
residents, and other community resources and stakeholders, the PACE model
enables collective understanding, strengthens relationships, and coordinates
actions that build strong and safe places. The PIs propose situational policing
as a theoretical framework that shifts away from policing as law enforcement to
policing as a means for creating safe places. The constructs (neighborhood
atmosphere and latent psychodynamic processes) provide a way to reimagine
policing with a strong-community end in mind. The situational policing framework
provides officers and communities with a way to visualize and assess progress
toward this desired end. The PIs seek to answer the question: What keeps
communities safe and strong? Reimagining the police with measurable community-
outcome goals—and with strategies to achieve them—has the potential to guide a
larger cultural transformation in the field of policing well beyond this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods study uses a Participatory
Action Research (PAR) approach, which is isomorphic to situational policing. PAR
democratizes the research process by including the stakeholders (e.g., local
residents, business people, police officers) as co-researchers. The sampling
frame includes neighborhoods in four police districts. The PIs select two
neighborhoods in each district based on high risk for crime and poor police-
community relationships. In each police district, one neighborhood will be
identified as a control and the other for the PACE treatment. Pre- and post-
treatment surveys will be conducted by the PAR teams with graduate students. The
four neighborhoods identified for the PACE treatment will participate in
structured conversations designed to foster understanding about the challenges
between and among the police and residents. The conversation will include a
broad spectrum of stakeholder participants leading to informed and collaborative
action. All eight neighborhoods will be surveyed at times pre and post
treatment. In addition, semi-structured, open-ended focus groups will be
conducted in the treatment neighborhoods by the PAR research team. The goal of
both the quantitative and qualitative components of the study is to reveal
latent psychodynamic processes that create a neighborhood atmosphere. The study
measures the effect of the neighborhood atmosphere on crime, violence, drug
abuse, and other social problems and the impact of PACE in a reimagined policing
with a safe, strong community focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.