* 2222386
* Collaborative Research: Enabling SBE Science via the Network for Transformative Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 97,536.00

This project supports an ongoing collaborative effort between Jackson State
University (JSU), The University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), the
American Indian Higher Education Consortium, and the Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities to implement the Network for Transformative Research
(NTR) as a model to generate multi-institutional, transdisciplinary research
collaborations that address emergent societal challenges. The NTR builds on the
research team’s prior success nucleating diverse teams and enabling them to
secure federal funding to address SBE relevant research challenges. The NTR will
provide participants with intellectual resources and training to negotiate the
barriers known to inhibit diverse, inter-institutional scientific collaboration.
The NTR has potential to germinate transformation by: (1) Providing
opportunities for early career researchers at minority-serving institutions
(MSIs) and smaller institutions to form diverse research teams, (2) Facilitating
the capacity of institutions with limited infrastructure to develop and sustain
research programs, (3) Harnessing the problem-solving potential of teams that
are diverse across multiple dimensions, and (4) Implementing an agile mechanism
for generating research driven by institutions serving communities often most
affected by societal challenges. The NTR will engage in three primary
activities, managed by JSU: (1) Recruiting scientists from network institutions
to participate in cohorts through the germination process developed in prior
work involving collaboration between JSU and UIUC, (2) Fostering institutional
capacity development by engaging administrators across participating
institutions, (3) Instituting ongoing evaluation of NTR activities to improve
processes and to develop generalizable practices for the broader research
community. The initial cohort for the NTR will include faculty selected from
universities located throughout Mississippi, to ensure representation from MSIs,
small, non-research-focused rural institutions, and research-intensive
universities. The proposed project supports the recruitment and management of
two cohorts of researchers who will develop interdisciplinary research projects
centering on: (1) Food insecurity, and (2) Natural Disaster Resilience. Each of
these topics has been identified by participating institutions as an area of
dire attention to the communities constituting the state of
Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NTR will refine sustainable methods for
accelerating the development of social, behavioral and economic research
capacity at MSIs. The project extends a previously developed scalable model for
broadening participation in science by bringing resource-challenged institutions
into the broader research landscape and expanding collaborative networks and
capacity within and among participating institutions. The model involves a
comprehensive set of interventions (whose designs are grounded in research
findings from the Science of Team Science, Communication Studies, and
Organization Studies) that includes formation of diverse scientific teams,
facilitated project management, and fostering of a collaborative culture at both
research-intensive institutions and institutions having limited research
infrastructure. The model being employed incorporates elements of collaborative
problem-solving, distributed research coordination and adaptive systems theory
to generate a comprehensive approach to research capacity-building that is both
scalable and sustainable. Researchers at UIUC will use mixed-methods evaluations
(including surveys, qualitative interviews, and field observations) to analyze
participants’ experiences and to develop tested and scalable methods to overcome
systemic barriers to the creation of diverse, successful research teams. The
project also included support for external evaluators to assess the NTR’s
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.