* 2222214
* URoL:EN - Rules of Resilience: Predicting transformation of emergent freshwater networks under variable climate regimes
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,924,794.00

Human health and well-being are intimately tied to surface freshwater
availability and quality. Providing adequate and safe freshwater requires
management of freshwater systems like lakes, rivers, and ponds. Increasing
environmental variability makes management more difficult and requires an
understanding of how natural biological communities respond to change.
Resilience, or the ability to withstand changes to climate, is likely due to
both diversity in species and individual characteristics. Species contain
individuals that can be very different from one another, we suggest this
diversity in characteristics (phenotype) is as important as the diversity of
species in building climate resilience. This idea has rarely been evaluated
experimentally or across space and time. This multi-institution, multi-
disciplinary team will test the effects of changing climatic conditions on
freshwater ecosystems. This collaboration combines technology (artificial
intelligence and distributed computing) with biological theory to understand
freshwater systems using observational, experimental, and modeling approaches.
This interdisciplinary team will test ecological frameworks and explore
resilience to environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;In ponds and lakes, body size is
an aspect of phenotype that can determine the success of a predator or a
competitor, where larger organisms are often more successful. Body size can also
change in response to environmental conditions, and some animals are better able
to adjust body size under favorable conditions. We hypothesize that communities
with limited species diversity and individual variation will be less resilient,
while communities that can maintain species diversity and individual variation
will maintain high resilience and ecosystem services. We hypothesize that
communities that maintain diversity and variation will do so by shifts in how
species and individuals interact, controlled in part by changes in body size. In
addition to predicting resilience of freshwater ecosystems under a changing
climate, results of this study will provide managers and policy makers with a
deeper understanding of the range of ecosystem changes to anticipate and enable
targeted application of management actions and dollars to preserve ecosystem
services for human well-being. The study will enhance the learning and research
experience of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) students at
Oregon State University, Gonzaga University, and Whitworth University by
providing an experience in scientific collaboration using skills and information
from different fields to solve a common problem. The team will conduct outreach
and recruitment efforts to engage underrepresented groups, particularly tribal
and migrant communities, via curriculum development, research participation, and
the production of bilingual children's books that highlight Pacific Northwest
freshwater ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.