* 2222278
* Examining Undergraduate Research Experiences of Latinx STEM Students in Research Intensive HSIs and Emerging-HSIs
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Katherine Garcia, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral fellowship
research project will undertake a comparative study of undergraduate research
experiences for Latinx students at Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) using an
asset-based framework and Chicana/Latina feminist epistemology and the "platicas
methodology" (or informal conversations). The study is expected to provide
insights about the campus context of HSIs that influence STEM retention of
Latinx students through their participation in undergraduate research
experiences. In addition to conducting a research project, the fellow will
implement a professional development plan designed to expand her methodological
training in quantitative (social network analysis) and mixed methods research
design and to gain pedagogical and mentoring tools to work with diverse
students. The fellow’s future research directions include investigating the
intersectional identities of Latinx students in STEM and exploration of STEM
graduate pathways that embrace Latinx culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
aims to examine the social and cultural assets that Latinx use in two research-
intensive HSI settings. Guided by asset-based frameworks, Rendon’s Latinx STEM
Success Model, and the Community-Centered STEM Identity Model, the project will
employ both a qualitative culturally relevant methodology known as "platicas,"
and a quantitative methodology based in social network analysis. A
transformative design was chosen, as this study aims to use culturally relevant
methods with a marginalized student group (Latinx students in STEM) with the
goal of transforming STEM outcomes. In addition, a Chicana/Latina Feminist
epistemology will provide an overarching framework for the study. The study
provides an intersectional approach by centering Latinx STEM students who are
also first-generation college students. It line of inquiry holds potential to
provide insights into the unique campus context of HSIs in advancing STEM
retention through participation in undergraduate research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially funded by The Kaleta A.
Doolin Foundation through a partnership with the National Science Foundation to
promote greater diversity within the STEM/STEM education research
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.