* 2222021
* AGU Workshop on Impactful GeoHealth Programs
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,565.00

Rapid changes to the environment due to climate change and the impact of human
beings on the environment is impacting human health. Environmental factors such
as extreme heat and cold snaps, flooding, the northward migration of tropical
insect-borne diseases, the increasing occurrence of harmful algal blooms, and
environmental degradation due to release and/or burial of anthropogenically-
generated pollutants originating from waste, manufacturing, and mining are
having significant and serious impacts on the health of our nation's population
as well as on people around the world. To identify possible solutions, the
American Geophysical Union (AGU), a professional society of over 60,000 Earth;
ocean; and atmospheric scientists, students, and private sector representatives,
will survey its constituents and collect input on where the geosciences are best
positioned to make fast progress in ameliorating environmental impacts on human
health. To accomplish this task, AGU will convene and gather information from
diverse subject matter experts including scientists, practitioners,
environmental justice leaders, industry leaders, entrepreneurs, education
experts, and other stakeholders, including early career scientists on this broad
topic. A steering committee made up that includes the AGU GeoHealth leadership
will help guide this work. The activities will lead to a set of recommendations
and prospects that will collectively: (1) identify high-priority challenges in
GeoHealth that can be addressed in the near term (2-4 years); (2) provide a
road-map or path for developing programs around these challenges; (3) provide a
set of ideas to communicate the importance of GeoHealth internationally; and (4)
address the need for training and career paths in GeoHealth. Results of their
community survey will be summarized in a report that will be made available to
the public. Key outcomes will be the identification of geoscience-related
environmental processes that have the highest human-health impacts and are
primed for immediate resolution and/or intervention. Broader Impacts of the
activity will be to improve our understanding of and better management of
environmental impacts on human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American
Geophysical Union (AGU) will conduct a broad, inclusive, results-driven survey
of its constituents, which include scientists and students from across the
Earth, ocean, and atmospheric sciences. Members from the private sector are also
involved. The goal of the information collection exercise is to gather ideas and
research areas where geoscientists, communities, and medical professionals can
come together to accelerate our nation's ability to mitigate and minimize human
health impacts of changes in the environment due to climate and anthropogenic
activities. AGU will build off and leverage key resources, leadership, partners,
and programs they have already developed in the area of GeoHealth. It will
include discussions with participants selected from the AGU College of Fellows
New Frontiers Committee, a committee that has already focused on supporting
GeoHealth over the past year. It will also include discussions with AGU section
leadership, especially in the following sections of GeoHealth, Atmospheric
Sciences, Biogeosciences, Cryosphere Sciences, Ocean Science, Global
Environmental Change, Hydrology, Education, Earth and Space Informatics, Earth
and Planetary Surface Processes, and Science and Society. These sections all
include active student and early career members. AGU leaders will also be
involved from the AGU Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Effort and its Advisory
Committee; from The Thriving Earth Exchange and selected fellows and community
members; as well as members of its Community Science Group which includes
several relevant partners including the American Public Health Association.
Results of this effort will be summarized in a report and posted on the
professional society website. An important component of the final report will be
the identification of targets that can be addressed in a significant way within
a 2 to 3-year timeframe. Information gathering will include online survey
vehicles, virtual gatherings, one-on-one discussions with experts, and broad
outreach across all fields of geoscience. An important aspect of the survey
effort will be engagement of early career scientists and members of groups
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.