* 2222215
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable antioxidants for industrial process fluids
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Sherri Elder, NEW PAGE STRATEGIC CONSULTING, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 253,030.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop bio-based antioxidant products for
industrial processes. Commercial development of peptide antioxidants has been
limited for use in consumer, food, or therapeutic applications. This project
will develop peptide antioxidants derived from the enzymatic digestion of
agricultural biomass as alternatives to synthetic antioxidants used in the
processing and storage of industrial fluids. Although synthetic antioxidants are
critical for the stabilization of many industrial processes, they are derived
from petroleum and tend to have toxicity and/or environmental safety concerns.
The products resulting from this effort will be first-in-class innovations;
safer and more environmentally responsible than existing products. Project
activities will validate peptide performance in the initial target application
area: the stabilization of vinyl monomer fluids and processes. This research
will initially focus on vinyl monomer processing as well as four additional
industrial markets where sustainable antioxidants could have a high impact. The
estimated consumption of synthetic antioxidants in the five combined markets in
2022 will be close to 1 million tons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project seeks to develop a bio-based antioxidant product derived from
sustainable materials and suitable for industrial process fluids. Antioxidant
peptides derived from the enzymatic digestion of plant-based proteins have the
potential to replace synthetic antioxidants in industrial processes. This
project focuses on process compatibility, product stability, and antioxidative
performance as key technical hurdles. This project will create a library of
antioxidative peptides generated by the enzymatic digestion of plant proteins.
This library will then be tested for the solubility of peptides with
representative fluids under process conditions, potential formulation design,
and for thermal and storage stability of the designed formulations. This project
will lower technical barriers to advancing the commercial development of peptide
antioxidants for applications across many industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.