* 2222816
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Efficient Inspection of Unpiggable Pipelines through Human-Robot Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Yongming Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2023
* USD 90,000.00

Recent trends in emerging fuels, such as renewable natural gas and hydrogen,
provide the United States a golden opportunity to become a powerhouse in global
energy markets and truly achieve full energy independence. However, recent
economic and business analytics has indicated that the US conventional oil and
gas revolution is being held back by its aging pipeline infrastructure, more
than half of which is over 60 years old. Therefore, within the gas pipeline
industry, an urgent need is to inspect and certify existing infrastructure for
emerging fuel transport. A grand challenge in gas pipeline infrastructure is
aging-related deterioration that often leads to catastrophic consequences.
Ensuring the integrity of pipelines requires advanced inspection and diagnostic
tools in the next few decades. Due to the complex geometries of pipelines, over
or under-sized valves, short-radius bends, and other conditions, a significant
portion of pipeline infrastructure in the US remains “unpiggable” – unable to be
inspected by the conventional inline inspection robots. Allowing pipeline
operators to inspect unpiggable gas pipelines with newly developed robots,
analytics, and human integration will significantly help the gas industry to
manage critical infrastructure. The proposed study aims to tackle this
challenging problem to reduce risk and improve efficiency for an industry with
inherent dangers related to transporting, storing, and accessing combustible and
corrosive materials. The robotic, decision-support, and training tools created
in this project will provide a conduit to recruiting and retaining individuals
who have not traditionally been considered for pipeline inspection positions,
such as persons with disabilities and operators with insufficient field
experience and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how a
cyber-physical-human interplay enables a more responsive and effective
translation of new technology advancements for oil and gas pipeline workers. The
overall goal of this project is to understand the work context of pipeline
inspection, examine the feasibility of a novel robotic inspection system, and
generate the empirical groundwork for a larger project proposal to the NSF’s
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) Initiative. The future
FW-HTF proposal aims to create a novel human-robot-AI framework to enable
automated inspection, safety assessment, and worker training. Specific plans for
this development grant involve (a) interviewing stakeholders to understand the
current work practices of pipeline inspection and assess their needs and
perceptions of robotics and automation technologies; (b) gaining an
understanding of human factors (such as trust) that strengthen the partnership
between humans and robots by conducting artifact analysis of robot prototypes
with stakeholders; (c) understanding potential safety hazards of robotic
pipeline inspection tools and developing guidelines on robot design for
mitigating such risks; and (d) understanding the human knowledge and inspection
data fusion and their impact on the risk assessment for the pipeline with the
preliminary results from the above tasks. The proposed study will significantly
advance the understanding of the future of work, workers, and technology for
efficient inspection of critical pipeline infrastructure. If successful, this
development grant will lead to a comprehensive FW-HTF research proposal for
designing and implementing cyber-physical-human systems that best utilize the
capacities of human workers and new technologies to achieve high productivity
and safe work conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.