* 2222890
* FW-HTF-P: Fostering Transferable Skills for Future-Ready Extraterrestrial Construction Workforce via an Intelligent-Immersive Training Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Yimin Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,987.00

The vision of becoming an interplanetary species requires the construction
industry to face an unprecedented challenge: extraterrestrial construction. We
envision the future frontier of the construction industry as extraterrestrial
construction where the role of workers and their required skills will be
significantly different. For the envisioned future extraterrestrial construction
industry, our interdisciplinary research team is interested in exploring how
Industry 4.0 emerging technologies rooted in digitalization and artificial
intelligence can enable a future-ready construction workforce by integrating
transferable skills into training environments. In this project, the guiding
principles are (1) developing a better understanding of definition, hierarchy,
and categorization of transferable skills in the context of future
extraterrestrial workforce development, and (2) exploring and advancing training
environments enabled by adapting emerging technologies and with a focus on
transferable skills to make the existing workers become ready for the future
frontier. Our interdisciplinary team will investigate the technological and
human dimensions of this vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate and identify the nature of future extraterrestrial construction and
the hierarchy of the skills required by future workers, as well as emerging
technologies that can be utilized to integrate transferable skills for
developing a future-ready workforce. In addition, we will design, prototype, and
evaluate an intelligent-immersive training environment using AI-assisted,
simulation-based virtual constructs on training the existing workers in specific
transferable skills to make them ready for the future frontier. In particular,
the project team will explore and prototype an intelligent-immersive training
environment that addresses the needs for training working professionals to
foster transferable skills of future extraterrestrial construction workers. The
research effort will advance existing knowledge in the following three main
areas: (1) the effectiveness of the intelligent-immersive training environment
for fostering transferable skills, i.e., computational thinking, fluid
reasoning, and agility, (2) the effectiveness of the training environment for
improving knowledge acquisition, retention, and performance of future
extraterrestrial construction workers and (3) an AI-based approach to learning
scaffolding and personalized learning in order to address specific needs of
working professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.