* 2222148
* Mentoring a Diverse Cohort of Postdoctoral Scholars in Data Science Education Research
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rachel Levy, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2025
* USD 640,469.00

Data science is rapidly growing, as a profession, a professional skill and a
component of literacy for the general public. With data science research careers
moving beyond the university setting and into other sectors, it is imperative to
learn what kind of learning environment will support the postdoctoral training
and development of diverse, skilled data scientists, educators, and data science
education researchers who can help build and communicate with a data-literate
public. The ability to consume, question, produce, and use data is critical not
only to answer research questions in areas such as health, science, business,
and government but also to inform decision-making in many aspects of work and
personal life. Through this project, the North Carolina State University Data
Science Academy will identify the key success components of a model for the
recruitment and mentoring of a diverse cohort of postdoctoral fellows who will
enter their professions with expertise in data science education research. This
model is intended to train and support scholars who have differing levels of
experience and strengths in STEM, STEM education, education research, or data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While data science and literacy can be embedded
across disciplines, they are central to STEM Education. How data-related skills
will be infused in courses across the curriculum and taught in stand-alone data
science learning environments is an open and evolving area of education research
and practice. The cohort of postdoctoral scholars will study the North Carolina
State University Data Science Academy's course design model: All-campus Data
science through Accessible Project-based Teaching and learning (ADAPT). Fellows
will work as part of a diverse education research team to develop, implement,
scale and share a long-term, robust research program that assesses the efficacy
of the ADAPT model and related courses. The research will add capacity to STEM
education research by presenting a model that has been validated through ongoing
assessment and continuous improvement and has the potential to be adapted to
other institutions and STEM fields. By matching postdoctoral fellows with a
diverse team of mentors with varied data science education research interests,
the project also aims to build reciprocal relationships between mentees and
mentors who learn from each other and their experiences. Postdoctoral scholars
will have opportunities to engage with a network of data science and education
leaders in industry, government, education, consulting and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.