* 2222847
* Track 4: Center for Equity and Diversity in Engineering at the University of New Orleans - Using Equity and Inclusion in the Transformation Preparation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lizette Chevalier, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,185,499.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of barriers that
prevent access to and success in educational and career pathways have manifested
have challenged the global prominence of the United States in science and
engineering. For students from historically-underrepresented populations, these
barriers can prove overwhelming. Providing supportive pathways for historically-
underrepresented students addresses both the need for a robust STEM workforce
and upward social and economic mobility of students. This project will work
specifically to address the need for a more diverse and inclusive engineering
workforce in the New Orleans metropolitan region and Southeast Louisiana –
otherwise known as “The Silicon Bayou” – by creating a Center for Equity and
Diversity in Engineering at the University of New Orleans (CEDE@UNO). Aligning
with the NSF Broadening Participation in Engineering Program, CEDE@UNO will
foster the education and professional development of a diverse engineering
talent pool at the only public urban-serving research university in Louisiana
and within one of the most culturally diverse metropolitan cities in the United
States. Over the course of three years, CEDE@UNO will target four specific
goals: 1) increase the diversity of University of New Orleans’ engineering
enrollment to more closely reflect New Orleans’ demographics; 2) increase the
first-year retention rate among historically-underrepresented engineering
students; 3) increase the graduation rate of historically-underrepresented
engineering students; and 4) increase the percentage of engineering graduates
who are women. The Center will serve all students and faculty of the Dr. Robert
A. Savoie College of Engineering but will particularly focus on improving
recruitment, retention, and degree completion of women and historically
underrepresented engineers. The Center will accomplish its work using a phased
implementation of multiple curricular and co-curricular support strategies that
weave together individual, yet synergistic, activities proven to positively
impact institutional and engineering student success: 1) targeted undergraduate
student recruitment; 2) grades 8- 12 outreach; 3) creation of transfer pathways;
4) modification of College hiring practices; 5) summer bridge program for
engineering students; 6) academic support programs, including peer tutoring,
supplemental instruction, and a digital loan initiative; 7) faculty professional
development focused on equity and inclusivity; 8) evolving the first-year
engineering seminar; 9) providing study/lounge space for networking and support;
10) peer mentoring; 11) growth of affinity groups for underrepresented minority
and female students; 12) alumni mentorship and experiential learning; and 13)
engineering-focused career placement services. Collectively, these activities
will enable the Center and the University’s Dr. Robert A. Savoie College of
Engineering to drive the organizational, cultural, and pedagogical changes
needed to achieve project goals. Tracking and comparing program data over time,
along with survey and interview data evaluation, will provide a deeper
understanding of how multiple, equity-minded practices support one another and
facilitate greater success at an urban-serving institution and throughout a city
like New Orleans. The project will also advance understanding of how a focus on
the values of equity, diversity, and inclusion within these practices can
transform a student’s sense of belonging in college and as a graduate. In
addition to meeting the demand for a more diverse and inclusive engineering
workforce in New Orleans and Southeast Louisiana, the impacts of this project
include fostering and advancing the existing culture at the University of New
Orleans, promoting the growth of women and historically underrepresented
engineering graduates, and sharing experiences regarding successful practices
with other urban-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.