* 2222573
* Mapping the Origins of Segregation using GIS Resources
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Amber Crowell, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 05/31/2026
* USD 383,941.00

Residential segregation continues to define many communities and is associated
with numerous social and economic consequences. This project develops new
empirical findings and understandings on residential segregation and an open-
access digital database with opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration
to understand and map the historical origins of contemporary patterns of
residential segregation. The digital data hub and archive for this project will
give researchers the capability to map, analyze, and document historical and
contemporary segregation patterns in communities using restricted historical
census data, innovative new methods of segregation analysis, and geographic
information systems (GIS) mapping. The digital hub will facilitate collaboration
with researchers, who will contribute and use data and mapping resources
archived on the project's website for teaching and research. By building a
research network to support the collaborative digital data hub and platform,
offering workshops, and an open graduate-level research methods course, this
project more broadly increases the research capacity and student
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research on historical segregation has
been limited to using aggregate data that cannot sustain analyses of the
locational attainments and household-level residential outcomes that shape
segregation patterns. This constrains the ability to compare historical patterns
of residential mobility and segregation with findings for contemporary urban
areas. The goal of this project is to fill this gap in knowledge by using new
data sources and new methods for segregation analysis. In addition, the project
will develop new GIS resources to document unique aspects that address long-
standing research questions about historical segregation patterns in 1940
including: dispersed vs. concentrated patterns of segregation; back-alley
"integration" of residents in urban areas; and complex patterns of spatial
separation of immigrant groups. An equally important goal is to develop a
collaborative digital platform and network of faculty and student researchers
who will generate new knowledge on historical segregation and neighborhood
narratives through interdisciplinary and mixed-methods contributions, supported
by the materials, workshops, and courses offered by the PI and Co-
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.