* 2222485
* FW-HTF-P: Supporting Nurse Workforce Development in Future Senior Care Facilities Using Intelligent Immersive Virtual Reality
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Junfeng Ma, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The growing aging population in the United States presages an increasing need
for senior care nursing. This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier
(FW-HTF) planning project will explore the future of nursing in geriatric care
and how Intelligent Immersive Virtual Reality (IIVR) can be used as a training
platform for nurses and other health care professionals working in senior care
facilities. IIVR is a promising technology that expands and advances existing
immersive VR by integrating Artificial Intelligence technologies and has the
potential to provide an efficient training solution with a high retention rate
at low cost. IIVR might be used in nurse training to bridge the gap between
current nurse skills and future requirements. The investigators also examine how
to reduce barriers to utilizing IIVR in nurse training in senior care
facilities. Thus, this research supports the development of the senior care
nurse workforce and explores methods to adapt transforming technologies to
prepare nurses to fulfill future senior care needs and enhance the quality of
future senior care services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
work is to enhance future training and retention of nurses working in senior
care facilities. To achieve this goal, a convergent team of professionals with
expertise in IIVR, cognitive science, senior care, and data analysis and
modeling will investigate: 1) Future nursing requirements in senior care
facilities and the degree that IIVR has been or can be exploited (Future Work);
2) The skillset gap between current senior care nurses and future requirements
and how IIVR might bridge this gap (Future Workers); and 3) An IIVR platform
constructed to understand the training needs of future senior care nurses
(Future Technology). Stakeholders from senior care facilities, senior care
technology providers, government agencies, nursing schools, and VR solution
providers will participate in multidisciplinary interviews, surveys, and
roundtables. These stakeholder discussions, together with quantitative analysis
(e.g., statistical analysis, text mining) and IIVR prototype development and
evaluation will highlight both the potential and risks of using IIVR for
training nurses working in senior care facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.