* 2222157
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of pollen-specific phospholipases in maize haploid production
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xuemin Wang, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 653,359.00

Sexual reproduction mixes the genetic materials from two parents, which is the
driving force for natural selections and a basis for plant breeding
improvements. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that ensure the
transfer of the genetic information from each parent to the next generation are
largely unknown. This project addresses how specific enzymes that cleave
phospholipids, which are building blocks of cell membranes, such as those of
sperm and egg cells, affect the sperm genome transfer in maize seed production.
Genetic defects in those enzymes lead to some embryos without the sperm genome,
producing maternal haploids with genetic information only from the egg. This
study will investigate how those enzymes affect membrane lipid changes and how
the lipid changes lead to haploid formation. Thus, findings from this project
will advance the fundamental, mechanistic understanding of sperm genome
stability and haploid seed production with potential applications to crop
improvement, such as haploid induction technology to enhance crop breeding and
production for food, feed, fuel, and industrial feedstocks. This project will
have additional broader impacts on science, education, and society by providing
opportunities for training of students and postdoctoral researchers and serving
as a platform to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.
The research materials, including various maize lines, will be distributed to
community and the results and large datasets will be disseminated to enhance
science and education through lectures and seminars, in classroom teaching, at
national and international meetings, and through timely publications in peer-
reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to elucidate
how two pollen-specific phospholipases, pPLAIIφ and PLD3, are involved in sperm
genome transmission and haploid seed production in cereal crops. The research
tests the hypotheses that loss of the pPLAIIφ and PLD3 activities perturbs lipid
homeostasis, membrane structures, and sperm-egg membrane fusion during
fertilization, leading to haploid induction and decreased seed production. The
supporting objectives are to: 1) determine the role of pPLAIIφ and PLD3
catalytic activities in haploid and seed production, 2) characterize the effect
of the phospholipases on pollen and sperm membrane lipid homeostasis, and 3)
measure lipid dynamics and effects on sperm-egg fusion. The results will advance
the understanding of sperm genome stability and sexual reproduction and have the
potential to identify chemical and molecular modifiers applicable to enhance
haploid induction for crop improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.