* 2222219
* SBP: Investigating Social Comparison Processes among Undergraduates at a Hispanic Serving Institution
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ho Huynh, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 464,392.00

People often compare themselves to others around them (i.e., engage in social
comparison). For minority undergraduate students, the people around them are
typically majority students. However, for Hispanic students who attend Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSIs), the majority of people around them tend to be other
Hispanic students. This shift from being in the minority to being in the
majority may have important consequences; yet, no research has examined the
potential effects. The current project plans to conduct studies to understand
how students compare themselves to others in this new context and tests a
strategy to help students compare themselves to others in more productive ways.
This project has important implications for society. Knowledge gained through
these studies can help colleges/universities better serve their students and
improve long-term outcomes. Additionally, the project will train 25
undergraduate researchers and results from the study will be made publicly
available through conference presentations and publications. Ultimately, this
research program will improve STEM education and create a more diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most beneficial type of social comparison
occurs when people compare themselves to others who they perceive as better off
than themselves but who are similar in important ways (i.e., upward
identification). On the other hand, it can be detrimental when people make
comparisons to those who they perceive as similar but worse off than themselves
(i.e., downward identification). The project’s main hypothesis is that downward
identification occurs frequently in Hispanic students who attend HSIs where
Hispanic students are in the majority. The project tests this hypothesis through
four studies. Studies 1 and 2 identify current social comparison processes and
outcomes related to these processes. Study 3 uses an experiment to determine
whether social comparison causes changes to student outcomes. Study 4 follows
students throughout an academic year (six data collection time points) to test
the long-term effects of a program designed to improve student performance
through social comparison. Ultimately, this research expands knowledge about
social comparison processes and enhances future research and interventions on
improving academic outcomes and minority representation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.