* 2222404
* EAGER: Quantum Algorithms for Solving Computational Mechanics Problems in Hybrid Quantum Computers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Caglar Oskay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,978.00

Quantum computing has received tremendous national and international attention
in the past few years. This is because research in physics, mathematics, and
computer science, as well as hardware and software technology have achieved
several critical milestones that demonstrate the potential of quantum computing
in revolutionizing many aspects of how and what we compute in engineering,
science, and beyond. Despite such significant advancements, solving important
engineering problems with quantum computing remains a distant prospect with
several fundamental research questions remain to be addressed from the hardware
and software, and from the quantum algorithm development perspectives. This
Early-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) research award will
explore quantum algorithms for solving the mechanical response of engineering
materials and structures. The finite element method is the most successful and
commonly used approach to predict the mechanical behavior of materials and
structures. The focus of this research is to study whether and how novel quantum
finite element algorithms could outperform classical finite element algorithms
in solving mechanics problems. As part of the grant, educational content will
also be developed to introduce the use of quantum computing in solving classical
engineering problems to a broad section of the engineering community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this EAGER research is to devise and
investigate quantum computing algorithms for solving continuum mechanics
problems in Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum computers that are available today
or will be available soon. This research will establish and analyze algorithms
for evaluating linear elasticity problems subjected to static loading
conditions. The specific research objectives to achieve the stated goal are: (1)
to develop a framework for the algorithmic structure of quantum finite element
method based on the Variational Quantum Linear Solver approach; (2) to analyze
the computational performance of the quantum algorithms relative to classical
algorithms in terms of complexity, accuracy and convergence; and (3) to verify
and validate the performance of the proposed quantum framework using existing
quantum computers with gate-based architectures and quantum computing
simulators. Since some of the solution procedures for the finite element method
either require or are better suited for classical computers, and since currently
available quantum computers are limited in the operations they can perform, this
research will study algorithms suitable for hybrid (classical-quantum)
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.