* 2222433
* Provider Pricing Behavior and Health Policy
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Morgan Henderson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 282,412.00

Spending on health care comprises almost 20% of GDP in the United States, and
spending on hospital care constitutes almost a third of that. Despite this cost,
relatively little is known about the pricing behavior of hospitals: until
recently, the rates negotiated between hospitals and insurers for items and
services have been largely confidential, thus significantly limiting
researchers’ abilities to understand the market dynamics for hospital care. This
project will use new, publicly available hospital price transparency data from
hospitals across the country to better understand how health policy affects
hospital pricing: specifically, how Medicaid expansion is associated with
altered hospital pricing practices. Hospitals typically contract with many
different payers – both public and private – that have different degrees of
negotiating power; Medicaid expansion changes the distribution of payer mix for
a given hospital, and thus may have consequences for the prices that payers are
able to negotiate. This project should not only deepen the collective
understanding of hospital pricing practices, but also enable additional research
into hospital pricing behavior and inform national policy discussions on the
costs and benefits of public insurance expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will assemble a sample of novel, publicly available hospital pricing
datasets from hospitals all over the country and clean, document, and synthesize
this data. Then, using this analytic dataset, this project will conduct two
studies on the determinants of hospital pricing. Using a quasi-experimental
state-border research design, both studies will estimate the relationship
between payer mix and hospital pricing behavior. The first study will examine
the extent to which hospitals respond to Medicaid expansion by shifting costs
between payers; the second study will examine the extent to which hospitals
respond to Medicaid expansion by strategically altering prices across services
within the hospital. Finally, this project will publicize and promote this
research dataset among other researchers at minority-serving institutions
(MSIs), and will provide proactive outreach to, and support for, other MSI
researchers seeking to use this new, important data
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.