* 2222592
* Collaborative Research: Zooplankton restarts in a high-latitude marine ecosystem: species-specific recruitment and development in early spring
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Russell Hopcroft, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 335,949.00

Global climate change and associated extreme weather events are increasingly
impacting marine communities at all trophic levels and leading to shifts in the
timing of life history events. This project is investigating the annual restart
of the spring zooplankton community in the Gulf of Alaska in order to determine
the timing of species-specific recruitment and growth. Zooplankton are small
pelagic animals that are a critical link between microalgae and protozoans and
higher levels in the food web including economically important fishes, birds and
marine mammals. While their abundances and species composition have been
documented over part of the annual cycle between late spring and fall, this
project focuses on winter and early spring. The project integrates traditional
methods with modern molecular approaches to characterize the diversity,
development, feeding and physiology of zooplankton, especially the early
developmental stages of copepods (small crustaceans). The goal is to determine
which species are there, how many are present and where they are in the water
column, and to reveal indicators of their health. Broader impacts include
research training for three graduate students and at least four undergraduates
in biological oceanography and physiological ecology. Outreach activities are
focusing on broadening the publicâ€™s understanding of plankton ecology. An
illustrated zooplankton guide for the Gulf of Alaska and plankton module for
school teachers and students is being produced in collaboration with the Center
for Alaskan Coastal Studies. Other plans include sponsorship of nature-drawing
workshops on zooplankton and the production of an Art &amp; Science traveling
exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is tracking zooplankton population
abundances, species composition and developmental stages through the spring
restart in a high-latitude fjord in the northern Gulf of Alaska. While the
entire zooplankton community is being characterized, the main focus is on the
difficult-to-assess early developmental stages of copepods, which dominate the
late spring biomass in the region. Three central hypotheses guide the research:
1) high abundances of copepod nauplii are present before any measurable
increases in food in surface waters; 2) species diversity increases between
winter and spring, with nauplii from large lipid-rich capital-breeding species
appearing first, followed by those from income- and hybrid-strategy species and
finally nauplii that emerge from dormant eggs; 3) prior to the appearance of
food resources, nauplii from capital-breeding species conserve resources by
delaying development and entering a state of dormancy in the second and third
naupliar stages. The project entails intensive depth-stratified field sampling
to characterize the wild community, in combination with laboratory experiments
on nauplii to determine their responsiveness to food. The prey are being
characterized by measuring chlorophyll a, dietary and prey community DNA
sequencing and flow cytometry to establish diversity and abundances. Size-
fractionated zooplankton samples are being analyzed using microscopy and
community DNA sequencing to ascertain species diversity, developmental stage
distribution and abundances. Feeding activity is being measured using dietary
DNA sequencing of nauplii followed by comparisons with the prey field. Dormancy
in nauplii is being determined by differential gene expression of target genes
(RT-qPCR) and high-throughput sequencing of mRNA of individuals
(transcriptomics) and community samples (meta-transcriptomics). Short-term and
long-term effects of food availability on dormancy, development and growth are
being quantified in laboratory experiments. Broader impacts are focused on
training of students in interdisciplinary research and state-of-art techniques,
and public outreach to introduce plankton ecology to broader
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.