* 2222373
* Workshop to Identify Convergent Nanotechnology Approaches for Precision Delivery of Active Agents in Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Gregory Lowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2023
* USD 59,046.00

Maintaining agricultural productivity in a changing climate, while also
minimizing the impact of agricultural activity on the environment, is needed to
sustainably meet future food demands. To achieve these goals, new tools are
needed to improve the efficiency of agricultural inputs such as fertilizers and
pesticides, and to protect crops from extreme climate events such as heat or
drought. Nanomaterials, defined as materials with no dimension larger than about
100 nanometers, are small enough to efficiently carry agents into plants, and
are therefore an attractive class of materials to deliver them to precise
locations in crops. Nanomaterials have been engineered to fulfill similar
‘precision delivery’ roles in other fields such as medicine. Leveraging the
lessons learned from nanomedicine to create new socially responsible tools for
agriculture requires discussions between multiple disciplines and between
different groups in those disciplines (research, industry, and government).
Therefore, this workshop planned for September 22-23, 2022 in Pittsburgh will
bring together agricultural engineers, precision medicine researchers,
environmental scientists, plant pathologists and physiologists, precision
agriculture specialists, biological engineers, soil scientists, social
scientists, and others to discuss the challenges and opportunities to create
precision delivery tools for agriculture. About 50-100 investigators from the
intersection of these different fields will meet to (1) create a prioritized
list of the most transformative nanotechnology approaches that could be
developed through cross-pollination of recent scientific discoveries in each
discipline, (2) conceptualize new scientific approaches to meet these goals, and
(3) create a roadmap and milestones to successful development and adoption of
the technologies. The workshop will recruit a diverse group of talented junior
faculty, postdocs, and students to benefit from their fresh perspectives and to
connect them with potential collaborators and mentors in the U.S. After the
workshop, the organizers will prepare a report and a peer-reviewed open-access
“Frontiers Review” publication highlighting the key barriers and opportunities
for nanotechnology to promote sustainability in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 2-day workshop at Carnegie Mellon
University will converge people, knowledge, approaches, and innovations from
disparate disciplines, federal agencies, and industry to imagine non-traditional
approaches for precision delivery of active agents in plants. The workshop will
leverage nanotechnology advances from multiple disciplines to discover and model
underlying rules of nanoscale interactions in plants and develop novel and
socially accepted nanoscale research and engineering tools for making
agriculture more efficient, resilient, and sustainable, and to advance plant-
based biomanufacturing methods. The workshop will allow investigators from the
intersection of diverse areas of nanoscience/engineering and agriculture to
discuss, among other topics: novel approaches for targeted delivery of
nutrients, genetic material, therapeutics, and nutraceuticals through synthetic
or biology-derived delivery vectors guided by highly selective bio-recognition
molecules; the development of nanomaterials that respond to in plantae
conditions of pH, temperature, redox state, and signaling biomolecules; and
machine learning-based design of nanomaterial chemical and physical properties
which can lead to highly precise and controlled delivery of chemicals and
biomolecules in plants. Attendees will 1) create a prioritized list of the most
transformative nanotechnology approaches for providing efficient and precision
delivery of active agents inside plants, 2) identify novel materials and
scientific approaches needed to meet these goals as well as the roadblocks to
realizing them, and 3) create a roadmap and milestones for overcoming the
scientific or social barriers to achieving the goals. Experts in nominal group
technique will structure discussions to maximize productivity and crosstalk
among disciplines. Educational activities associated with the workshop include:
(1) presentations from keynote speakers highlighting state-of-the-art knowledge
on the needs for innovation in agriculture for sustainability using plant
nanobiotechnology/sensing, immunology and targeted drug delivery, bimolecular
engineering, omics, plant genetic engineering, analytical chemistry, and
computational chemistry/biology, and precision agriculture; and (2) inviting
participation of 10 to 15 senior PhD students and young scientists, defined here
as either untenured faculty or scientists fewer than six years removed from
their Ph.D. completion. This workshop is aimed at promoting discussions and
disseminating information about the potential of nanotechnology to enable
precision delivery of active agents in plants. This will shift the trajectory of
agriculture sustainability by improving agrochemical delivery, making plants
more resilient to climate change, and improve plant biomanufacturing. This will
enable future sustainable agricultural practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.