* 2222465
* Collaborative Research: ORCC: Harnessing Adaptive Variation in Drought Resistance Strategies to Manage Populations Under Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Siobhan Brady, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2026
* USD 257,963.00

Preserving biological diversity in the face of climate change is a major
societal challenge, and land managers face daily decisions about how to do so as
they strive to sustain natural resources. Climate change is increasing average
temperatures and also changing how often and how intensely extreme events like
severe droughts occur. Extreme events are particularly challenging for organisms
with limited movement like plants, potentially causing enduring losses of
diversity or even local extinctions. Management and conservation actions that
take predicted future environments into account are necessary, but there is
little consensus on what these actions should be and what biological principles
should guide them. This challenge exists in part because studying what traits
allow plants to withstand these extreme climate events is difficult; extreme
droughts occur unpredictably, yet data or experimental resources must be
obtained beforehand to assess the event’s impact. The proposed research will
take advantage of a decade of collections of the common monkeyflower, Mimulus
guttatus, made before, during, and after a severe, multi-year drought
experienced in the 2010s in the Western US. Through studying what genetic
variants and characteristics have helped adapt different populations to long-
term differences in moisture among sites and also to this severe contemporary
event, the proposed research will reveal strategies that may allow populations
to remain resilient in future climates. These predictions will be tested in
field studies. Through workshops with land managers, the project design will be
informed by relevant stakeholders, and the results will subsequently inform
their decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address this
overarching question: what genetic and organismal adjustments to drought
resistance strategies will promote local population resilience to changing
climates? Annual populations of M. guttatus, are widespread but patchily
distributed across a landscape over which the seasonal timing and severity of
drought stress is highly variable. Although M. guttatus populations show
multiple genetic and organismal signatures of adaptation to spatial variation in
aridity, recent work has found they are becoming locally maladapted as climate
change causes increasingly drastic disruptions to historical drought regimes.
The project will intensively characterize how genetic variation acts through
regulatory networks to adaptively tune organismal strategies to local conditions
and ask whether the varied eco-evolutionary processes that unfolded during the
2010s Western US drought are explained by local variation in historical drought
intensity, local standing genetic variation, or seed bank dynamics.
Specifically, population genomic analyses and in-depth resurrection experiments
will assess how genes and morphological, transcriptomic, and ecophysiological
traits evolved during this severe drought event. How drought-associated alleles
adaptively adjust these traits will be tested functionally by gene editing, and
manipulative field experiments will evaluate how these genetic and organismal
factors enhance fitness under current and predicted future drought regimes. All
experiments will be structured around a common set of genotypes, and the
resulting synergy will enable construction and validation of predictive
frameworks for inclusion of genetic and organismal data into assisted gene flow
practices as a means to promote population resilience to climate change and
inform critical conservation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.