* 2222772
* I-Corps: Drug discovery pathway for neural cells
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Cedric Geoffroy, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of novel technology to increase the probability of clinical success
in developing novel therapeutics for neurodegenerative disorders and neurotrauma
using our novel screening system. This project is expected to bring several more
compounds to the preclinical stages in 2022 and move compounds into the clinical
stages by 2025. The broader impact of our technology beyond the development of
novel therapeutics is the change in paradigm our drug discovery platform will
cause. If our method is successful in discovering compounds with high clinical
efficacy, many drug developers will switch from cell lines to using clinically
relevant primary cell cultures, resulting in an increase in the value of our
technology as it will be needed during the active patent window to conduct
screenings in adult neural cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a novel screening system, the first of its kind, to
test compounds directly in adult neural cells. Current neural screens use
embryonic or newborn neural cells which leads to a very high clinical failure
rate as those cells do not represent the target adult neural population in those
with neurological diseases and disorders. The proposed novel screening system
can consistently provide 10s of millions of neural cells of high purity and
viability to conduct drug screenings directly in adult neural cells in place of
embryonic/newborn neural cells. The benefits of this novel screening system in
adult neural cells are 1) reduced chances of positive hits not being effective
at pre-clinical stages; 2) increased odds of finding age/sex specific compounds;
3) ability to find novel compounds/targets unique to adult neural cells; 4)
reduced overall cost of drug development. We are using this technology to
discover novel drugs/compounds/targets that can treat neurodegenerative diseases
and neurotrauma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.