* 2222878
* Proposal for Support of the Annual Phenomenology Symposium at the University of Pittsburgh: 2022-2024
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Tao Han, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 45,000.00

This grant award provides support for the 2022, 2023, and 2024 Annual
Phenomenology (PHENO) Symposia at the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
under the direction of Professor Tao Han.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
the Annual Phenomenology (PHENO) Symposia is to present and discuss state-of-
the-art results in theoretical and experimental particle physics; to stimulate
new ideas in cutting-edge research and foster collaborations among physicists;
and to encourage the participation of junior physicists and nurture their career
development. In recent years, the annual PHENO conferences have been devoted, in
large part, to studying the physics that might emerge from the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN, the European Laboratory for Particle Physics in Geneva,
Switzerland, and to the connections between these experimental results and
results from other collider- and non-collider-based experiments in both
elementary particle physics and astrophysics and cosmology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior physicists are especially encouraged to attend the
Pheno Symposia. Indeed, a characteristic feature of the PHENO Conferences is the
significant involvement of junior physicists (graduate students, postdocs, and
beginning faculty) attending from many institutions in the US and abroad.
Physicists from under-represented groups are also specifically recruited and
well represented. As a result, the PHENO Conferences have become nothing less
than the largest professional student meetings in high-energy physics in the
United States. As such, this grant serves the national interest by supporting
the development of a cutting-edge scientific infrastructure in the United States
and the training of junior physicists to take part in the most current research
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.