* 2222403
* URoL:EN: A non-parametric framework to understand emergent behaviors of microbial consortia
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Yinjie Tang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,946,305.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new framework to better understand the
emergent behaviors of microbial consortia. Emergent behavior is defined as a
system’s behavior that arises from the interactions between its individual parts
and that cannot easily be predicted by the behavior of these individual parts.
For example, researchers found that when subjected to antibiotics, the overall
population consisting of both resistant and non-resistant cells grows faster
than the individual resistant mutants. Because such behaviors cannot easily be
extrapolated from that of individual parts of a system, their study has been
based on observation rather than prediction. This project will provide a novel
framework to predict emergent survival properties of a synthetic community
consisting of individual microbial specialists or generalists that are designed
to degrade specific toxic aromatic compounds. This interdisciplinary research is
innovative and will advance our knowledge on emergent behaviors of complex
living communities. This innovative project will also bring broader impacts to
the global synthetic biology community, microbiome scientists, mathematics
experts, relevant industry, and future generations. In addition, the team will
engage the research community through Synthetic Biology Young Speaker Series, a
weekly, virtual, and multi-year forum where a global thought leader gives an
opening 5 min talk, followed by a 45 min, rising star’s talk, for &gt;1,000
global audiences. Furthermore, the project will increase K-12 students’
participation in STEM education, focusing on the St. Louis area where most of
the K-12 students are underrepresented students. Through these activities, this
project will nurture our future leaders in the converging field of research and
industry to sustainably meet global chemical and energy demands and address
climate crisis issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use diverse
interdisciplinary approaches to develop a non-parametric estimation framework as
follows. First, the team will rationally design and create microbial strains
that can degrade a specific set of model lignin breakdown products. Second, the
team will develop generalizable tools for statistical inferences, including
tools for mean function estimation, simultaneous confidence band construction,
estimation of joint effects, and breakpoint estimation. Third, the team will
perform carefully-designed microbial community assembly and adaptive evolution.
From these efforts, the project will generate new quantitative insights into
emergent survival properties in synthetic microbial consortia and provide
reusable tools for rigorous inferences of emergent properties in various
microbial consortia. This project has huge impacts on the scientific community
and society thanks to the following reasons. First, the developed framework is
generalizable because it does not rely on specific function forms and
parameters. Second, the rational and iterative approach of strain design,
building, and testing will validate the putative gene functions, filling the
critical knowledge gaps. Notably, this work will expand our understanding of the
regulatory network controlling aromatic compound catabolism in Rhodococcus
opacus, with broad applicability to related organisms. Third, the integrated
approach will generate quantitative insights into community assembly and
functional redundancy in consortia of rationally constructed organisms. Last,
the parallel evolution experiments will also generate insights into evolutionary
processes of collective systems and their two forces: robustness and
adaptability. Using diverse microbial consortia as model systems, the team will
provide the insights into the complex evolution process, enabling quantitative
analysis of robustness and adaptability of collective systems. This project will
also train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in an
interdisciplinary manner, enabling unique training of the future workforce and
educators in chemical engineering, synthetic biology, microbial ecology, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.