* 2222208
* Advancing the Cognitive Science of Active Learning: Pinpointing Instructional Features that Maximize Equity, Self-Efficacy, and Student Learning in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Amedee Martella, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral research
fellowship project will investigate how active learning can be effectively
integrated into lectures to promote equity, self-efficacy, and student learning
in STEM courses. By conducting the research at a Hispanic-Serving Institution
with a diverse student population, the fellow is in a position to produce
insights into instructional practices that enhance the academic success of
groups of students who are underrepresented in their participation in STEM
fields of study. A professional development plan is in place that is tailored to
the career goals of the fellow and includes activities that will enable the
fellow to deepen knowledge and skills related to conducting theoretically driven
and applied research. This in turn lays the groundwork for a future research
career of developing evidence-based teaching guidelines for college instructors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will include three experiments that
manipulate the dosage schedule and order of active learning and lecture to
assess the impact of active learning on student success in introductory STEM
coursework. The manipulation of dosage schedule will involve blocking active
learning and lecture and interspersing active learning and lecture. The
manipulation of dosage order will provide (a) lecture first and active learning
second and (b) active learning first and lecture second. The first two
experiments will occur in an highly controlled laboratory environment and the
third experiment will occur in an introductory biology class co-taught by two
biology professors. Students in the three experiments will learn biology
concepts in four different instructional conditions, and their level of success
in these conditions will be measured using self-efficacy and learning
instruments. A comparison between underrepresented and non-underrepresented
students on their self-efficacy ratings and learning scores will also be
conducted to examine whether there are any proportionate or disproportionate
gains or losses. The results of the study could be used to guide college course
transformations by producing evidence about how to implement active learning
effectively,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the STEM Education
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.