* 2223560
* Conference: iid2022: Statistical Methods for Event Data - Illuminating the Dynamic Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Massimiliano Bonamente, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/28/2023
* USD 29,000.00

The University of Alabama in Huntsville will organize and host a workshop on
astrostatistics in November 2022. Event data are common across the quantitative
sciences, from economics and social sciences, to physics, astronomy, biology and
beyond. The workshop intends to bring together astronomers and other scientists
for a first meeting dedicated entirely to statistics for integer–count event
data. The workshop is structured in a format that includes introductory
lectures, contributed presentations, and hands–on exercise activities, aimed at
furthering the understanding and use of statistical methods for event data. The
portion of the workshop costs funded by the NSF is primarily intended to
facilitate the participation and attendance of early–career scientists and
underrepresented minorities. The primary broader impact of this workshop is the
training and development of young scientists in the area of statistical data
analysis for astronomy, with an emphasis on the recruitment and support of
participants from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
has a two–fold motivation: (a) the training and engagement of young scientists
in proper statistical methods for the analysis and interpretation of data; and
(b) the gathering of scientists – both astronomers and in other related fields –
to exchange recent advances in the statistics and analysis of event data. The
workshop will cover thirteen main topics including general methods of
statistical estimation, statistics for spatial analysis in astronomy, statistics
for spectral data, statistics for temporal analysis of low count-rate data, and
linear and non-linear methods of regression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.