* 2223496
* CAS-Climate: Construction of a bacterium with optimized methane consumption at 10ppm for climate change mitigation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mary Lidstrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,500.00

The rapid pace of climate change has created great urgency for short-term
mitigation strategies and in this project, new scientific information is
obtained to support strategies for removing the potent greenhouse gas methane
using methane-eating bacteria. Success in this project lays the foundation for
developing greenhouse gas mitigation technology that if deployed at scale, could
slow global warming by 2050.This technology will buy time for the development
and launch of CO2â€“focused interventions while keeping at bay some of the most
devastating near-term impacts of a warming planet. This concept is brought to
educational activities, to increase understanding of how such approaches can
help the planet, and undergraduates also obtain hands-on learning in the
laboratory as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current proposed
methane mitigation strategies are mainly focused on reducing emissions, and
these are important goals. However, it has been argued that emission strategies
must be augmented by atmospheric methane capture to slow global warming by 2050.
Removing methane from the atmosphere is extremely challenging due to the low
concentration (1.89 ppm). However, hundreds of thousands of emission sites exist
in which the overlying methane is in the 10-100 ppm range, and these present
opportunities for methane capture from air using bacteria that consume methane
(methanotrophs). Naturally occurring methanotrophs that utilize methane at these
levels have methane consumption rates that are much too slow to be practical.
However, a methanotroph has been identified in the investigator's culture
collection that grows at 500 ppm significantly better than other strains in the
literature. In this project, specific traits are tested to determine whether
they are involved in growth at low methane, including the affinity of the
methane oxidation system, the starvation response regulatory gene rpoS, and key
branchpoints in the metabolic network. Strains showing enhanced growth at low
methane are characterized for growth, methane oxidation, transcripts, and fluxes
at low methane, to understand how these changes affect growth parameters and the
metabolic network compared to the wild type. Selection is carried out for
strains with enhanced growth at 100 ppm methane, using adaptive laboratory
evolution approaches, and any new traits that are identified are characterized.
Methanotrophs capable of faster growth at 100 ppm and lower can be used in the
future for new technology to remove methane from air.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.