* 2223879
* Collaborative Research: Digitization and Enrichment of U.S. Herbarium Data from Tropical Africa to Enable Urgent Quantitative Conservation Assessments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Porter Lowry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,266,390.00

Biological diversity has been the subject of hundreds of years of work by
botanists and zoologists, accumulating rich stores of specimens and associated
data in museums and herbaria around the world. These rich information resources,
however, too often remain in analog format only, and have not been digitized and
“enabled” in the service of science. This project aims to digitize, enrich, and
share openly the rich data resources held in United States herbaria that
correspond to plants of tropical Africa. By the close of the project, it will
have captured data from 1.1 million herbarium specimens, and will augment
digital accessible data records for the African continent by more than 15-fold.
It will also have created a broad, international, intercontinental network of
scientists and students interested in and experienced with management and
analysis of such data. This combination of information resources and human
capacity will enrich and improve biodiversity conservation planning across
Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Herbarium specimens represent a rich source of
data on plant diversity. This project will focus on the tropical African seed
plant specimen holdings of 21 U.S. herbaria, which will be imaged, associated
data captured, and data records georeferenced and quality-controlled. Imaging
and data capture will be carried out at each of the herbaria, and data will be
aggregated for efficient georeferencing. For most records, georeferencing will
be performed automatically; however, a small portion will be georeferenced
manually by plant scientists in Ghana, Rwanda, Malawi, and Gabon. Finally,
project data will be subjected to detailed quality-control assessment, and
served openly to the scientific community via a dedicated “African Plants”
portal on Symbiota, as well as integration into iDigBio.org and the Global
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF.org). These rich data resources will be
used to understand the conservation status of African plant species in much
greater detail than has been possible to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.