* 2223559
* Feasibility of Engineered Neural Networks for Neuro-Restoration After Cortical Stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zoran Nenadic, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Over 8 million people in the US are living with chronic stroke. The resulting
disabilities lead to significant public health costs and decreased quality of
life. With no means to satisfactorily restore functions after stroke, new
effective regenerative approaches are much needed. Therefore, a new concept of
“engineered neural networks” (ENN) is proposed. The ENN is envisioned to contain
neurons derived from human adult stem cells and be structured to have precise
inputs and feedback loops. These connections will enable the ENN’s integration
with other brain and body areas and thereby learn behaviors. Ultimately, this
integration process can lead to ENNs replacing stroke-damaged brain and any
associated functions. Before this goal can be achieved, the first step is to
develop a benchtop testbed cultured neural network (CNN) and verify that it can
be trained to perform an arbitrary sensory task and motor behavior. Successful
completion of this study would demonstrate that CNNs can be trained to encode
arbitrary behaviors and interact with other brain and body areas. This would
justify further research to pursue the development of ENNs and methods to
implant such systems into the stroke-damaged brain. Ultimately, this may restore
brain resources in a functionally meaningful manner, which may in turn lead to
ground-breaking regenerative treatments for stroke rehabilitation. This study
will also: (i) promote education and lifelong learning in biomedical engineering
students and research trainees; (ii) broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in neuroengineering; (iii) increase scientific literacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel neurorestorative concept
of “engineered neural networks” (ENN) envisioned to contain neurons derived from
human induced pluripotent stem cells (HIPSCs). The ENN will have a precise
structure consisting of inputs and feedback loops, formed by excitatory and
inhibitory neurons, to facilitate communication with other brain/body areas
post-stroke. By interfacing the ENN with microelectronics, consistent and
precise patterns of excitatory and inhibitory inputs and error-driven feedback
will be delivered to train the ENN to interface with other brain/body areas and
learn arbitrary human behaviors. Ultimately, this can establish bidirectional
communication of the ENN with the remaining post-stroke brain, thereby replacing
the stroke-damaged cortex and subserved functions. To gauge the feasibility of
this concept, the first step is to develop a benchtop testbed cultured neural
network (CNN) and verify that it can be trained to perform an arbitrary sensory
task and motor behavior. Scientifically, the CNN platform can provide a means to
study basic concepts of neural encoding and memory retrieval. From a
neuroengineering perspective, this study may inform the optimal design of stem
cell-derived neuronal tissue. If successful, this study would demonstrate that
CNNs can be trained to encode arbitrary behaviors and interact with other brain
and body areas and would justify further research to pursue the development of
ENNs and methods to implant such systems into the stroke-damaged brain.
Ultimately, this technology may restore brain resources in a functionally
meaningful manner, which may, in turn, lead to ground-breaking regenerative
treatments for stroke rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.