* 2223111
* SBIR Phase I:  Intelligent Fire Detection for Indoor Settings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Rania Hassan, ERLI.AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the
company’s novel fire detection principle and the use of soft computing
techniques by means of (1) computational experiments, and (2) a wide range of
real fire and nuisance experiments on the company’s fire detector prototypes.
This will allow the company to resolve any technical hurdles that may arise from
the integration of the software and hardware into a minimum viable fire detector
expected to significantly outperform current market solutions. The company has
utilized real-world datasets of fire and nuisance experiments conducted by NIST
to test and benchmark the innovation. Using temperature data, for example, the
company’s algorithm detected fires up to 10 times faster than current technology
(fixed-threshold). In addition, no missed detection occurred, and no false
alarms were triggered in all NIST experiments. While these results are
impressive, they are not sufficient to commercialize the innovation given that
they are based on 69 experiments only. The activities proposed in phase I are
designed to reduce the technical risk and strengthen the confidence in the
company’s technology prior to commercialization. This is especially important
because of the high regulatory burden and associated liabilities in the fire
detection space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging ML, erli.ai’s patent-pending
technology will process streaming data from heat/smoke sensors to detect the
earliest signs of fire and separate fire and nuisance events. We introduce a new
alarm triggering principle rooted in the temporal analysis of sensor data
instead of the existing fixed-threshold approach. We propose to further develop
our computational architecture, which employs deep Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM)
neural networks and a variational autoencoder, by developing a theoretical basis
for the outstanding performance our algorithm produced. We will develop an
anomaly detection evaluation scheme for time streaming clustering using Dynamic
Time Warping and Similarity Matrix technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.