* 2223416
* Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing of Cell and Tissue-Based Products
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Tubon, BIOINDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING AND DESIGN ECOSYSTEM
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 234,191.00

This project aims to coordinate a network of stakeholders that will promote
economic growth through workforce development in Advanced Manufacturing of Cell
and Tissue-based Products (AMCTP). AMCTP requires a new kind of manufacturing
that uses robotics, microfluidics, 3-D printing, computational modeling, and
novel types of engineering to construct biologically relevant products composed
of living cells in combination with natural or synthetic materials. The field is
built upon advances in stem cell biology, genome editing, synthetic biology,
computational modeling, micro- and nano-fabrication, tissue engineering, and 3-D
additive manufacturing. The products of AMCTP have the potential to extend our
understanding of disorders and may provide effective methods for treating
conditions such as Parkinson's disease, spinal cord injury, macular
degeneration, diabetes, and heart disease. There are expanding career
opportunities in this field, as well as unmet needs to develop a workforce that
has the required skills. By creating a network of stakeholders from education,
government, and industry, the goal of the Coordination Network is to develop a
skilled, diverse workforce for AMCTP and inform the public about
AMCTP.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This coordination network will use the experience,
expertise, and perspectives of diverse stakeholders to unify efforts and scale
up the progress in preparation of entry, middle-skill, and senior level career
tracks in AMCTP. Madison area Technical College will work with stakeholders to
ensure that project activities include principles of inclusion, equity,
equality, and diversity. The lessons learned in this project have the potential
to serve as a model for similar efforts in other emerging technology areas. The
project aims to accomplish four objectives: (i) establish a national consortium
and a system of governance based on shared interest and public-private
partnerships to enable workforce development for AMCTP; (ii) conduct annual
meetings of the AMCTP consortium and focused Special Interest Group meetings;
(iii) identify/develop/disseminate industry-based AMCTP core competencies and
identify and disseminate information about relevant workforce education/training
options; and (iv) create a structure for sustainability based on public-private
partnerships, investments, and commitments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.