* 2223224
* SBIR Phase I:  A Human-Aware Platform for Socially Collaborative Personal Artificial Intelligence (AI) Assistants
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Crystal Chao, APPLIED SENTIENCE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is enabling Artificial Intelligence (AI) assistants to become proactive,
empowering them to provide better service to users. Currently, commercial AI
assistants respond to user requests reactively. The technologies developed in
this project would provide AI assistants with the situational awareness to
understand users’ lives and predict their needs. The technology will also enable
social intelligence to take the initiative to support users in appropriate ways.
This SBIR Phase I project will apply these technologies to a consumer product
for assisting users with time management and meeting goals while establishing
and strengthening healthy, desirable habits in their daily lives. Proactive
personal AI assistants have the potential to improve productivity, convenience,
and quality of life for every person, as well as to promote aging in place with
greater independence and wellness. Fundamental scientific advancements will also
enable a new generation of potential applications for AI assistants across
sectors, fueling economic growth and creating jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses two central technical challenges for enabling proactive AI
assistants: contextual awareness of users and agent-initiated interaction.
Contextual awareness includes the AI agent’s real-time understanding of current
user state and activity, as well as a long-term understanding of past user
habits. The project proposes to develop hybrid computational models combining
machine learning of multimodal user observations from visual, acoustic, and
geolocation data with probabilistic graphical models that perform long-term
inference and prediction over historical user observations. A virtually-embodied
AI agent will leverage these contextual awareness representations to conduct
real-time, face-to-face collaborations with users. The project proposes to
research and develop a dynamic scheduling approach to proactively enable the
agent to communicate with users. These models will be integrated within a
broader system that assists users with time management. This system will
implement an end-to-end architecture for protecting user privacy while handling
their data. The technical solution will be validated based on quantitative
metrics related to utility and user acceptance by deploying the prototype in end
users’ homes over a multi-week period and conducting surveys about their
subjective experience of the proactive AI assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.