* 2223083
* STTR Phase I:  Three Dimensional (3D) Printed Mixed Matrix Membranes for Biogas Upgrading
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey McCutcheon, MEMBRANEX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to derisk a new membrane manufacturing
technology for biogas upgrading. Renewable natural gas (RNG) is attractive as a
carbon neutral energy source as it is derived from organic wastes such as food
waste, agricultural waste, and municipal biosolids. RNG is part of biogas and
requires cost- and energy-effective separation from carbon dioxide. The company
has developed an additive manufacturing technology that enables the fabrication
of high performance membranes to enable lower cost biogas upgrading. These
membranes offer energy and system design benefits over more traditional
separations technologies for the production of RNG. The membrane printing
approach may lead to the production of best-in-class membranes for RNG
production and could enable carbon capture and utilization from biogas
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project seeks to demonstrate the production of mixed matrix membranes
(MMMs) comprised of polyether block amide polymer and zif8 zeolite. The proposed
method uses electrospray based additive manufacturing to precisely control
membrane thickness and zeolite loading, allowing customized membrane properties
for biogas upgrading. Furthermore, the additive manufacturing, or printing,
method enables increased loading of the zeolite over conventional casting
techniques without the formation of defects that would lessen selectivity. The
goals of the project include quantification of the maximum zeolite loading while
avoiding loss of selectivity. The company will produce small membrane leaves up
to 1 ft2 in area and demonstrate consistent performance across the leaf using
mixed gas testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.