* 2223716
* Conference Proposal: Diversifying the 2022 AOS-BC Conference in San Juan, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Michael Webster, University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2023
* USD 99,325.00

Like most other areas of science, ornithology (the study of birds) lacks the
diversity that is critical to a healthy, vibrant, and productive field of
research. Much-needed efforts to broaden participation in the sciences have
accelerated in recent years, particularly with respect to making science more
welcoming and inclusive to individuals from groups that historically have been
marginalized or excluded. Moreover, the popularity of recreational birding and
the increasing number of volunteers participating in bird-themed citizen science
projects has put ornithology in the spotlight with regard to calls for diversity
and inclusion in the sciences. The joint 2022 conference of the American
Ornithological Society (AOS) and BirdsCaribbean (BC) will be a powerful platform
for activities to broaden participation in the field of ornithology. Being the
first in-person meeting for either society in over two years, and being held in
Puerto Rico, AOS &amp; BC 2022 will be very well attended and will provide
unusually strong training and outreach opportunities. By bringing together so
many individuals with such diverse perspectives, the conference is certain to
push ornithology in new directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have
direct impacts on diversity and inclusion within the discipline of ornithology.
First, Diversity and Inclusion Travel Grants, and Caregiver Grants, will ensure
a diverse pool of attendees. This diversity will be further enhanced by funds to
support attendance by local Puerto Ricans. All of these attendees will
participate in the broader scientific sessions, training workshops, and
mentoring/networking events. Additionally, this project will support three
workshops that will directly address broadening participation in ornithology.
Together, these efforts at AOS &amp; BC 2022 directly lead to a broader and more
inclusive discipline, and will provide a solid basis for future efforts aimed at
making ornithology and other STEM disciplines more
diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.