* 2223439
* I-Corps: Software technology for performance-based wind design through dynamic shakedown
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Seymour Spence, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software tools for the performance-based wind design (PBWD) of a
wide class of building systems subject to extreme winds. In 2020 alone, it is
estimated that the United States was subject to 22 weather events that caused
more than one billion dollars of losses. To increase the resilience of the built
environment against extreme winds, there is interest from the engineering
community to radically change how buildings are designed to resist extreme winds
through the application that implement performance-based engineering. The
proposed technology may fill the unmet market need for software tools that
provide the practicing civil/structural engineering community with a means to
carry out PBWD of building systems. The software tools may create the design
freedom necessary for innovation leading to reduced economic and societal losses
during extreme weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of software technologies for performance-based wind
design (PBWD) of a wide class of structural systems through reliability-based
dynamic shakedown. The technology is based on recent advances in the theory and
probabilistic modeling of inelastic structural systems of wind excited
buildings. These advances may enable, for the first time, the comprehensive
inclusion of failure mechanisms associated with instantaneous plastic collapse,
low-cycle fatigue, and ratcheting, which are fundamental for the
characterization of the post-yield behavior of structural systems subject to
weather events. The computational efficiency and robustness of the resulting
frameworks have allowed the introduction of a new class of software tools that
have the potential to provide structure designers with practical means to
achieve designs that meet the current and future needs for buildings with
enhanced performance and greater sustainability at reduced
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.