* 2223343
* I-Corps: Social Media Misinformation Interactive Dashboard
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Zhijie Dong, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an online dashboard with misinformation forecast trends and
analysis to help address the misinformation endemic in America. Misinformation
is a significant issue that may create confusion and misunderstanding about
essential topics. Misinformation online may result in people questioning
evidence-based medical guidance or refusing safe treatments. Understanding
current misinformation content and trends supports both corporate entities and
social media users. For corporations, th proposed suite of tools may show how
misinformation impacts businesses by exploring and forecasting public sentiment
concerning relevant misinformation topics. This analysis may provide value to
these agencies by shifting resources from manual identification to analyzing the
content and implications of misinformation posts. Individual users may be better
equipped by understanding not only the major topics in misinformation but also
an explanation of why this misinformation topic is being spread. Potential
customers may be drawn to this proposed technology since information demand is
met from grassroots organizations, which can be inconsistent with data quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
automated data collection, data analytics, and deep learning methodologies. The
goal is to develop an application and associated website that centralizes up-to-
date misinformation content and metrics. Such a solution will provide potential
customers with an enterprise-level system to help better understand the
implications and types of misinformation spread across social media platforms.
Currently, an array of tools to interact with misinformation content is under
development. Pipelines are being constructed to channel and store raw data using
the selenium framework for the collection step. Thesedata are stored locally and
will act as the raw information to support the finalized dashboard. Deep
learning models that are trained to identify text-based misinformation have been
developed with the goal of expanding to image, sound, and video identification
to address current social content trends. This Transformers framework also
identifies sentiment on specified topic groups to support analysis. The proposed
technology involves multiple research areas, including big data, natural
language processing, artificial intelligence, and statistical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.