* 2223894
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Nonstationarity of Compound Coastal Floods in the Anthropocene
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Mu√±oz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 09/30/2025
* USD 50,304.00

Human activities, such as hydrologic regulations and altered land-cover land-use
(i.e., urbanization and deforestation) directly modulate freshwater regime to
lower coastal regions. Large-scale anthropogenic activities also contribute to
global warming, which drives sea level rise (SLR) and intensifies the magnitude
of natural hazards (i.e., hurricanes). These terrestrial and coastal hazard
drivers synergize to produce compound floods through nonlinear interactions that
yield in a level of risk not expected from each driver in isolation. Yet, the
spatiotemporal variability of these nonstationary processes and the associated
risks are not well understood. Compounding flood patterns are responsible for
many of the recent hydroclimate disasters (i.e. hurricanes Harvey, Maria, and
Ida), and are expected to evolve under anthropogenic effects. This project helps
provide a solid operational framework for hydrologists and coastal planners that
can be used for quantifying the expected impacts of coastal hydrology stressors
on coastal communities and ecosystems, thereby facilitating efficient resource
allocation for risk mitigation in the face of SLR and rapid urbanization. This
project will support a suite of educational and awareness activities, which will
utilize and enhance programs already in existence at The University of Alabama,
particularly those to recruit students from diverse backgrounds that are not
well represented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a
fundamental body of knowledge on the ever-changing physical and statistical
dependence among various compound flooding drivers over time (e.g., river flow,
rainfall and coastal sea level) and advances our understanding on how such a
nonstationary dependence affects the flooding dynamics and the associated risks.
The team will develop a Hybrid Statistical-Process Based modeling framework that
integrates statistical tools for nonstationary multivariate data analysis,
machine learning algorithms and coupled hydrologic-hydrodynamic models for
probabilistic flood inundation mapping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by a collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science
activities in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.