* 2223730
* EFRI ELiS: Bacteria-Bacteriophage Hybrid System for Rare Earth Element Biomining
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Hongyue Jin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,300,000.00

Rare earth elements (REEs) are utilized as critical components in a broad range
of essential products and clean energy technologies including smart phones,
medical imaging equipment (MRI), solar cells, electrical vehicles, wind-
turbines, and light emitting diodes (LEDs). In the United States, over 90% of
the REEs used in commercial products and industrial applications are produced
overseas through the mining, extraction, and processing of virgin ores. However,
REE mining has a heavy environmental footprint as it requires significant
amounts of energy and water and generates substantial amounts of wastes. The
overarching goal of this project is to explore the development of an integrated
biomining process for the sustainable extraction, separation, and concentration
of REEs from domestic ores, mineral deposits, and waste materials. To advance
this goal, the Principal Investigators propose to design and build a hybrid
bacterial and engineered bacteriophage system that could 1) extract REEs from
processed ores, minerals, solid wastes, and 2) separate the REEs from the
resulting leaching solutions to produce purified REE concentrates for industrial
usage. The successful completion of this research will benefit society through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development of next
generation biomining processes for the sustainable extraction and purification
of REEs. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through education and
training including the mentoring of two graduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher at the University of California, Berkeley and two graduate students
at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States is
vulnerable to disruptions in its supply of rare earth elements (REEs) which have
become the critical components of a broad range of essential industrial products
and clean energy technologies. Thus, there is an urgent need to reduce the
Nationâ€™s reliance on imported REEs by sustainably mining and processing domestic
deposits of REEs. The goal of this research is to develop a novel bio-
hydrometallurgical process consisting of an integrated bacterial and engineered
bacteriophage (Phage) hybrid system that could sustainably bioleach REEs from
their ores and separate/concentrate the REEs from the leaching solutions. To
recover REEs in a cost-effective and sustainable manner, a synthetic biology
approach will be integrated with engineered methylotrophic bacteria to
selectively bioaccumulate REEs as phosphates and to engineer E. coli to produce
organic acids for bioleaching. The specific objectives of the research are to:
(1) Discover and design the proteins that are responsible for the binding and
transportation of REEs; (2) Engineer phage for REE binding for the selective
separation of REEs; (3) Integrate the engineered bacterial strains with phage to
build a hybrid REE extraction system; and (4) Investigate the social, economic,
political, and environmental implications of the proposed new REE biomining
process. The successful completion of this research has the potential for
transformative impact on biomining through the development of cost-effective and
environmentally acceptable processes to extract, separate, and concentrate REEs
from processed ores and waste materials. To implement the educational and
training goals of this project, the Principal Investigators propose to leverage
existing programs and resources at their respective institutions to develop and
implement two programs including a Biology/Bioengineering/Biomining Research for
Undergraduate Student (REU) program and Help (BIO-RUSH), an education/outreach
STEM program designed to recruit and mentor K-12 students and
undergraduate/graduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.