* 2223752
* PFI (MCA):  Price and Lead Time Quotation for Make-to-Order Firms with Contingent Demand and Demand Learning
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ana Muriel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Mid-Career Advancement (PFI(MCA)) project is to enhance the operations and
customer service of make-to-order (MTO), customized service, and healthcare
delivery organizations. The research will focus on developing and enabling the
commercialization of decision support tools to generate real-time, operationally
attainable pricing and lead-time quotes. The success of healthcare delivery
organizations, many of which are small-to-medium size enterprises, is complex
due to uncertainty. If a firm bids too aggressively, they often experience a
demand surplus, resulting in poor service and penalties from unfulfilled
proposal terms. If a firm proposes too cautiously, they become noncompetitive,
resulting in business loss and under-utilization of capacity. This research will
build a general decision support framework, which will be validated in the
context of the industrial partner’s sales and operations environment. The
project contributes directly to undergraduate and graduate recruitment,
education and training in STEM, leadership, innovation, and entrepreneurship
through participation and outreach activities. Underrepresented students will be
recruited by leveraging the pull of working with dynamic industry partners and
various supporting programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
decision support tools that integrate demand learning and revenue management
techniques while explicitly considering the presence of ‘contingent demand.’
Dealing with the underlying uncertainty associated with contingent jobs, which
may vary wildly in their requirements, necessitates robust approaches built
around learning customer behavior and the stochastic system performance
resulting from the exponential number of possible realizations of the demand
backlog. The real-time quoting of arriving jobs in the presence of contingent
demand has not received much attention in the literature. The development of
optimization approaches that balances exploration and exploitation in
operational decision making is recent and presents additional challenges in this
context. The problem will be approached in a comprehensive fashion building on
data science and operations research techniques to optimize system performance
over a time horizon. Various customer behavior functions and special cases will
be studied to gain a deeper understanding of the theoretical properties of
systems subject to contingent demand and leverage them to address general cases.
An online simulation platform will be built for practical evaluation and
performance comparison of various approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.