* 2223046
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: SOCIAL: System-on-Chip Information Flow Validation under Asynchronous Events
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kanad Basu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 290,443.00

We live in an era where smart, connected computing devices pervade many critical
applications, including transportation systems, industrial automation, health
and biomedical systems, etc. Naturally, these devices create, process, and
exchange significant sensitive information. Unauthorized or malicious access to
these assets can result in disastrous consequences, including loss of human life
in the case of health monitoring systems. The goal of this project is to create
a comprehensive infrastructure for information flow validation, i.e., ensuring
that sensitive assets in modern System-on-Chip designs cannot be accessed or
corrupted by an unauthorized or untrusted agent. The ove r-arching goal is to
develop a scientific foundation and a comprehensive automated framework of
integrated tools for systematically addressing the spectrum of challenges in
information flow validation. The research objectives are tightly integrated into
teaching and outreach activities, in the form of new curriculum development,
organizing security competitions in premier conferences, recruitment of female
and underrepresented minority students, and involving high-school graduates in
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has three technical objectives. The
first objective is to develop a core foundation for information flow analysis
that accounts for real-world complexities. In particular, many hard-to-detect
real-world information flow violations result from interruptions of functional
flow by a variety of asynchronous events, to subvert the integrity of hardware
assets. The project addresses this critical issue by incorporating new,
innovative approaches to specify, analyze, and integrate the role of
asynchronous events and hardware-firmware interaction within the foundation. The
second objective is to develop a comprehensive automated framework of integrated
tools for systematically addressing the spectrum of challenges in information
flow validation. The project addresses this goal through a combination of
dynamic and formal analysis techniques that draw inspiration from advances in
formal methods, testing, and machine learning. Third, the project targets smooth
integration of the analysis infrastructure with industrial validation
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.