* 2223720
* EAGER: Design of an RNA-based Dual Regulator for Repetitive Gene Expression Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Yongchan Kwon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,779.00

The project integrates biological experiments and computational studies to train
future scientists and engineers with competence in conducting interdisciplinary
research, and to cultivate a multi-disciplinary perspective for problem-solving.
Drawing expertise from engineering and biology, the project expands the state-
of-the-art design of gene circuits with new capabilities that would enable cells
to interact and respond in novel ways. This new means of programing cells with
various capabilities will open doors to complex cellular designs with
predictable and novel functionalities for applications in advanced biocomputing
and medicine. The research also promotes participation of the K-12 and
underrepresented students in STEM activities and advocates early STEM education
and interdisciplinary research. These are critical elements for the success of
the young generation scientists and engineers, as well as the sustainability and
prosperity of future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current biological
controllers are typically constrained by unidirectional and non-repetitive
regulation of the target gene expression, which could hamper their applications
in cases where repetitive up and down regulations are needed. The research plan
involves mathematical modeling and control theory to guide the design of an RNA-
based gene circuit and utilizes the in vitro transcription and translation
(cell-free) system for rapid parts characterization and performance evaluation.
Specifically, the project deploys an RNA-RNA annihilation reaction as the
comparator between the reference and the target gene concentration. The outcome
of the comparator then triggers the downstream up-regulator via CRISPRa
(Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats activation), or a
down-regulator via RNA-RNA sequestration. By continuously evaluating the
relative gene expression level and actuating the corresponding regulation
pathway, repetitive bi-directional regulation is achieved. The project focuses
on the design of genetic controllers with expanded regulation capability and
improved feasibility for potential practical applications. In view of the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, its findings are expected to benefit
research in synthetic biology, mathematical modeling, control theory, and the
cell-free systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.