* 2223449
* Civic Innovation Challenge 2022
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,10/31/2024
* Kathleen Garman, METROLAB NETWORK, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michal Ziv-El
* 10/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This cooperative agreement with MetroLab Network supports the execution of the
second iteration of the Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) program, a national
research and action competition driven by community priorities and supported by
NSF together with the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of
Energy. CIVIC aims to flip the community-university dynamic, prioritizing
community-led partnership by asking communities to identify civic priorities
ripe for innovation and to partner with researchers to address those priorities.
CIVIC helps bridge the gap between research and deployment, ensuring that
research is conducted in a context that allows for realistic testing and
evaluation of impact, and on an accelerated 1-year timeline to ensure
communities can experience and iterate on the results of the pilot. This
challenge will enable data-driven, research-informed communities to engage
residents in the process, and lay a foundation for a broader and more fluid
exchange of research interests and civic priorities that will create new
instances of collaboration while introducing new areas of technical and social
scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MetroLab supports this effort in
multiple ways. First, MetroLab is building a Community of Practice among the
project teams, from both the first and current round of the program. Building
this community among experts working on first-of-its-kind projects across the
country promotes the sustainability, scalability and transferability of all
awarded projects. It further enables grantees to learn from each other in a way
that will amplify project successes and sustain community impacts. This
Community of Practice is expected to live on beyond the scope of the CIVIC grant
and serve as a platform for future collaborations. MetroLab is also producing
tool kits and workshops to support awarded CIVIC team, focusing on community
engagement, stakeholder analysis, and pilot management. MetroLab also supports
communications and amplification of team successes throughout the grant, in
addition to hosting a website that showcases the growing portfolio of civic
research work supported by the CIVIC program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.