* 2223664
* A Carbon Negative Self-Healing Enzymatic Construction Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Suzanne Scarlata, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 755,379.00

Second only to water, concrete is the most consumed material on earth. Every
year, waste concrete from construction and carbon dioxide excretion from cement
production and transport is increasing, and concrete alone now contributes to 9
percent of the overall CO2 emissions. Additionally, concrete is inherently
brittle, and it requires frequent repair and replacement, which are economically
expensive and further generate large volumes of carbon dioxide. Scientists have
been trying to find environmentally friendly and low-cost substitutes for
concrete for decades. The goal of this award is to create a new class of
inexpensive, carbon-negative, self-healing construction materials using a
combined modeling and experimental framework. The material utilizes a safe,
ubiquitous, biological enzyme that can efficiently capture CO2 during its
production. Using this new paradigm, a self-healing Enzymatic Construction
Material will be produced. This Enzymatic Construction Material can
significantly lengthen the service life of civil infrastructure while capturing
carbon. It is predicted that one cubic yard of Enzymatic Construction Material
will approximately store 18 pounds of CO2. In contrast, one cubic yard of
concrete emits around 400 pounds of CO2. The research tasks will be complemented
by training both graduate and undergraduate students and developing a program to
help inspire underprivileged girls to learn about construction and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the efficient process of CO2 transport in
cells by enzymes, a new paradigm is introduced to create the Enzymatic
Construction Material with self-healing properties. The enzyme, carbonic
anhydrase, catalyzes calcium carbonate crystal precipitation, establishing
mineral bridges along the polymer scaffolding that bonds the aggregate together.
Hence, curing of the material can be performed at low temperatures in a short
timeframe. The material exhibits an average strength value that is three times
as high as the minimum requirement for cement mortar and is also capable of
sustaining many cycles of healing after fracture. The scientific contribution of
the project includes the following. (1) The formulation of a new class of
construction materials through enzymatic crystal precipitation. The rate of
crystal precipitation through the enzymatic mechanism is four orders of
magnitude faster than bacterial methods making it scalable to industrial
applications. (2) The enzymatic mechanism provides a means for the development
of carbon-negative materials to ultimately replace concrete. (3) A novel
fluctuation-based Semi-Grand Canonical Monte Carlo simulation method will be
used as a modeling technique for the thermodynamic behavior of the Enzymatic
Construction Material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.