* 2223332
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Using K-feldspar megacryst and mineral inclusion T-X-t histories to assess batholith growth and evolution in the Tuolumne intrusive complex, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Valbone Memeti, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2026
* USD 337,782.00

Volcanoes are well-known but poorly understood. How does magma build up beneath
active volcanoes, and how long does it take to do so? What controls whether it
erupts or cools deep underground to form plutons? How long does it stay molten
there, and how much of it is eruptible for how long? Hundreds of millions of
people live within 100 miles of active volcanoes. They are at risk of being
exposed to volcanic hazards. Volcanic eruptions also affect climate and the
environment. Yet decades of research have not answered some of these basic
questions. This project will address these questions in the Tuolumne pluton. It
is home to the spectacular rock exposures of Yosemite National Park. Uranium-
lead age dates of small minerals will determine when the plutons cooled to the
rocks that are exposed at the surface today. They will also reveal the duration
of time that magma was present. Additionally these much smaller minerals are
found included in several-inch-large potassium feldspar crystals. The chemistry
of the feldspars serves like fingerprints in a crime scene. They will determine
when, where and how much magma was stored 90 million years ago to feed volcanic
eruptions. How sticky and hot magma was will help determine what these eruptions
might have looked like. This project supports two research groups: 1) Researcher
Memeti, a woman at Hispanic-serving, undergraduate-focused California State
University Fullerton, and 2) Researcher Schoene at research-focused Princeton
University. The team will train several graduate students in age dating and
chemistry methods. Graduate students help train undergraduate students involved
in different parts of the project. All students take part in all aspects of
research activities including field work and publishing. Memeti will complete
following activities: 1) update authored Yosemite audiotour mobile app based on
this project’s results, 2) continue to organize field trips to Yosemite National
Park, and 3) share research results with park rangers. 4) She will develop
introductory geology labs for geology students, and 5) continue her outreach
efforts on volcanic hazards at southern California public events. Schoene will
teach local K-12 teachers on volcanoes and hazards in a seminar at Princeton
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-yr collaborative RUI project
between California State University Fullerton and Princeton University seeks to
determine the time and length scales of magma bodies in magmatic arcs and their
changes in composition, crystallinity, and volume over time. The study will use
K-feldspar pheno- and megacrysts up to 12 cm long and megacryst-hosted mineral
inclusions from the Half Dome and Cathedral Peak units of the 95-85.5 Ma
Tuolumne intrusive complex in the central Sierra Nevada. K-feldspar textures and
zoning will be imaged in 3D with CT scans and CL images and quantitatively
analyzed with electron microprobe and laser ablation ICPMS for geochemistry.
K-feldspar mineral inclusions will be measured for TIMS-TEA U-Pb zircon and
titanite geochronology, SIMS Ti-in-zircon and Zr-in-titanite thermometry, and
EMP and LA-ICPMS plagioclase and hornblende thermometry and chemometry
(determining melt compositions). These data will be synthesized to test the
hypotheses that the Tuolumne intrusive complex matured thermally during
incremental construction, creating interconnected magma bodies many kilometers
in length, capable of magma flow, fractionation, mixing, and likely eruption.
These data will reflect on current debates about whether long-lived and large
composite intrusions like the Tuolumne complex are characterized by “hot” or
“cold” storage. “Cold” storage is characterized by small, rigid magma mushes
that spend most of their time at temperatures near or at the solidus, limiting
interaction with coeval magma bodies, only occasionally, if ever, “defrosting”
by magma recharge to feed volcanic eruptions. In contrast, “hot storage” allows
for dynamic inter-unit magma mixing and crystal recycling in large (10-100s of
square kilometers) magma bodies at significantly higher temperatures above the
solidus and lower crystallinities and at time scales of up to millions of
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.