* 2223623
* Characterizing surface-mantle interactions in deepwater turbiditic successions, northern and central Apennines, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Emily Finzel, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2026
* USD 502,351.00

In the deep interior of the Earth, dynamic processes related to convection of
Earth’s mantle can uplift or subside Earth’s surface by hundreds of meters.
These deflections affect sedimentation and erosion patterns, evolution of
drainage systems, and water depth in marine systems on geologic timescales.
Changes in the Earth’s surface topography in turn influence atmospheric
circulation and biological habitats. Disentangling these diverse drivers depends
upon a thorough understanding of each one. The investigators will identify the
influence of dynamic processes by combining surface geological observations of
erosion and sedimentation patterns in the Apennine Mountains in Italy with
numerical modeling of the deeper Earth to develop a detailed understanding of
how dynamic processes are preserved in the rock record. The broader impacts of
this research include: full participation of women in STEM; improved STEM
education and educator development; development of a diverse, competitive STEM
workforce; and collaboration with science education students and in-service
school teachers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The idea that sedimentary basins that
develop above retreating versus detaching slabs will have distinguishable
tectonic signatures means that quantifying these differences allows for
interpretation of plate boundary settings in ancient orogens. In most previous
studies, slab detachment is well documented by geophysical observations that do
not provide information about the timing, duration, or rate of these events.
Slab rollback studies are often focused entirely on the geologic record with
little to no quantitative information about the geodynamic parameters that
influenced the evolution of the region. This project will focus specifically on
characterizing the thermal, erosional, and sedimentary response to the
transition from slab rollback to slab detachment in the northern and central
Apennine Mountains in Italy. These critical geologic observations of uplift and
subsidence will be used to calibrate geodynamic models that quantitatively
characterize the interaction between crustal tectonics and mantle dynamics
during slab rollback and detachment. The results of this project will improve
our ability to detect such episodes in the geologic record and result in a
better overall understanding of the evolution of long-lived convergent margins.
Additionally, this study will provide better constraints on the timing and
duration of basin transitions in the geologic record. The investigators will
involve Masters of Arts in Teaching graduate students and in-service science
teachers from around Iowa in curriculum development at the college and
elementary or secondary levels. In addition, this project will provide career
development opportunities for the PI through new collaborations with several
international universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.