* 2223735
* EFRI ELiS: Three-Dimensional Printable BioReactors For Sustainable Rare Earth Metal Recovery
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Manish Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,999,999.00

Rare Earth elements (REEs) are a group of heavy elements that are critical to
modern energy technologies and efficiency such as batteries for electric cars,
energy efficient lighting, display panels, and magnets for wind turbines.
However, they are energy intensive and environmentally damaging to mine and
purify; and mining, in particular, could disproportionally impact disadvantaged
communities. In recent years domestic production of REEs has declined to
negligible levels making the US dependent on imports from other countries with
important implications for energy and national security. The goal of this
research is to create 3D printed assemblies of encapsulated, engineered bacteria
that will be able to selectively extract REEs from ores and industrial waste
products, such as coal fly ash, in an environmentally friendly way. These
assemblies of printed, encapsulated bacteria will be integrated into membrane
bioreactors where REEs can be easily collected with the help of separation
membranes. In addition to conducting laboratory research to optimize different
components in this living system, the technical and economic feasibility of the
proposed approach and its social, health, environmental, and economic
implications for mining communities will be evaluated. Additional benefits to
society will be accomplished through education and training including the
mentoring of four graduate students at the University of Texas,
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare earth elements (REEs) can help reduce
worldwide dependence on fossil fuels and are necessary for many modern
technologies. Current REE extraction methods are resource intensive,
environmentally damaging, and in some cases disproportionally impact
disadvantaged communities. Biologically promoted leaching and separation of REEs
is a promising option but remains challenging due to fundamental knowledge gaps
that limit selectivity, throughput, and scalability. The overall goal of this
research is to engineer a living system via high-throughput printing of
bioreactor droplets into functionally organized, selectively permeable
structures capable of producing biological reductants and lanmodulin-type
proteins to extract and concentrate REEs from low grade ores or waste streams
that can then be separated for collection in membrane bioreactors. The specific
research objectives are to: 1) develop microbial cultures that produce
biomolecules for enhanced REE extraction and separation, 2) develop smart
biological droplet architectures that enhance lanthanide transport and
concentration, 3) develop a high-throughput printing method for functionally-
structured, bacteria-encased droplets, and 4) integrate the desired bioreactor
droplet structures into a membrane bioreactor for sustainable REE recovery and
evaluate the process. The evaluation includes assessment of the ethical, social,
economic, health, legal, safety, and environmental implications of replacing
current REE extraction technologies with the proposed bioreactor droplet system.
The successful completion of this research could have transformative impacts on
REE extraction by providing domestic, sustainable, and reliable sources. New
research knowledge will be incorporated into college courses, undergraduate
students will be involved in research and K-12 outreach, and educational
materials for REE-impacted communities will be created. The included broadening
participation plan promotes retention through novel mentoring, motivates
students through civic engagement, and prepares students through
multidisciplinary research and coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.