* 2223710
* Towards a green and inclusive post-pandemic recovery of the Blue Economy and coastal communities
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Marta Vicarelli, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This research project uses case studies from coastal communities in four
countries---Costa Rica, Germany, Scotland (UK), and the United States---to study
the environmental and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on these
communities. These communities depend on coastal communities that depend on
coastal tourism (Blue Economy) for their livelihoods, but the pandemic led to
drastic reduction in tourism and other economic activities in these communities.
The project assesses which aspects of the Blue Economy communities prefer to
recover; determinants of resilient and inclusive development of coastal
communities; and determinants coastal communities that depend on coastal tourism
(Blue Economy) for their livelihoods of socioeconomic performance. In addition,
the project involves the training of early career researchers. The research pays
particular attention to the resilience of vulnerable people, and possible
strategies for recovery. The results of this research project provide inputs
into policies to mitigate the negative consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on
communities living in environmentally sensitive coastal communities and the
development of resilient and fair post-pandemic development of coastal
economies. The results of this research could therefore help to establish the
U.S. as a global leader in environmental and climate friendly
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses several
methods and a comparative approach to study the environmental and socioeconomic
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, especially on coastal economies that depend on
environmental tourism (Blue Economy). Specifically, the project studies the
socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19 and policy response to the pandemic; short-
and long-term COVID-19 recovery strategies of the Blue Economy; barriers to
coastal green and inclusive recovery policies; elements of successful resilience
recovery strategies; and lessons and best practices transferable across risks
and locations to efficiently respond to or prevent future crises. The project
employs large-scale surveys of coastal regional authorities and businesses,
discrete choice experiments to value future recovery scenarios, and expert
interviews. The results of this research are shared with other academic
institutions, partners, and key stakeholders in each country. The results of
this research project provide inputs into policies to mitigate the negative
consequences of the COVID-19 on communities living in environmentally sensitive
coastal communities and the development resilient and fair post-pandemic
development of coastal economies. The results of this research therefore help to
establish the U.S. as a global leader in environmental and climate friendly
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.