* 2223042
* STTR Phase I:  Developing Thiazolothiazole Molecular Materials for Electronic and Photonic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Kevin Boyle, LIGHT AND CHARGE SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project includes the development of highly fluorescent,
next generation dye compounds for a variety of optoelectronic applications. The
new materials provide an easily synthesized and synthetically tunable platform
to function in both solid-state panel lighting/signage and in organic light-
emitting diodes (OLEDs). The fluorescent dye materials that are developed will
enable low-cost printing processes and manufacturing for large scale lighting
and luminescence industries. The technology will also enable OLED manufacturing
to transition from thermal evaporation process to low-cost printing processes.
The low-cost, high performance, printable dyes may increase panel lighting/OLED
use, resulting in positive societal impacts through reduced energy usage, lower
prices for existing lighting technologies, and new innovative lighting products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project seeks to develop a series of highly fluorescent compounds that will be
developed and tested for printed lighting panel/signage applications and as blue
emitter for OLEDs. A primary barrier to large-scale, luminescent, organic
materials devices for OLED lighting and the display/signage market is the
limitations of currently available fluorescent molecular compounds in terms of
cost, stability, and processability. The high structural tunability,
photostability, and high fluorescence quantum yield of the new, high-performance
materials make them an attractive option for luminescent molecular device
applications. The new materials provide an easily synthesized and synthetically
tunable platform to function both as a printable emissive layer for solid-state
panel lighting/signage, and as the light emissive layer for solution processable
organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The goals of proposed research include
the production of solution-processable, photostable dyes for stolid-state panel
lighting with solubilities exceeding 1 wt.% in precursor formulations, external
quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of greater than 30%, and photostabilities exceeding
10,000 hours. In addition, using these compounds, the team seeks to will
demonstrate blue-emissive, printable light-emissive layers for
OLEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.