* 2223127
* MsRI-Planning Workshop: National Center for Automated Chemical Synthesis and Democratized Molecular Innovation (ACSDMI)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Martin Burke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,500.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry, Professor Martin Burke at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is organizing a workshop to discuss
the optimal design of a midscale national facility for automated chemical
synthesis that would act as a nexus point for the creation and organization of
synthetic data to address critical needs in our ability to make molecules,
democratize molecular innovation beyond synthetic experts, and provide
opportunities to powerfully accelerate advances in core research areas critical
to our national welfare and security. While the use of automated processes for
the preparation of biomolecules, particularly DNA and proteins, has
revolutionized the advancement of research in biology over the past two decades,
challenges associated with the autonomous linkage of a wide range of different
substructural chemical fragments have hampered the development of similar
systems for the complete synthesis of organic molecules such as small-molecule
pharmaceuticals, materials, and fine chemicals. Recent transformative advances
in chemistry, robotics, artificial intelligence (AI), and cloud computing have
yielded new technologies that have the potential to overcome these hurdles and
make automated chemical synthesis across a wider swath of chemical space
possible. This workshop will consider the best way to organize a facility to
maintain national competitiveness with the rapidly growing demand for molecules,
to effectively function in a field that has not previously been facility-
focused, and to serve as a disruptive game-changer for synthetic chemistry and
all disciplines that benefit from on-demand synthesis of non-commercial
compounds. Synergistically, the workshop will also consider unique training
opportunities that a midscale facility for chemical synthesis could enable and
how the broadening of access to chemical synthesis via automation could be
leveraged to advance community engagement, education, and the diversification of
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together experts in
synthetic automation, traditional synthetic chemistry, artificial intelligence,
user interfaces, and analytical instrumentation integration with potential end
users in material and biotechnology applications, educators focused on training
for future chemical careers, and directors of established facilities to discuss
critical design elements for a mid-scale automated synthesis facility. Through a
series of carefully organized breakout sessions, participants will explore ideas
for: 1) establishing a facility that supports an ecosystem for democratized
molecular innovation, 2) critical infrastructure design elements, 3) plans for
operation and maintenance, and 4) key aspects of training and education.
Molecular innovation discussions will include what is needed to support the
advance of chemical synthesis, the demand for new molecules in materials science
and biotechnology, and the integration of industrial collaboration for improved
data sharing. Facility design breakout sessions will include topics such as
robotics and software needs, chemical analysis integration, and user interface.
Operation and maintenance planning will consider options for running and
maintaining such a facility post-construction. Training and education
discussions will consider the skills and experiences necessary to support a
disruptive next-generation community of molecule makers. Integration of workshop
outcomes into a synthesized report is planned, to address the needs and
priorities of intersecting scientific communities regarding the design of a mid-
scale facility for automated chemical synthesis and democratized molecular
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.