* 2223914
* Pandemic Communication in Time of Populism: Building Resilient Media and Ensuring Effective Pandemic Communication in Divided Societies
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Daniel Hallin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,516.00

This project uses several methods to study how populist politicians distorted
COVID-19 pandemic health communication to encourage polarized attitudes and
distrust among citizens, thus making them more vulnerable to misinformation
generally. It also studies how best to counter these populist narratives and
develop more effective communication channels. The research studies four areas
of communication: government led pandemic communication, media policy, media
coverage, and public attitudes towards the media. The project makes an important
contribution to research on populist communication and political polarization by
bringing two fields of expertise–populist communication and public
health–together. The research will inform recommendations aimed at building more
resilient media organizations that are better equipped to withstand the
challenges of future pandemics in divided societies. By helping to improve the
quality of health communication, this research will help to improve the health,
hence living standards of US citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop the first comprehensive, comparative study of health crisis
communication in the context of populist politics and examines the impact of
populism on four aspects of the pandemic communication circuit during COVID-19:
government-led health crisis communication, media policy, media coverage, and
public attitudes. The project will also study how best to counter these populist
narratives and develop more efficient and reliable communication. The focus is
on four countries---Brazil, Poland, Serbia, and the US---all led by populist
leaders during the pandemic and capture different types of populist responses to
the pandemic. The project also takes a transnational perspective to analyze how
the interaction between populism and pandemic communication was shaped by China
and Russia’s pandemic geopolitics. By helping to improve the quality of health
communication, this research will help to improve the health, hence living
standards of US citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.