* 2223602
* AGS-FIRP Track 1: Graduate Education in Mountain Meteorology at Storm Peak Laboratory Fall 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2023
* USD 40,668.00

This award will provide funding for a 3-day field-based research experience at
the Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL). SPL is a Community Instruments &amp; Facilities
(CIF) site supported by the NSF Facilities for Atmospheric Research and
Education (FARE) program. Fifteen University of Utah graduate students in the
atmospheric and related sciences will spend three days at Storm Peak Laboratory
to conduct student led research projects related to mountain meteorology. The
project will also contribute to the development of a globally competitive
science, technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) workforce and improved STEM
education by providing an educational opportunity that enables students to gain
experience and professional skills in environmental instrumentation, field-
program design and execution, scientific collaboration, and scientific
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participating in the project will
be enrolled in Mountain Meteorology, a graduate- level course covering
orographic cyclogenesis, front-mountain interactions, atmospheric rivers in
complex terrain, climate change in mountainous regions, valley and basin cold
pools, terrain-forced flows, and orographic precipitation. The project will
enable integration of field-based research experience into the course curriculum
and enable data collection that will be analyzed by the students and presented
in a conference style session at the end of the semester. This educational
experience will enable students to develop instrumentation and field-research
skills to advance knowledge during their graduate research and post-graduate
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.