* 2223488
* Molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of gene expression by non-coding RNAs in archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jocelyne DiRuggiero, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2025
* USD 721,157.00

This project investigates the role of small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) in the
response of microorganisms to environmental stress. Hundreds of sRNAs have been
discovered in Archaea, a group of microorganisms with a close evolutionary
relationship with Eukaryotes, but little is known about their mechanisms of
action and how they modulate the functions of living organisms through
evolution. The research will elucidate the regulatory landscape of an sRNA in a
model archaeon in order to address this gap in knowledge. A deeper understanding
of archaeal sRNA functions and regulation will enable manipulation of sRNA
molecules as synthetic biology tools and rational design of biological systems
for biotechnology applications. The broader impact activities will engage
students from diverse backgrounds early in their STEM careers with laboratory
research, especially first-generation college students, women, and
underrepresented minorities. Students will be recruited through FiGURE (First
Generation Undergrads Research Experience), an innovative research experience
and cohort building program at Johns Hopkins University. These activities will
also provide mentorship training for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to gain a mechanistic
understanding of sRNA regulation in a model archaeon, Haloferax volcanii (Hv) in
response to oxidative stress. The specific goals are to (1) characterize post-
transcriptional mechanisms of the SHOxi sRNA-mediated oxidative stress response
and determine how SHOxi regulates putative targets by modulating mRNA stability
or interfering with translation; (2) identify chaperone proteins and other
factors involved in the interactions of oxidative stress-responsive sRNAs with
their targets; and (3) elucidate how the stress-responsive sRNA SHOxi is
regulated under oxidative stress (particularly testing the hypothesis that
canonical archaeal transcription factors regulate SHOxi). The research will
employ a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches, site-directed
mutagenesis combined with sRNA-mRNA interaction modeling, and high-throughput
phenotyping. The outcomes are expected to reveal mechanisms by which an archaeal
sRNA binds and regulates its targets, identify novel RNA binding proteins, and
discover how sRNA-mediated regulatory networks are integrated with those of
transcription regulators in archaea. The resulting knowledge will be of interest
to the archaeal community and the non-coding RNA and RNA
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.