* 2223988
* Dynamics of Spontaneous Emulsification in Microchannels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Cubaud, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 359,641.00

This award will investigate the basic multiphase flow properties of mixtures
made of oil, water, and organic solvents at small scales. The phenomenon of
spontaneous emulsification refers to the natural formation of droplets due to
the presence of a miscible solvent in oil-water systems and offers great
opportunities for tailoring the properties of soft materials and developing
innovative methods for the treatment of oil and aqueous products in a range of
industries, including pharmaceutical, personal care, food, energy, and in the
environment. While the multiphase flow behavior of pure substances is relatively
well understood, less is known about the influence of fluid additives, which
significantly alter material properties and flow arrangements. Here, an
integrated suite of teaching and research activities is designed to unravel the
physics of multiphase flows in the presence of miscible solvents and develop new
predictive knowledge into an array of captivating fluid phenomena of fundamental
and practical interests. This award will provide a wide range of educational
opportunities for a diversity of students in an inclusive and well-structured
environment and original outreach activities will stimulate the curiosity of the
public at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will formulate the
relationships between material properties and liquid-liquid multiphase flows
using advanced microfluidic protocols. A series of hypothesis-driven inquiries
will quantitatively elucidate various microscale transport phenomena resulting
from the addition of miscible solvents, such as alcohols, in immiscible liquid-
liquid multiphase flows. Alcohols compose an important class of simple organic
compounds with a myriad of practical uses as extractants, antiseptics,
detergents, biofuels, wetting agents, viscosity modifiers, or emulsifiers. The
proposed research will lay the scientific foundations for improved manipulations
of aqueous-oil multiphase flows with alcohol solvents and characterize out-of-
equilibrium fluid interactions resulting from the interplay of interfacial
tension and diffusion phenomena in microflow geometries. Functional relationship
of flow pattern characteristics will be established across a broad range of
solvent concentration for both ‘water-in-oil’ and ‘oil-in-water’ multiphase
flows. Interfacial phenomena leading to the generation of colloidal dispersions
at ultralow interfacial tension will be methodically accessed over vast ranges
of length-scales and timescales using well-characterized microgeometries and
leading-edge imaging and diagnostic techniques. Broad variations of flow
velocity and fluid properties will delineate significant regions of uncharted
flow regimes and enable opportunities for scientific discoveries. Ultimately, a
general, unifying theoretical framework will be developed to characterize the
role of liquid solubility on the fundamentals of multiphase
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.