* 2223922
* N-Doping of Organic Semiconductor Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Antonio Facchetti, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/28/2026
* USD 488,143.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are
promising materials for flexible electronics such as solar cells, displays, and
sensors. For many applications, their electrical conductivity must be increased
by adding positive (p-type) or negative (n-type) charges. This process is known
as molecular doping. While there are many p-type organic semiconductors, n-type
organic semiconductors are far rarer. Moreover, they are less stable in ambient
conditions, and it can be difficult to control their electrical conductivity.
Advancing the field of organic electronics will require development of new
electronic materials and processes for n-type doping. The goal of this project
is to enhance the efficiency of n-type doping using a catalyst, a compound that
enhances the speed of a chemical reaction. The investigator will combine
synthetic strategies for new organic semiconductors with selection of n-type
dopant-catalyst pairs to optimize the doping process. This research will result
in a new class of n-type organic semiconductors with high-performance and
enhanced stability. This research will also promote understanding on how the new
n-type materials affect device performance. The PI’s educational goal is to
foster a positive perception of organic electronic materials and devices. This
will be accomplished through outreach to middle and high school students,
coupling course instruction to undergraduate and graduate research projects, and
providing internship opportunities at a start-up company to foster
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doping of inorganic materials has been
instrumental in the progress of the semiconductor industry and advances in
numerous fields including medical diagnostics, environmental science, and
homeland security. For organic semiconductors, several strategies have yielded
doped π-electron solids with greatly enhanced optical and electronic properties
as well as novel materials, physical phenomena, and device concepts. However,
these advances were largely enabled by p-doped (hole transporting) materials,
while useful n-doped (electron-transporting) materials have been limited in
chemical accessibility, doping efficiency, and environmental stability. This
limits their use in devices where both p-type and n-type semiconductors are
required. Recently, the PI and coworkers discovered that metal nanoparticles
(e.g., Au) can catalytically assist/accelerate the doping of representative
organic semiconductors by molecular dopants. This research project will: 1)
Elucidate the mechanism of the catalytic n-doping process and expand the scope
to other type of catalysts. 2) Explore other dopants and semiconductors,
implementing to date unexplored structural design and synthetic strategies. 3)
Characterize catalyzed vs uncatalyzed doped film properties in terms of
composition, electronic structure, morphology, microstructure, and opto-
electronic response. Thus, this study plans to bring n-doped organics to
unprecedented levels in terms of molecular/macromolecular materials designs,
their accessibility in scale, and their useful opto-electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.