* 2223225
* SBIR Phase I:  Structure-guided design of anti-inflammatory modulators of protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR1)
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Christopher Dockendorff, FUNCTION THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,710.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is that a deeper structural understanding will be developed of protease-
activated receptor 1 (PAR1), an important target for promising new anti-
thrombotic and anti-inflammatory drugs. The project will also support the
development of new compounds targeting PAR1 with the potential for improved
potency and safety profiles. Such compounds could represent a new drug class for
the treatment of inflammation-related diseases, including kidney
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves the confirmation of
the binding site on PAR1 of small molecule ligands called parmodulins. A
detailed characterization of this binding site will support the rapid design,
synthesis, and testing of new and improved parmodulins with superior properties
as oral medications. A combination of computational, structural biology, and
synthetic methods will be combined with PAR1 cell assays to confirm the binding
site and develop more detailed structure-activity relationships of the
parmodulins. It is also anticipated that novel parmodulins will be identified in
this project with improved safety and stability
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.