* 2223186
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous waste sorting platform for decentralized pre-processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Ethan Walko, RSTREAM RECYCLING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Busisness Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in improving landfill diversion and recycling
rates of non-industrial waste. This project targets high-traffic venues (HTVs)
with controlled waste streams such as stadiums, universities, airports, and
theme parks. Waste stream sorting to differentiate classes of materials for
recycling and landfill is currently undertaken either using rudimentary, labor-
intensive manual sorting, or expensive and technically complex robotic sorting,
neither of which are feasible options for small- to mid-sized facilities (i.e.,
HTVs), which then shoulder heightened rates imposed by material recovery
facilities due to contamination. These expenses have discouraged recycling,
contributing to the mounting waste problem. This project seeks to develop an
intelligent waste-sorting system that leverages computer vision and innovative
hardware to enable on-site, decentralized sorting, facilitating the recapture of
the 66 million tons and $200 billion worth of recyclable materials that
currently go to waste each year. By mitigating waste accumulation in landfills
and the greenhouse gas emissions associated with virgin resource mining, this
technology supports United Nations sustainable development goals 11 (sustainable
cities and communities) and 12 (responsible consumption and production) and
aligns with the NSFâ€™s mission of advancing national health, prosperity, and
welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology consists of a
hardware-software solution that uses the latest in computer vision to perform
automated singulation (i.e., arranging objects in a 1-by-1 stream) and
classification in cluttered environments, allowing for increasingly complex (or
diverse) structures (shapes, sizes, and materials) to be accurately identified
and subsequently sorted. This approach produces an ordered stream of objects,
which can then be sorted according to any diversion scheme for efficient
recycling. The software uses semi-supervised learning to allow for domain
adaptation from a centralized training set, enabling rapid implementation of
optimized sorting schemes of site-specific waste streams, requiring
significantly less human intervention than traditionally needed. Successful
development would result in a simplified sorting platform that is cheaper, more
robust, and less resource intensive than existing waste sorting operations, thus
offering a novel turnkey solution that could be feasibly adopted on-site.
Research objectives include: 1) Developing and evaluating hardware assemblies
using electromechanical processes for waste stream singulation; 2) Developing
software for efficient dataset generation and waste stream classification,
particularly using semi-supervised learning and data augmentation approaches;
and 3) Validating the developed system for high precision singulation and
classification of recyclables under noisy like
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.