* 2223453
* NSF-DFG Confine: Building functional supraparticles through directed assembly of nonspherical nanoparticles under confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xingchen Ye, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 382,055.00

Nanoparticles are finding use in almost all sectors of our economy from personal
care to drug delivery. Their utility arises from the ability to access new
properties that depend on their size, shape, and precise arrangement – called
self-assembly. Self-assembly of nanoparticles in confined geometries hold the
promise to build functional materials and devices with important properties that
are otherwise not available. This award is a collaboration between Indiana
University in the United States and Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg in Germany to create well-defined supraparticles consisting of tens to
thousands of nonspherical nanoparticles through directed self-assembly within
liquid droplets and small channels. This award will expand the toolbox of
supraparticle-by-design and will lay the groundwork for future computational
studies of nanoparticle assembly by incorporating realistic interactions.
Broader impacts of this project emphasize collaboration between experimentalists
and computational scientists to enhance graduate and undergraduate education
through multidisciplinary research. Summer research opportunities will be
provided to students from underrepresented groups. Interactive modules to
illustrate basic concepts of self-assembly will be designed and presented at
local science museums and festivals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this award is to advance the design and synthesis of supraparticles by
leveraging confined geometries to control nanoparticle assembly. Three aims will
be undertaken. First, experimental, and computational approaches for the
assembly of nonspherical nanoparticles into discrete supraparticles using
emulsion droplets as templates will be established. Second, emulsion droplets
generated using conventional emulsification methods and microfluidics to achieve
precision synthesis of supraparticles composed of non-centrosymmetric
nanoparticles will be leveraged. Third, one-dimensional supraparticles with
emergent chiral optical properties via crystallization under cylindrical
confinement will be fabricated. The interplay between experiment, establishing
improved synthesis and characterization protocols, and theory, advancing coarse-
grained modeling and simulation algorithms, will improve the fundamental
understanding of self-assembly pathways in spherical and cylindrical
confinement. The findings obtained and insights gained will also have
applications in other systems that are affected by geometric constraints, such
as crystallization of water in pores, virus capsid formation, biomineralization,
macromolecular organization, and molecular packing in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the “Chemistry and
Transport in Confined Spaces (NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative
solicitation that involves the National Science Foundation and Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.