* 2223904
* I-Corps: Xeno-free synthetic coatings for growth and derivation of human pluripotent stem cells
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Luis Villa Diaz, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of reproducible synthetic substrates for the pluripotent stem cell
market. This technology may provide a stem cell researcher with the ability to
grow cells on a substrate and more readily replicate the results with the
assurance that the cells can be safely delivered to patients. This method may
produce new treatments for chronic diseases in patients while decreasign the
time to governmental approvals for the therapeutic uses of stem cells. Current
substrates vary from batch to batch due to the nature of their derivation, but
the proposed technology seeks to produce the same substrate over and over, with
minimal variation, providing reproducibility. This reproducibility may generate
treatments to help millions of individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a synthetic substrate and method that is
reproducible, is eady to use, reduces the time to effective treatment, and
sustains the derivation and long-term culture of human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) in an undifferentiated state without genetic abnormalities and equal
genetic profile. The interest in the public and private sector in producing
hPSCs at a large scale has grown significantly due to the potential benefits
that these cells bring to regenerative medicine. However, stem cell translation
from the laboratory to medical applications has been slow because the substrates
used for growing the cells are not xenogenic-free (xeno-free), not reproducible,
and not chemically defined; This results in cultures with non-consistent
quality. The goal of this project is to resolve this problem in the stem cell
ecosystem. The proposed substrate allows the growth of hPSCs in a xeno-free and
defined environment with high reproducibility resulting in methods which may
save time and effort. If succesasful, academic stem cell research labs, clinical
labs, bio-banks, pharmaceutical manufacturerers, and bioengineering companies
will be certain that they are producing cells free of any cross-contamination
and ready for direct use in regenerative medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.