* 2223084
* NSF-DFG Confine: Drying-induced assembly of colloidal supraparticles from anisotropic nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Howard, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 271,389.00

This project was awarded through the “Chemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces
(NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the
National Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). Colloidal
supraparticles - micrometer-sized spheres made from smaller nanoparticles (NPs)
- are versatile materials. Porous supraparticles with internal voids are
particularly valued for their catalytic, photonic, drug delivery, and physical
absorption properties. While supraparticles can be fabricated at scale using
solvent drying to assemble NPs inside liquid droplets, these processes are
poorly understood. This project will use computer modeling to address this
knowledge gap in how porous supraparticles form and how their properties can be
engineered. Furthermore, the nanoparticle shape and surface property effects on
the assembly process and the characteristics of the product supraparticles will
be investigated. The models that will be developed have significant potential to
shorten the research &amp; development cycle of new materials in both academic
and industrial settings. This international collaboration will train a globally
competitive work force. The project will also integrate activities to (1)
broaden participation in computational science through a summer research
experience for undergraduates underrepresented in STEM, (2) develop a virtual-
reality educational activity on diffusion for K-12 students, and (3) disseminate
open-source software and training materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop mathematical models to investigate the drying-induced
assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) with interaction or shape anisotropy into
colloidal supraparticles. This process is poorly understood because it involves
complex molecular thermodynamics and nonequilibrium transport in confinement.
Complementary particle-based and continuum models - based on the multiparticle
collision dynamics and classical dynamic density functional theory approaches,
respectively - will be developed and validated. The models will be applied to
“patchy” NPs with anisotropic attraction and rodlike NPs with anisotropic shape
that have significant untapped potential for realizing new porous supraparticle
assemblies. The local NP density and orientational order will be characterized
to systematically interrogate how both the NP properties and the processing
conditions (such as the drying speed) determine the porosity distribution in the
supraparticle. The proposed research will not only improve our ability to
engineer supraparticles but also advance fundamental understanding of confined
advection-diffusion processes for NPs, including related processes such as
freeze drying, filtration, and sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.