* 2223547
* Long G4 regions (LG4s) in the human genome constitute functional enhancers that coordinate neighboring gene expressions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Glen Borchert, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 427,321.00

A promoter is a region of DNA upstream of a gene where proteins bind to initiate
transcription of (turn on) a gene by producing an RNA copy of the gene sequence.
Promoters can be very complex and typically work together with other DNA regions
known as enhancers to ensure specific, robust gene transcription. Fortunately,
despite their complexity, promoters are easy to identify because they generally
correspond to the 100-1,000 base pairs (bp) just before the start of a gene.
This has allowed detailed characterization of a massive number of promoters over
the past several decades. However, enhancer characterizations have proven much
more challenging. Like promoters, enhancers are typically short, 100-1,000 bp
DNA sequences that markedly regulate gene transcription but, unlike promoters,
an enhancer can be found up to 1 million bp away from the gene it influences.
How do enhancers work across such large distances? Genomic DNA can bend,
bringing enhancers and promoters close to one another to initiate transcription.
Interestingly, numerous studies attempting to link genomic mutations with
various traits and/or diseases have found that more than 90% of disease-
associated mutations lie within the noncoding portions of the genome, and even
more strikingly, most of these mutations lie within regions of the genome
thought to function as enhancers rather than promoters. Despite their
importance, there is still only a very limited ability to define enhancer
sequences, and major questions about their mechanisms of action and targeting
determinants remain unanswered. Understanding what drives enhancer:promoter
interaction can significantly improve our ability to address a number of
societal challenges (e.g. disease, improving crop resistance to adverse
environmental conditions via gene modulation, etc.). This project also provides
unique interdisciplinary training for students (including local underrepresented
minority students) combining molecular biology and computational
genetics/bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the
interplay between gene promoters and gene-distal enhancers will unquestionably
lead to fundamental new insights into the basic control of gene transcription
and the action of regulatory mutations involved in disease. However, the
fundamental mechanisms responsible for how enhancers target and transfer
information to their cognate promoters, broadly speaking, remain key gaps in our
knowledge. The work outlined in this proposal will directly address the long-
standing question of how enhancers, which are often located far (hundreds of
kilobase pairs) away, make contact with specific promoters in the context of the
nucleus. Notably, enhancers are often significantly enriched with G4-capable
sequences and, interestingly, the promoters regulated by G4-enhancers are
likewise disproportionately enriched with G4-capable sequences. As hybrid G4
structures can be formed between distinct DNA strands, together, these
observations suggest that direct G4:G4 interactions can contribute to
enhancer:promoter targeting. The work outlined in this proposal is significant
in that it will employ an array of genetic manipulations, biochemical assays,
and novel NGS-IP strategies to directly characterize the role of G4 DNA in
enhancer::promoter targeting and generate novel methodologies that will be of
use in defining specific enhancer::promoter
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.