* 2223495
* EFRI BRAID: Optical Neural Co-Processors for Predictive and Adaptive Brain Restoration and Augmentation
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Rajesh Rao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,970,395.00

Neurological disorders, such as traumatic brain injury, stroke, or cerebral
palsy, are an important cause of disability and death worldwide. Nearly one in
six of the world’s population experience these disorders. However, the very
limited treatments available for these disorders provide only modest therapeutic
benefits and are often associated with serious side effects. Brain-inspired,
implanted computing devices could provide a solution for rehabilitating and
curing these disorders. Such devices can operate by recording electrical signals
from the nervous system, processing them, and stimulating another part of the
brain in real-time. This allows the injured or impaired area of the brain to be
bypassed or rehabilitated. However, existing brain-inspired computing devices
consume too much power and are not fast enough to provide such real-time
feedback and control. This project aims to create a “brain co-processor” by
innovating in two aspects: first, create new algorithms based on neural signals
collected from the brain to provide higher accuracy; and second, by employing
optical hardware that not only can process information with high speed and low
power, but also directly interfaces with the brain by exploiting light-
controlled proteins in the brain. Furthermore, this project aims to improve the
training and education of undergraduate and high school students, with a strong
emphasis on including women and underrepresented minority communities, in multi-
disciplinary research on optics, machine learning, and neuroscience. The
scientific results will be disseminated to a wide scientific audience via
seminars, workshops, peer-reviewed publications, and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the brain works and using
that knowledge to restore or augment brain function require ultrafast parallel
algorithms that are orders-of-magnitude more advanced than current state-of-the-
art. This research project will build “optical neural co-processors” that use
light as a computational resource and leverage brain-inspired encoder-decoder
recurrent neural networks to interact with the brain in multiple natural
timescales of the brain. Combining expertise in theoretical neuroscience, neuro-
inspired machine learning, optogenetics, neuro-rehabilitation, nanophotonics and
integrated semiconductor optics, this research project will develop brain-
inspired predictive coding artificial neural networks for neural interfacing and
co-processing; design and fabricate optical neural architectures that exploit
emerging semiconductor nanophotonics and integrated photonics; as well as
demonstrate optical neural co-processors that interface with the brain in real-
time for rehabilitation in non-human primates. Along with technical
advancements, neuro-ethical implications of the developed technologies will be
investigated in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.