* 2223235
* Disentangling Inertial Particle-Turbulence Mechanisms in the Absence of Gravity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 395,999.00

Volcanic ash transport, atmospheric pollutants, and dust storms on planet Mars
are few examples of turbulent flows (i.e., flows with high velocity) laden with
particles. Because of its importance and ubiquitousness, turbulent transport of
particles has been widely investigated. However, numerous questions remain which
limit a comprehensive understanding of this phenomenon and modeling capacities.
For instance, it is still unclear whether small spherical particles in a
turbulent environment settle slower, faster, or at the same speed than in a
quiescent (no flow) fluid. Development of predictive models relies on generating
refined experimental and numerical data to accurately characterize the subtle
multi-scale physical mechanisms at play. This award aims at exploring particle-
turbulence interactions in low-gravity conditions with the goal of separating
gravitational and inertial forces to better understand and implement their
influence in inertial particle models. Broader impacts are tailored to the
participating students and researchers as well as the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the Dryden Drop Tower, a unique facility
located at PSU, this award will perform a systematic experimental exploration of
the single and collective particle interactions with turbulence in microgravity
conditions. Microgravity experiments will provide the opportunity to explore the
effects purely attributable to inertia. These will be systematically surveyed by
considering particles with various response times (tunable by change in material
and/or particle size). The objectives of the proposed investigation include: 1)
dissociating the effects of particle inertia and gravity on particle-turbulence
interactions for both finite-size and punctual single particles, 2) evaluating
joint effects promoted by clustering and/or particle-particle interactions of
finite size and point-particles in a turbulent flow under microgravity, and 3)
developing Lagrangian stochastic models for finite size particles in gravity.
Broader impact activities include STEM training at the post-graduate, graduate,
and undergraduate level and international research visits. The Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry science communication training program will provide a great
opportunity for graduate student and post-doctoral researcher to effectively
communicate their science with the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.