* 2223917
* EAGER: Automatic Story Generation in Support of Early Vocabulary Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Katharina Kann, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,737.00

In child development, small early differences can compound into big long-term
effects. One example of this is the relationship between early vocabulary size,
literacy, and later academic achievement. With this relationship in mind, many
vocabulary enrichment programs based on shared reading with a caregiver have
been developed, with mixed success. Evidence suggests that individualizing
target-vocabulary selection can improve learning, but manually generating
stories that include personalized target words for every child is infeasible.
Automatic story generation using natural language processing techniques has the
potential to solve this problem. Although there has been some progress in
automatic story generation for adults, this is an unsolved and particularly
challenging problem when stories are targeted for preschoolers, because both
content and complexity need to be tailored to the age group. Thus, the
researchers explore multiple innovative machine learning methods to generate
engaging, high-quality child-directed stories that contain specific words that
will enrich a child’s vocabulary. Furthermore, preschoolers and their caregivers
participate in story-sharing activities to investigate if the automatically
generated stories are effective tools for teaching words to children. This
research is particularly critical for low-income families and dual language
learners, who are more likely to exhibit vocabulary delays while, at the same
time, being less likely to receive intervention
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research makes
novel and potentially transformative contributions to the area of automatic
story generation by taking necessary exploratory steps towards flexible,
adaptive technology that can automatically generate personalized, engaging, and
effective stories for toddlers and their caregivers to share at home as a
vehicle for early vocabulary enrichment. Specifically, the first part of this
project consists of the following: 1) an investigation of multiple computational
models with regards to their suitability for preschooler-directed story
generation; 2) a study of strategies to avoid the generation of content that is
not suitable for children by machine learning-based story generation models; and
3) an exploration of how to automatically incorporate a set of predefined target
words into generated stories. Furthermore, the team of researchers investigates
the quality of story generation models and the stories' effectiveness for word
learning via the following: 4) obtaining feedback from families in the local
community as to whether the automatically generated stories are appropriate and
engaging for preschoolers and 5) conducting a laboratory study in which stories
will be shared by caregivers and their children in a setting that resembles a
natural home environment and subsequently comparing the children’s knowledge of
target words against control words.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.