* 2223141
* The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) Survey of the Plankton of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,244.00

The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) survey (1931 to present) is the only
long-term and ocean-basin-wide in-situ survey of plankton in the world. This
award continues the CPR survey in the western Atlantic from Iceland to the
eastern margin of the United States. It uses a consistent, cost-effective
methodology deployed from ships-of-opportunity to continue a unique and
invaluable time series of phytoplankton and zooplankton observations in the
surface ocean. The primary objective of this project is to maintain the spatial
and temporal integrity of the CPR time series and facilitate marine ecological
research. Because plankton form the base of the marine food web, long-term and
basin-scale observations allow us to understand how marine ecosystems respond to
stressors such as climate change, acidification, eutrophication, and loss of
biodiversity from fishing pressure, ultimately enabling ecosystem-based
management of marine resources. Broader impacts include contributions to U.S.
and international and integrated observing systems, marine policy, and marine
resource management. Data from the CPR survey are made publicly accessible
through the Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office. In
addition, maintenance of a sample archive will maximize its use by the wider
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project observes and describes
long-term, pelagic plankton variability and diversity in the Northwest Atlantic
Ocean. The data are enabling scientists to interpret marine biological change
and assess anthropogenic, climatically forced, and natural plankton variability
over multi-decadal time scales. Scientific research is anticipated to advance a
number of key lines of scientific inquiry that will incorporate responses of the
marine plankton community to large-scale environmental change, how changes can
impact ecosystem productivity, and how connected these changes are across the
wider Atlantic. In addition, CPR research focuses on biodiversity and invasive
species; sustainable use of marine bio-resources; and ecosystem health, ocean
acidification, and micro-plastics. These themes are highly relevant to timely
and compelling scientific questions, marine policy and management interests of
the United States, and broad societal concerns regarding the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.