* 2223870
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Efficient Algorithms for Optimal Transport in Geometric Settings
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Pankaj Agarwal, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 315,930.00

Optimal transport (OT) is a powerful tool for comparing probability
distributions and computing maps between them. Simply put, optimal transport is
the minimum-cost plan to transport mass from one distribution to the other,
where the cost of transporting one unit of mass between two locations is the
ground distance between the two locations. OT has been studied extensively in
mathematics, engineering, physics, economics, operations research, and computer
science because of their numerous applications. Despite extensive work,
computing OT plans has remained a computationally challenging problem, and there
is a large gap between the theory and practice of OT algorithms. The need for
fast OT algorithms is becoming even more urgent with the proliferation of
machine learning and algorithmic decision making in all disciplines. The
scarcity of scalable algorithms that compute high quality transport plans has
limited the applicability OT to many applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of this project is to advance the theoretical underpinnings of OT and
to bridge the gap between the theory and practice of OT algorithms. By
exploiting combinatorial, geometric and statistical properties of OT, leveraging
new approaches for min-cost flow, and exploiting approximation and probabilistic
techniques, simple and scalable algorithms will be developed for computing high
quality OT plans of both discrete and continuous distributions whose supports
are compact regions in Euclidean space. The emphasis will be on designing
combinatorial algorithms that not only have good worst-case running time but
that have better expected running time on stochastic or semi-stochastic inputs.
The project will also explore techniques to circumvent the curse of
dimensionality, which arises in the OT of high-dimensional distributions.
Building on these OT algorithms, new algorithms will be developed for data
analysis (e.g. clustering, training neural networks) on a family of
distributions in Wasserstein space, i.e., using OT as the distance between a
pair of distributions; for quality assessment of algorithms that return a
probability distribution (e.g., flood-risk-analysis algorithms that return a
distribution of water over a region).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.