* 2223944
* SBIR Phase I:  A wave attenuation technology for oyster reef restoration and small dock protection
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Craig Tinus, BOTELMOT RESEARCH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 254,493.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in advancing oyster reef restoration efforts
by improving the understanding of oyster reef formation at the individual level
and improving the resilience of waterfront infrastructure including small docks.
This project will develop a technology that could improve ecosystem services and
private dock protection. The socioeconomic importance of intact infrastructure
and coastal protection includes maintaining property values, economic job
opportunities, and supporting coastal infrastructure by minimizing erosion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on a shallow water wave
attenuation system that does not restrict water flow behind it and does not
create sediment accretion. This system is needed for both oyster reef
restoration and the protection of small docks. Oyster reefs do not establish in
areas that have been channelized and are then subjected to both boat waking and
increased fetch due to the increased wave energy. The proposed system will be
indexed to the water surface and will adapt to changes in water height but will
necessarily be anchored to the bottom. What is unknown in this project is how
rigidly the system has to encounter oncoming waves in order to both survive
extreme events and not absorb too much wave energy as to limit water flow. The
development of a nontoxic and biocompatible prototype would provide the data
necessary to project both economic and hedonic
valuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.