* 2223911
* Track I - Center Catalyst: The CONVERSE Center: CONverging on Volcanic ERuption Science with Equity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,088.00

The CONVERSE Center: CONverging on Volcanic ERuption Science with Equity Track I
project will set up the foundations for a new national center that will
significantly advance the scientific understanding of volcanoes. This will be
accomplished by observing, in real-time, the dynamic processes that occur during
volcanic eruptions. The observations and scientific data that will be collected
during such eruptions will be used to develop an unprecedented understanding of
the processes that lead to volcanic eruptions, the eruption’s intensity, size,
style and duration. The ambition of the center is to optimize the scientific
data gathering process from volcanic eruptions to improve the fundamental
understanding of volcanic systems and with that information aid in producing
accurate forecasts of future hazardous eruptions. Achieving this goal requires a
well-coordinated, inclusive, diverse and innovation-rich community that is able
to response to volcanic unrest. Education and outreach are integral parts of
this geohazards center. Training and education activities will be of great
importance to the center’s success and include training of future volcano
scientists in the entire workflow of responding to eruptions and the training of
the broader science community through specific volcano eruption scenario
exercises. Another key aspect of the center is to build and strengthen long-
lasting relationships between the academic community primarily working at
universities and the scientists working at government agencies that are
responsible for volcano monitoring and eruption response. The centers activities
will be aimed at increasing the diversity of researchers able to respond, gather
and analyze critically important data to improve understanding of volcanic
eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching ambition of the CONVERSE
geohazards center is to optimize the scientific advaces from responses of the
scientific community to volcanic unrest in order to improve fundamental
understanding of volcanic systems and aid in producing accurate forecasts of the
dimensions (intensity, magnitude, duration, location) of future hazardous
eruptions. Achieving this goal requires a well-coordinated, inclusive, diverse
and innovation-rich community response to unrest. CONVERSE evolved as an NSF-
funded Research Coordination Network, to answer the third of three Grand
Challenges in the 2017 National Academies consensus report on volcanism (ERUPT):
1. Forecast the onset, size, and hazard of eruptions by integrating observations
with quantitative models; 2. Quantify the life cycle of volcanoes; 3. Develop a
coordinated volcano science community to maximize scientific returns from any
volcanic event. The CONVERSE Research Collaborative Network (RCN) was
highlighted in the National Academies 2020-2030 vision document (“Earth in
Time”) (NAS 2020). This proposal is the next step in the evolution of CONVERSE
towards achieving these goals. This Center Catalyst project will therefore
design a US-based center to defining an organizational structure that supports
collecting multiple types of complementary data during the critical phases of
volcanic eruptions. These data will then enable the development of multi-scale
quantitative models that capture critical processes, feedbacks, and thresholds
to advance understanding of volcanic processes and the consequences of eruptions
on Earth systems. Training and education activities will be integral to the
Center’s success in this Catalyst phase and will focus on: (i) training of
future volcano scientists in the best practices of the entire volcano science
workflow and (ii) community training and outreach through workshops and eruption
scenarios. In-reach and community engagement will be analyzed and assessed
continuously and inform the Center's design and activities with regards to
equity and inclusion of a diverse community. A central role during the Center’s
catalyst phase will be as the bridge between the academic community and
government agencies responsible for volcano monitoring and eruption response,
mainly the USGS in the USA. The center will streamline the partnership with the
USGS Volcanic Hazards Program and with observatories and academic and volcano
observatory partners around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.