* 2223702
* A multi-enzyme-mimicking bioceramic material for enhanced cell functions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yunqing Kang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2025
* USD 376,732.00

Part 1: Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the body processes food
and reacts to environmental and other pressures, cells in the body produce free
radicals. If the body cannot process and remove free radicals efficiently,
oxidative stress can form and become harmful to cells and body function, which
has been linked to osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, stroke, cancer, and other
inflammatory diseases. To maintain and boost overall health, neutralizing free
radicals in the body is crucial. Antioxidants are thought to have the function
to prevent or slow damage to cells by neutralizing free radicals. Green
vegetables, fruits, herbs contain many antioxidants, for examples, vitamins,
polyphenols, and also various biological enzymes. However, these natural
antioxidants produced from vegetables, fruits or plants have many limitations,
such as complicated preparation procedures, unstable reactivity, and
environmental sensitivity. Therefore, new artificial antioxidants or enzymes are
being studied, for example, synthetic manganese dioxide particles. Manganese is
a trace element in the body, and also an essential element for bone health. The
objective of this project is to study whether or not manganese dioxide particles
have similar cell-protective functions to those natural enzymes. In this
project, manganese dioxide particles are mixed with ceramic particles to form a
sponge-like block using a mold, and bone cells are used to test the cell-
protective function of the sponge-like blocks. The project is also to test if
the cell-protective function of the manganese dioxide particles can be kept when
their structures change from solid into hollow. The instructional objective of
this project is to broaden participation in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by recruiting middle-high school students and undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups, to participate in the
research tasks of this effort, and thereby enhance the STEM pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inorganic
nanoparticles doping into bioceramics for enhanced biomedical function have been
widely reported. However, doping manganese dioxide nanoparticles, a mimetic
nanozyme, into a calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramic to develop a new biomaterial
has not been studied yet. Whether or not the doping of manganese dioxide into
CaP bioceramics can still retain the unique enzyme-mimicking function of
manganese dioxide while simultaneously enhancing the properties of the CaP
biomaterial remains unknown. Therefore, the primary objective of this project is
to investigate whether the doping of manganese dioxide nanoparticles can endow
the new cell protective and proliferative functions of a traditional CaP
biomaterial while retaining the multi-enzyme-mimicking activities of manganese
dioxide nanoparticles. To this end, manganese dioxide nanoparticles with
shell/core hollow structures are prepared and doped into a CaP porous scaffold.
The in vitro enzyme-mimetic catalytic activities of the composite porous
scaffolds and related mechanisms are investigated. The cell protection function
of the new biomaterial is characterized by culturing human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells on the porous manganese dioxide-doped CaP scaffold. This
project fills the gap of the knowledge of whether the doping of manganese
dioxide in a ceramic biomaterial scaffold can endow new enzyme-mimicking
activities and cell protection/proliferation function for the traditional CaP
biomaterial. This research provides a new platform for the PI to attract and
mentor diverse high school students from Florida Atlantic University High School
and undergraduate students from Florida Atlantic University, a Hispanic Serving
Institution, in project-based summer activities for the next-generation of
biomaterial scientists. Educational and outreach plans including teaching
courses, conferences, publications, are designed to broaden public awareness of
the fundamental knowledge about the cell protective function of nanoparticles-
doped ceramic biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.