* 2223360
* IMR: MT: Tools for Safe, Easy, and Reliable Active Global Internet Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Zakir Durumeric, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 295,682.00

It is difficult to predict Internet behavior due the complexity and distributed
nature of the Internet. For example, it is hard to know whether proposed
Internet protocols will work when deployed. As a result, researchers turn to
large-scale, measurement of real-world systems to understand how the Internet is
structured, how protocols operate, and where there are security and performance
failures. This proposal improves a core set of measurement tools that
researchers use for performing large-scale measurement of Internet hosts,
websites, names, cloud assets to prevent common measurement errors, support
recently introduced protocols, and account for real-world deployment
complexities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will specifically make
improvements to the ZMap suite of active measurement tools, including to (1)
automatically detect error conditions and prevent erroneous data, (2) adapt
tools to accommodate recently introduced network protocols like TLS 1.3, and (3)
enable tools to find and accommodate services that appear in unpredictable
locations. The challenge in these tasks lays in the fact that: (1) because there
is no ground truth against which to compare results, tools need to intelligently
determine whether results have become unstable and to alter their behavior while
maintaining data consistency, (2) must operate with exceptional performance to
accommodate the size of Internet-wide studies, and (3) must produce and
structure data that researchers can use when research tasks are not known ahead
of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this project lies in the research
that it will enable. ZMap has been used in many research publications over the
past few years, but research has uncovered several shortcomings and error
conditions that can produce inconsistent data. The Internet has also evolved
over this time period, which requires software changes to accommodate. The
improvements will help make ZMap accessible to additional researchers, ensure
that researchers with less Internet measurement experience can reliably collect
valid results, enable the study of recently introduced protocols, and enable
researchers to use the suite of tools as part of broader measurement
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ZMap tools are documented and available for
download at https://zmap.io. Any auxiliary datasets produced will be published
at https://scans.io. ZMap is planned to be maintained for the foreseeable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.