* 2223148
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Anion Exchange Membrane Water Electrolyzers via Novel Electrode Geometry
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Philipp Muscher, ORIGEN HYDROGEN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 274,919.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable very highly-efficient low-cost green
hydrogen production by improving a key functional component of a promising water
electrolysis technology. Green hydrogen is a chemical fuel and a feedstock with
no associated CO2 emissions. In an effort to decarbonize our economy, green
hydrogen can address sectors of our economy that are not easily electrified
using clean electricity, for example steelmaking, chemicals, heating, and heavy
transport such as shipping and aviation. However, the cost of green hydrogen is
still too high to prompt large-scale adoption. The pure-water electrolyzers
developed in this project can significantly reduce green hydrogen production
costs compared to the current state-of-the-art: they require only water and
electricity as inputs, and are entirely made of low-cost, non-toxic materials,
utilizing domestic supply chains. They are modular, enabling the development of
both large hydrogen production facilities and small decentralized systems, e.g.,
for on-site operations or refueling stations. This project will not only help
the adoption of green hydrogen, it will also elucidate how the chemical and
electrochemical modifications of active surfaces can more broadly be used to
make electrochemical reactions, such as water splitting, more
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
drastically improve a key component of an anion exchange membrane water
electrolyzer (AEMEL): the anode electrode. The anode is the site of the oxygen
evolution reaction (OER), a required but inefficient step during electrolytic
hydrogen production. Enhancement of the OER kinetics by improved anode design,
if translated to commercial AEMEL systems, would directly lead to a lower cost
of green hydrogen. This project aims to replace the conventional two-layer
anode, in which a complex catalyst layer is coated on top of a porous transport
layer (PTL), with a simpler “unified” anode, in which the PTL is functionalized
such that the catalyst layer is no longer necessary and the reaction kinetics
are improved. In this project, two approaches to functionalize the PTL surface
will be combined: the increase of the electrochemically active surface area (via
etching, dealloying, and deposition techniques) and the increase of the
intrinsic catalytic OER activity (via alloying and deposition techniques). This
effort is expected to result in significantly improved AEMEL performance and
lifetime, which will be evaluated using electrochemical methods, both ex situ
(3-electrode cell) and in situ (in an operating
electrolyzer).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.