* 2223964
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The challenges of living small: functional tradeoffs in the vertebral bone structure of diminutive mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kenneth Angielczyk, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 05/31/2026
* USD 484,370.00

This research explores how body size affects the structure and function of bones
in very small (miniaturized) mammals. Miniaturization is common across animal
groups and is significant because it is often associated with the evolution of
new features despite the unique challenges faced by small animals. The effects
of miniaturization on the vertebrate skeleton are particularly fundamental
because the skeletal system supports all other organ systems, and must withstand
internal and external applied forces while still facilitating efficient body
motion. It remains poorly understood how the skeletons of the smallest
vertebrate animals withstand and transmit everyday forces. 3D imaging
techniques, computer modeling, and physical testing on mammalian backbones
(vertebrae) will be used to assess how the skeletons of several related groups
of small mammals (shrews, moles, hedgehogs, and solenodons) have evolved to
function at small size. The project is testing whether smaller bones are
stronger (more resistant to breaking) or stiffer (more resistant to bending),
and how internal and external bone structure work together to allow very small
mammals to move safely and efficiently. Planned activities will promote
scientific and public understanding of how natural selection leads to changes in
the shapes of bones, and how body size influences the way animals interact with
their environment. This project involves training of six students from a
primarily undergraduate institution (Bucknell University) in independent
research. Outreach activities through the Field Museum will promote public
awareness of the incredible diversity and importance of small mammals, which are
often overlooked but are critical to ecosystem
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research leverages the taxonomic richness
and ecological and body size diversity of the mammalian clade Eulipotyphla to:
1) measure the contributions of trabecular and cortical bone tissues to whole-
bone performance in the eulipotyphlan lumbar spine; 2) quantify the selective
pressures to maximize bone strength, stiffness, or both in very small mammals;
and 3) determine when tradeoffs between strength and stiffness occur as very
small mammals adopt novel ecologies. By focusing on the morphology and
performance of trabecular and cortical bone in the axial skeleton, specifically
the lumbar spine, this research takes advantage of a system that is
developmentally constrained via Hox patterning but also morphologically plastic
and heavily involved in quadrupedal locomotion. The integrative approach of this
study synthesizes Finite Element Analysis (FEA) results with body size,
phylogenetic, ecological, and morphometric data to assess morpho-functional
tradeoffs and quantify selective pressures on vertebral bone. The use of
Eulipotyphla for this clade-wide functional study is novel but appropriate, as
the group is taxonomically and ecologically diverse and includes the smallest
mammal by mass (weighing less than two grams). These investigations will yield
novel quantitative evidence about the relative importance of, and interaction
between, trabecular and cortical bone under stress, and test long-standing
hypotheses about how selection acts on bone morphology to produce appropriately
strong, stiff bony structures at small sizes. In addition, educational and
outreach outcomes include undergraduate research training, a treasure hunt
activity to find small mammals at the Field Museum, and a learning kit for the
Field Museum to support middle school learning
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.