* 2223970
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining STEM Educators to Serve in High-Need Schools in Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Jason Graham, University of Scranton
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 691,252.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective STEM teachers.
To do so, it will recruit undergraduate STEM majors to complete STEM degrees and
support them in becoming certified as secondary teachers of mathematics or
science. These individuals will receive scholarships and other supports designed
to enrich their STEM knowledge, as well as their teaching knowledge and skills.
To expand their STEM content knowledge, the Noyce Scholars will have the
opportunity to participate in collaborative mentor-scholar projects, summer
computational workshops, and a chemometrics course ((i.e., statistics and
computer applications in analytical chemistry). They will also benefit from
faculty mentorships that include opportunities to reflect on their academic and
career pursuits. Monthly workshops will include sessions related to
interpersonal skill development, such as grit, and cultural and linguistic
competence. Such skills are important for effective teaching in high-need school
districts. The project expects these undergraduate Noyce Scholars will gain the
knowledge, skills, and perspectives needed to support student learners of
science and mathematics in Pennsylvania in high-need secondary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Scranton University includes
partnerships with Mid Valley School District and Luzerne County Community
College. There are three specific projects goals. The first is to recruit,
prepare, and graduate 21 qualified undergraduate STEM majors to become certified
as secondary teachers of science or mathematics. The second goal is to provide
professional support for the long-term success of these STEM educators. The
final goal is to place and retain a high percentage (90%) of these Scholars in
teaching positions in high-need school districts upon graduation as they
complete their teaching service requirement of two years of teaching for each
one year of scholarship support. Early residency teaching experience will be
part of the scholars&amp;#39; coursework when they practice and hone their
skills and knowledge alongside an effective teacher-mentor in a high-need
classroom. Further, to ensure that the scholars have the necessary support for
their Praxis tests, enrichment preparation and support will be provided to the
Noyce Scholars through freely available online resources via a learning
management software. A robust project assessment process, led by an independent
evaluator, is intended to identify aspects of the program that are most
effective in STEM teacher recruitment, retention, and preparation. The project
intends to use results from this evaluation to improve the teacher education
program and will disseminate the results locally and nationally via publications
and presentations. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends Noyce project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program. The Noyce
program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary k-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.