* 2223976
* SBIR Phase II:  Quantification of Operative Performance via Simulated Surgery, Capacitive Sensing, and Machine Learning to Improve Surgeon Performance &amp;  Medical Device Develop
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Hannah Eherenfeldt, Resuture Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2025
* USD 996,413.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve surgical skill acquisition,
assessment of surgical performance, and medical device training. The
apprenticeship-based model of surgical training has created inefficiencies in
the medical device and healthcare industries. This problem is exacerbated by the
evolving complexity and specialization of surgical procedures and devices. The
proposed technology combines lifelike, physical simulated procedures, novel
sensing technologies, and machine-learned data analytics to address a universal
market need for data-driven training. The technology developed during this
project will result in surgical simulation platforms to improve procedural
competency and the ability to practice device deployment outside of the
operating room, while providing critical data-driven insight into surgical
performance and quantitative evaluation. Ultimately, this solution could reduce
patient costs, improve outcomes, and expedite medical device development and
adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will result in the
development of a comprehensive system that collects data and evaluates vascular
surgical operative performance in both the open and endovascular fields. An open
vascular surgery simulation platform previously developed to train surgeons will
be expanded to include endovascular procedures and the integration of capacitive
sensors to capture a comprehensive set of operative performance data. This
project aims to use artificial intelligence to classify key performance metrics
from the collected dataset to build a comprehensive model to classify operative
performance. A data-driven platform for surgical training and medical device
development is not currently commercially available and the industry currently
relies on increasingly cost-prohibitive means to provide vital surgical
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.