* 2223610
* IMR: MT: A Community Platform for Controlled Experiments on Internet Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Nicholas Feamster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Internet measurement research has long operated on convenience samples---
measurements that are derived from convenience, based on the sets of vantage
points that can be obtained through access to a particular testbed, the
deployment of an application, or the opportunistic recruitment of participants.
Throughout the early decades of the Internet, such an approach was sensible and
could often provide important insights about the design of specific protocols or
applications, or even some aspect of the Internet writ large. Over the past
several years, however, the research community---and society more broadly---has
begun to ask a broader set of questions, moving beyond those of technical
protocol or application design, to questions of social or policy relevance. The
current measurement tools and platforms are ill-equipped to address the
concomitant research questions that intersect with broader societal questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a platform to change that,
delivering the first-ever network measurement platform that can facilitate
studying a broader set of research questions than are possible with existing
platforms. Perhaps one of the most striking examples of such a set of questions
relates to the Internet's digital divide. The challenge is widely acknowledged,
by researchers, advocacy organizations, and policymakers alike, as a significant
challenge, and providing all Americans with affordable Internet connectivity is
a national priority as well. This project is developing a measurement platform
that will enable this new family of measurements. Building on early successes in
a pilot deployment in Chicago, the project aims to design, develop, and deploy a
first-of-its-kind measurement infrastructure that is specifically designed to
enable new classes of research questions concerning digital infrastructure
across our nation's population (and ultimately, the global population). The
infrastructure is open-source, and incrementally deployable and expandable,
allowing the project and infrastructure to scale from pilot to national or
global deployments as lessons from early deployments are applied to a larger
testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential outcomes of this platform are
profound and wide-ranging, catalyzing an entirely new class of Internet
measurements and research studies---shifting the computer networking and
Internet measurement research areas from questions that focus only on
convenience samples (thus limiting our research questions to those of technology
and protocols) to samples that concern infrastructure and population (thus
allowing networking researchers to ask a broader set of technical questions with
importance across disciplines, from economics to policy to social
science).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.