* 2223749
* 38th Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Narayan Bhattarai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 5,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Steering Committee of the Southern
Biomedical Engineering Conference (SBEC) will host a conference meeting from
August 25th to 28th in New Orleans, Louisiana, on the rapidly growing
interdisciplinary field of biomedical science and engineering. This conference
strongly supports and promotes the research engagement of students, especially
ones who are not well-funded, under-represented, or otherwise not likely to be
able to attend conferences. The mission of the conference is to encourage
students to pursue cutting-edge research in the field. NSF funding will be used
exclusively to support conference registration fees and their other related
costs (e.g., logistics and travel, etc.) for URM researchers. Eight to ten
underrepresented minority (URM) students from multiple universities will be
supported to attend this conference. These students will present papers and
posters at the conference, and their abstracts will be published in the yearly
issue of SBEC proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This award will increase the participation from underrepresented
minority (URM) communities at the 38th Southern Biomedical Engineering
Conference (New Orleans, LA; August 25-28, 2022). The goals of this conference
include exchanging knowledge while gaining a better perspective on the advances
in the field of biomedical science and engineering, and discussing the issues
faced by clinicians and researchers. Several topics including biomaterials and
their applications in implants, tissue engineering, drug delivery etc.,
presented at this conference will help researchers, engineers, and clinicians
find balance between innovative technology and the human side of medical care.
In keeping with the emphasis on student participation, the SBEC will provide
best paper and presentation awards to undergraduate, graduate, and professional
students. Student testimonials will be collected to assess and summarize the
impact of attending this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.