* 2223512
* Collaborative Research: Phenobase: Community, infrastructure, and data for global-scale analyses of plant phenology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Guralnick, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 96,649.00

Plant phenology – the timing of plant life-cycle events, such as leaf growth,
flowering, and fruiting – plays a fundamental role in shaping terrestrial
ecosystems. The timing of plant phenology not only affects the fitness of
individual plants, it also impacts the fitness and behaviors of organisms
dependent on plants, which in terrestrial ecosystems includes nearly all
animals, either directly or indirectly. Thus, changes in plant phenology can
trigger dramatic, and sometimes devastating, consequences for ecosystems and
human economic interests and health. Plant phenological data are therefore
indispensable for understanding ecosystem function, detecting ecosystem changes,
and predicting the impacts of ongoing climate and land use changes. Given the
importance of plant phenology, continuing local, regional and national data
collection efforts have generated large volumes of phenological data. However,
these data are surprisingly heterogeneous, difficult to integrate, and thus
remain largely inaccessible for broader research. At the same time, community
science and specimen digitization infrastructure have produced massive, rapidly
expanding collections of herbarium specimens and in situ plant photographs,
which contain a wealth of virtually untapped historical and contemporary
phenological information. This project will use machine learning approaches to
extract phenological data from plant photographs and digitized specimens. These
data will then be integrated with phenological monitoring resources to create an
open access, global plant phenology database – Phenobase. During this project,
one postdoctoral researcher and several graduate and undergraduate students will
be trained in programming and data science skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to support community needs for generating and delivering
high-precision, harmonized and semantically integrated plant phenological data
at unprecedented taxonomic, geographic, and temporal scales, along with new
tools to help scientists and the public engage with these data. To achieve this
goal, this project will develop a global, standardized knowledge base by
integrating different phenology observation networks around the world; expand
this knowledge base by using computer vision (CV) techniques to generate new,
high-quality phenological data from the rapidly growing collection of community-
submitted plant photographs on iNaturalist and Budburst; add critical historical
data by using similar CV techniques on herbarium specimens available through
iDigBio and GBIF; develop tools for data query, access, and visualization
delivered via the Web and as software packages; and foster compelling,
community-driven use cases showcasing the use of Phenobase for new research and
for public good. These approaches will not only meet current growth in imaging,
but scale to meet continuing, exponential growth into the future. By weaving
together phenologically relevant outputs from monitoring projects from around
the globe, including the efforts of millions of community scientists, Phenobase
will support and empower phenological research that is currently impossible.
Results derived from this project can be found at
http://plantphenology.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.