* 2223962
* The interaction of selection, pleiotropy, and drift in phenotypic evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Gideon Bradburd, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,536,017.00

Evolution of the traits of organisms most famously occurs through natural
selection, but can also occur through other processes. Traits can evolve through
genetic drift, especially in small populations, when individuals may die or fail
to reproduce for reasons having nothing to do with their fitness. Traits can
also evolve as a result of pleiotropy, in which single genes affect multiple
traits. If natural selection acts to change one trait, other traits that share
pleiotropic genes with it will also evolve. While selection, drift, and
pleiotropy have been well-studied in isolation, rarely have the roles of all
three been considered together. This research will comprehensively determine the
roles of natural selection, drift, and pleiotropy in a plant species that shows
patterns of recent evolutionary change across latitudes and altitudes. Examining
these factors simultaneously will help us understand how organisms can adapt or
fail to adapt to environmental change. The project will integrate field studies
of selection with laboratory genetics and genomics. It will involve teams of K12
teachers and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, improving
their understanding of the process of science and scientific careers, as well as
producing classroom curricular materials based on the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon decades of field and
laboratory research with the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana. The
recent evolution of self-fertilization in this species has weakened natural
selection on stamen number because short stamens do not contribute to seed
production. Short stamens have been lost in some populations of this species,
especially at low altitudes and latitudes. Three gene regions associated with
stamen loss have been identified, permitting simultaneous investigation of
evolution at the morphological and genomic levels. The role of natural selection
in stamen loss will be evaluated using field and growth chamber experiments with
plants of known genotypes. The role of pleiotropy will be evaluated by
statistical associations between stamen loss and other traits known to be
affected by selection, and by studying genomic associations for gene regions
influencing these traits. Finally, the role of drift will be evaluated by
studying whole-genome diversity and assessing the relationship between small
population size and stamen loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.