* 2223077
* STTR Phase I:  High Speed, High Power, Single Mode Photonic Crystal Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Weidong Zhou, SEMERGYTECH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to demonstrate the viability of a
semiconductor laser technology based on laterally confined photonic crystal
cavities. The proposed laser technology may ensure secure semiconductor and
microelectronic supply chains within US for energy-efficient high-capacity data
center link capabilities, Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) systems for
autonomous driving/aerial vehicles, high performance communication and sensing
systems, etc. The novel solution may accelerate technology development, address
technical and market gaps, and foster entrepreneurship with important social
impacts. The project will help prepare a diversified workforce skilled in
semiconductor production, nanotechnology, photonics and optics, and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop and commercialize high speed photonic
crystal surface emitting lasers (PCSELs) with single-mode, high power output.
PCSEL offers the combined attributes of conventional lasers with demonstrated
high-power, single-mode operations from large apertures. To address the cavity
scaling challenges in high speed PCSELs with aperture sizes down to a few
micrometers, a novel lateral cavity confinement configuration is proposed. Such
a lateral confinement configuration can offer both strong optical confinement
and compact lateral charge confinement for increased intrinsic modulation speed
and reduced parasitic effects. The trade-offs between the modulation speed and
optical power will be investigated. Vertical cavity feedbacks will also be
incorporated and optimized for photon lifetime management. The objective of this
project is to investigate different optical feedback configurations in the PCSEL
cavities to scale the cavity sizes down to a few micrometers with the goal of
single-mode, high power, and high-speed operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.