* 2223676
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Large-scale Multidisciplinary Design Optimization with Unsteady Simulations: A Hybrid Pseudo-spectral Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ping He, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,232.00

This project will develop a breakthrough multidisciplinary design optimization
(MDO) framework that uses unsteady multiphysics computer simulations to optimize
system performance automatically. The research is motivated by the lack of
effective numerical algorithms to shorten the design period for large-scale
engineered systems with unsteady processes, such as spacecraft, aircraft, and
wind turbines. This issue is further exacerbated by ever-increasing expectations
for system performance and safety. The automated MDO framework will
significantly reduce the design cycle time for transformative systems that are
poised to improve the nationâ€™s economic prosperity and change how people live
and connect, such as urban air taxis and systems supporting space travel.
Furthermore, this project will advance the knowledge of complex mechanisms and
interactions in large-scale engineered systems, which would otherwise be hard to
obtain solely by human intuition. This project will also conduct educational and
outreach activities for underrepresented minority and K-12 students to encourage
STEM engagement, promote diversity and inclusion, and stimulate students'
interest in engineering design and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to enable the gradient-based
multidisciplinary design optimization (MDO) of large-scale engineered systems
governed by unsteady processes. The project will develop a new hybrid pseudo-
spectral (HPS) adjoint algorithm to compute unsteady gradients for a broad range
of disciplines efficiently. The originality of the HPS algorithm is that it
effectively combines the robustness of time-accurate analysis and the speed of
pseudo-spectral adjoint to enable efficient computation of high-dimensional
unsteady gradients. The project will investigate the fundamental characteristics
of the HPS algorithm and develop a modular architecture to couple any number of
disciplines for large-scale unsteady MDO. It will demonstrate the framework by
conducting urban air mobility electric aircraft and offshore wind turbine MDO
that considers the unsteady coupling between fluid mechanics, structures, heat
transfer, and dynamics. With further development, the framework can be extended
to more disciplines, such as control and multiphase flow. The unsteady MDO
framework will be open to the public to promote collaborations in the
engineering design community. The HPS algorithm is general and expected to
benefit many other fundamental research areas beyond MDO, including surrogate
modeling, error and uncertainty analyses, and machine learning. Moreover, this
project is anticipated to create a catalytic effect in the engineering design
industry to transform the traditional, human-supervised design process into a
more automated one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.