* 2223011
* SBIR Phase II: Artificial Intelligence Powered Software Testing
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Ivan Barajas Vargas, MUUKLABS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Parvathi Chundi
* 04/30/2025
* USD 971,804.00

The broader/commercial impact of the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project reduce the cost and speed of software quality assurance (SQA)
end-to-end testing by enabling artificial intelligence (AI) to automate tests
without the need for coding or highly experienced coders. As innovative high-
growth Software as a Service (SaaS) companies go to market faster with more
confidence and fewer software defects, industries will benefit economically by
saving time and money. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will
build an AI solution which, although used by less experienced software
engineers, will allow software companies to identify software defects with
minimal user interactions. The real-time and guided process gathers information
directly from the web browsers, handling traditional and unresolved problems
with test automation such as software test design, automation, coverage, and
maintenance. The AI solution will make SQA highly efficient by performing two
major tasks: simulating real-time users' exploration of web applications and
identifying unexpected behaviors. The architecture enables AI agents to self-
learn and interact with the application, improving on each observation. The AI
learning cycle implements thorough communication within the system as it
communicates requests to apply specific actions based on its own knowledge
analyzing the resulting effect. Phase I research proved that the architecture
can be upgraded to a commercial version, providing value to customers looking to
improve software quality in their products and go to market faster. The
anticipated technical results in Phase II will enhance the categorization of
unexpected software behaviors, optimize the data analysis time, and reduce the
learning cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.