* 2223241
* NSF-BSF: The impact of the KFERQ motif on protein turn-over in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alicia Melendez, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 837,754.00

This collaborative project between U.S. and Israeli researchers will investigate
how proteins are broken down into the basic units for recycling. The project
focuses on an ancient form of degradation, where proteins are selected for
breakdown on the basis of a specific motif in their protein sequence. Small
roundworms were genetically engineered to carry this specific degradation motif
fused to a fluorescent protein. These engineered worms will be used to detect
the fluorescent signal in living worms under microscopes and identify conditions
that alter the intensity of the fluorescent signal. These conditions will
identify the factors involved in protein degradation. Knowledge of the motif-
sequence-mediated degradation pathway in worms will enable comparative analysis
with vertebrates and other creatures, and has the potential to discover the
evolutionary origin of this mechanism, and identify conserved fundamental
principles that will be relevant for mammalian biology as well. Concurrently,
the two researchers aim to broaden the participation of under-represented
minority students in STEM. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in methods of scientific inquiry and communication skills. Students will be co-
mentored in the expertise of both labs and will be exposed to joint group
meetings and seminars in an international scientific environment. Results of
outreach will be assessed by the successful recruitment of these students, at
different training levels at both institutions. This project has the combined
goals of revealing a complex cellular process and increasing the global network
of under-represented STEM researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autophagy is an
evolutionarily conserved process that mediates turnover of cytoplasmic material
by the lysosome. There is a critical need to define the molecular mechanisms
involved in degradation pathways, how they affect the proteome, and how they
evolved. In mammals, the properties of the residues that constitute the KFERQ
protein sequence motif determine whether the targeting chaperone HSC70 can bind
and function in chaperone-mediated autophagy, or microautophagy. Strikingly,
although more than a third of the proteins in C. elegans carry a KFERQ-like
motif, the molecular underpinnings of any alternative forms of autophagy besides
macroautophagy have not been explored. The PIs have developed a KFERQ-sensor in
C. elegans, which will be used to elucidate and dissect the genetic and
molecular mechanisms that regulate protein turn-over via the KFERQ-like motif
and determine its physiological relevance in C. elegans. Identification of the
KFERQ-mediated degradation pathway will enable a comparative analysis with
higher organisms and has the potential to highlight the origin of this
mechanism, enable the study of its evolution, and identify conserved fundamental
principles that may be relevant for mammalian biology as well. This project will
establish the relevance of the KFERQ-like penta-amino-acid motif to affect
protein stability and degradation in C. elegans and use it to elucidate the
likely ancestral pathway of degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.