* 2223709
* I-Corps: Development of a gut bacterial strain to stimulate mucus-secreting cells of the colon to treat leaky-gut
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Hariom Yadav, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 12,325.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to address
leaky gut and improve the microbiome. Leaky gut, or increased intestinal
permeability, is an unhealthy gut lining that may allow partially digested food,
toxins, and microbes to be released. This may trigger inflammation and changes
in the normal gut flora that could lead to problems within the digestive tract.
Currently, there are no products on the market with clinical evidence of ability
to address leaky gut. The proposed technology may relieve leaky gut and its
associated inflammation, as well as improve the host’s microbiome. The proposed
technology increases the presence of beneficial bacteria indiscriminately by
making the gut a more suitable place for probiotics to live and thus does not
decrease microbiome diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a bacterial strain called Lactobacillus paracasei
D3.5 that was discovered by screening hundreds of human-isolated bacterial
strains to treat leaky gut. The bacterial strain was selected for its unique
ability to stimulate mucus-secreting cells of the colon called goblet cells.
Because the components of the bacteria responsible for these effects become more
bioavailable after killing the bacteria with heat, the heat-treated version
called Postbiotic LPD3.5 was used for a subsequent preclinical study. In this
study, the preparation was found to restore the thickness of the colonic mucosal
layer in aging mice, which then led to the recovery in tightness of the
connections between epithelial cells lining the gut. Both of these effects
prevented bacteria and toxins from leaking through the digestive tract into the
blood stream, and relieved the associated inflammation, a condition referred to
as leaky gut. Moreover, Postbiotic LPD3.5 also was shown to strengthen the
host’s bacterial community, decrease anxiety, and improve insulin sensitivity,
muscle function, and memory. In order to test whether Postbiotic LPD3.5 is able
to stimulate the mucus production in humans, human goblet cells were treated in
vitro. The effects seen in human goblet cells were the same as those observed in
goblet cells of mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.