* 2223171
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale study of oscillating flow and multiphase heat transfer in porous media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Leitao Chen, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 132,601.00

In our evolving energy landscape, it is crucial to maximize the efficiency of
energy technologies and understand the impact of fossil fuel extraction and
carbon storage. Technologies that are central to this - subsurface remediation,
geothermal energy systems, batteries, fracking, etc. - are governed by
complicated flow through porous media, which is not currently well understood. A
porous medium has multiple, convoluted pathways of various sizes for fluid flow
through an otherwise solid material. The flows can be single phase (liquid/gas)
or multiphase, and can occur at constant temperature or with heat transfer. The
flow can occur in a single direction, or oscillate. When all of these are
combined, nonlinear effects can result, which could improve the behavior of a
system or negatively impact performance, depending on how the effects are
propagated and understood. The major objective of this work is to experimentally
study oscillating and multiphase flows in porous media, and then develop a
numerical approach that can be used to gain further insight into the fundamental
behavior, thereby improving energy efficiency, and lowering both economic costs
and environmental impacts. Although porous media flow sounds esoteric, it occurs
in many daily applications (brewing coffee, etc.). Therefore, this project is
well suited for pre-college outreach, and several topics related to it will be
used to engage underrepresented students from K-12 classrooms. In addition, this
project will promote STEM education via an inter-college educational
collaboration for undergraduate design projects, and demonstration units about
porous media flows will be created for pre-college
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will combine experimental and
numerical techniques to describe the effects of the physical porous structure,
the flow/heat transfer boundary layer (including a comparison between
oscillation and non-oscillation) and the variations in wettability from
materials and manufacturing process. Experimentally, naturally-occurring and
engineered porous media will be scanned, analyzed, and catalogued in a database,
and an experimental platform will also be designed and developed to study in
situ oscillating and multiphase transport phenomena inside porous media using
the Neutron Imaging Facility at Oak Ridge National Lab. This experimental work
will be coupled with numerical simulations through parallel development of a
multiphase discrete Boltzmann method model and a hybrid discrete/lattice
Boltzmann method model to capture kinetic behaviors and multiscale interactions,
in order to elucidate the fundamental behavior of oscillating multiphase
thermofluidic phenomena and fluid-solid interactions. The knowledge developed in
this project will, in turn, be used to improve the design of porous structures
in a variety of energy applications, including thermal storage in concentrated
solar power plants, carbon retention in rock structures, and fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.