* 2223825
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: A General Framework for Responsive Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Society increasingly relies on the reliability and security of software.
Abstract interpretation is a well-established methodology for proving that
software is free of certain classes of bugs. However, for industrial-scale
software, standard abstract interpretation techniques may take hours to
complete, making them difficult to integrate into modern software development
practices. This project develops a framework for responsive static analysis,
which retains the power of abstract interpretation while running much more
quickly for common use cases. The project's novelties are new algorithms for
running abstract interpretation responsively, corresponding mathematical proofs
that these algorithms produce the desired, correct results, and working
implementations of the algorithms. The project's impacts are greater performance
and applicability of powerful abstract interpretation techniques for verifying
software correctness, which in turn will yield more reliable and secure
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a recently-developed
framework for demanded abstract interpretation, a demand-driven and incremental
analysis approach based on reifying analysis computations and dependencies in a
graph structure. Via generalizations of this approach, this project will extend
the framework to handle compositional analysis, essential for efficient analysis
of procedure calls, and refinement-based analysis, to enable combining analyses
with varying levels of precision and scalability. This generalized framework
will facilitate provable guarantees of from-scratch consistency, a crucial
property for responsive analysis. The project will also implement the
generalized framework and instantiate it with challenging analysis problems,
addressing research challenges in making the framework
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.