* 2223407
* NSF-DFG Confine: Structure, dynamics, and electrochemical stability of concentrated electrolytes in confined spaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bryan McCloskey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will investigate the fundamental role of confinement on the ionic
structure and dynamics in highly concentrated electrolytes, and reveal how
confinement impacts performance of battery systems. Confinement occurs when the
dimension of a physical feature, such as a pore, is comparable to the dimensions
of the molecules present. Porous electrodes are common in batteries, with pore
sizes that are often smaller than 50 nanometers. Ions need to navigate and react
electrochemically inside this confined pore space for electrical current to
flow. Therefore, in battery systems the electrolyte dynamics and reactivity
within pores is central to the device performance. Highly concentrated
electrolytes are a burgeoning field driven by groundbreaking opportunities for
safer and higher energy density electrochemical devices, in particular for new
directions in aqueous batteries, which use water instead of a flammable solvent.
Despite their promises, highly concentrated electrolytes bring their own set of
challenges that are exacerbated within the confined settings of battery systems.
A poor understanding of transport properties in highly concentrated electrolytes
suggest that there are unique structure-property relationships at play that
warrant further investigation, especially under confinement. This project will
yield advancements in electrolyte engineering and offers insights into improved
electrode materials/structures for better batteries. Beyond batteries, the
results will have important implications for colloidal gels, ionic and polymeric
liquids, and generally molecules under confinement. Insights from studying the
water-based electrolytes may also aid in environmental remediation applications
like brine management. This project will also provide training at several
levels. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers will gain unique
perspectives from the international collaboration and local elementary students
will learn about battery basics through outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will uncover fundamental
structure-property relationships for confined concentrated electrolytes using
experiments, theories, and models. The team will isolate contributions from the
anion, cation, valency, as well as the dielectric constant of the solvent to
obtain a clear understanding of the underlying structure and dynamics. The
Berkeley team will focus on the fundamental aspects leading to novel theoretical
frameworks and validated models for the electric double layer and transport
dynamics under confinement using experimental techniques such as the
Electrochemical Surface Force Apparatus (ESFA), impedance spectroscopy,
molecular simulations, and recently developed Onsager transport theory. Insights
from these studies will provide input to the Münster team who will address the
role of EDLs on non-Faradaic processes in porous electrode systems and its
influence on the reactivity on metallic electrodes from a chemical and
electrochemical standpoint using different electrochemical and spectroscopically
methods including Raman (including in situ surface enhanced) and IR
spectroscopy, as well as in situ NMR and laser spectroscopy. This project
involves a novel combination of experimental techniques and theoretical
descriptions for the forces, relaxation and transport behaviors of electrolytes
under confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the
“NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in in Chemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces
(NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the
National Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.