* 2223556
* IMR: MT: Fine-Grained Telemetry for Next-Generation Cellular Access Networks (NG-Scope)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Kyle Jamieson, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 539,988.00

The Next Generation Cellular Wireless Radio Access Network (RAN) is emerging as
the dominant data network for Internet access, supporting capacity-enhanced
mobile broadband, ultra low latency, and high connectivity machine-to-machine
scenarios alike. Insightful performance measurement of such applications depends
on one or more of delay, jitter, and network capacity measurement data
(telemetry) at millisecond-level timescales. This necessitates a clean-slate
approach that marries high resolution physical-layer telemetry with end-to-end
network- and transport-layer telemetry. This proposal develops NG-Scope, a
measurement tool that provides a network telemetry stream to higher software
layers. NG-Scope's telemetry succinctly summarizes wireless capacity, RAN-added
latency, and network management data. Rather than relying on crowd-sourced data
from deployment on most or all user equipment, NG-Scope provides visibility into
all users' telemetry data in a given cell. NG-Scope accounts for and leverages
the latest 5G innovations, but abstracts these details behind a proposed
standardized API (Application Program Interface) that measurement tools,
applications, and transport layer protocols access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NG-
Scope gives network measurement researchers visibility into the RAN at fidelity
levels and user population scales not previously possible. Its proposed RAN-
specific processing techniques bridge the gap between physical- and transport-
layer telemetry data, enabling inference of the sources of network phenomena not
previously observable, such as the ability to differentiate between wireless
channel conditions and RAN versus core network congestion as the cause of packet
latency and jitter. NG-Scope does not require the incentivization or cooperation
of any service provider, enabling unfettered access to RAN telemetry and thus
broadly accelerating innovation in network measurement and
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NG-Scope will benefit basic longitudinal internet
measurement research, network operators' network monitoring tasks, and internet
application architects' design and development efforts. It will be developed in
an open-source model so that internet measurement researchers can deploy the
tool locally. Results of data measurement campaigns will be made publicly
available, to facilitate trace-driven emulation based experiments of other
researchers and network protocol designers. Researchers will be able to remotely
prototype and evaluate their own applications and network protocols in a virtual
programming environment with remote access. The project will engage with under-
represented groups through summer research opportunities, REU sites, and the
undergraduate junior/senior thesis. Project website:
ngscope.cs.princeton.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.