* 2223387
* Light Addressable Thin Film Sensor System for High Resolution Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jinghua Li, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 410,542.00

Abstract title: A Light Addressable Thin Film Sensor System for High Resolution
Imaging&lt;br/&gt;Principal investigator: Jinghua Li, The Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;Biofluids in human bodies contain a variety of chemical
biomarkers that can reveal health status and age-based conditions. Recording the
spatiotemporal distribution of these biomarkers within the surfaces of soft
tissues can provide valuable information about bio-related dynamic,
heterogeneous processes which could potentially contribute to the early
diagnosis and effective treatment of diseases. However, there is a knowledge gap
in understanding these processes due to the lack of bio-integrated analytical
tools with sufficient spatial and temporal resolutions. This study aims to build
a flexible, high-resolution imaging system using thin film semiconductor
nanomembranes. When paired with a focused, addressable, and modulated laser
beam, the imaging system can generate a quantifiable photocurrent, the amplitude
of which scales with the local concentration of target biomarkers. This project
seeks to contribute to the education of undergraduate and high school students
by providing training and research opportunities in technologically relevant
areas such as optoelectronics, physics, and biomedical engineering. Results
obtained from this study will be used to create “deformable-imaging-film” demo
kits for high school students participating in the Design Learning Center
Capstone Experience Program to inspire their pursuits of STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate a series of
fundamental questions related to the design principles of the high-resolution
imaging system based on the field effect in semiconductor physics. Exploration
of the flexible and light addressable system will enhance the understandings of
optical-electrical coupling in submicron semiconductors for biosensing on
curvilinear and soft surfaces. The hypothesis is that the proposed thin film
sensing platform can unprecedentedly combine functionalities needed for imaging
biomarkers on/within soft tissues, including flexibility, scalability, high
spatiotemporal resolution, and multifunctionality. Specific aims of this project
include: (1) develop flexible semiconductor nanomembranes on polymer substrates,
and explore bias voltage induced formation of depletion regions within the
semiconductors in liquid environment; (2) investigate optical-electrical
coupling behaviors in the semiconductors with the radiation of a focused,
modulated laser beam, and uncover the structure-interface-resolution
correlations; and (3) establish the viability of using the resulting polymer-
supported nanomembranes for imaging the distribution of multiple biomarkers.
Overall, the research outcomes will provide understandings of the chemical,
electrical, optical, and biological phenomena at the solution-electronics
interface within the flexible and light addressable imaging system. The codesign
of thin film electronics, biochemical interfaces, and recording hardware will
create new knowledge at the intersection of conventional fields of technical
study. The sensing technologies, interface designs, theoretical models, and
device concepts can be transformative in multiple research fields spanning
nanotechnology, optoelectronics, biomedical engineering, and clinical medicine.
For future applications, the high-resolution imaging of chemical and/or
biological markers in large scale can provide accurate information for early
diagnosis, intervention, and cure of diseases when combined with data science
and artificial intelligence. In addition to monitoring biological processes,
this imaging technology could also be useful in areas such as quality control of
industrial lubricants, fuel cells, and food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.