* 2223785
* EFRI ELiS: Mechanically Adaptive Living Structural Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Christopher Hernandez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

The manufacturing and application of materials used in construction and building
materials is energy intensive, generating substantial costs in dollars and
carbon emissions. At the same time, building operations themselves are energy
intensive, especially when it comes to heating and cooling. In the coming
decades, there will be a need for new, more sustainable, and higher-performing
building materials. The long-term goal of this project is to establish the
technology for building materials that are less energy intensive during
manufacturing and also reduce the costs of heating/cooling over the lifetime of
the completed building. The specific goal of this project is to enhance the
performance of sustainable materials used for insulation by increasing the
ability of the material to contribute to the structural demand. In addition to
technical achievements, the proposed work includes consideration of the legal
challenges associated with the incorporation of such materials into building
codes. Additionally, this project establishes a graduate level course for the
emerging field of “Engineered Living Materials” that will include cross-campus
instruction among the participating universities. Insights from the proposed
work will be integrated into educational programs for middle school and high
school students from underrepresented groups at each of the participating
universities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research advances technology
related to sustainable living building materials by creating materials that
adapt to mechanical stresses during use by increasing density and stiffness at
regions of greatest mechanical demand. The project focuses on the development of
mechanically induced biomineralization in hempcrete, a sustainable building
material with negative carbon emissions. The proposed work will advance
knowledge in the field of living building materials by establishing the fluid
environment necessary for nutrient delivery to resident microbes and the changes
in chemical environment associated with ureolytic biomineralization within
confined spaces of the living building material. A transformative aspect of the
proposed work is the use of mechanically sensitive bacteria that alter the
density and stiffness of the building material only at locations of greatest
mechanical stress, increasing density and mechanical properties at needed
locations while maintaining less dense regions with better insulative capacity
This project includes 1) multiscale modeling to determine the transport of
nutrients and waste products generated during biomineralization within
microscale pores within a living building material, 2) fabrication of test beds
of mechanically sensitive organisms using an existing sustainable building
material that can benefit from enhanced mechanical performance (hempcrete), and
3) analysis of the legal implications of living building materials, which,
unlike other building materials, are purposely designed to change their
mechanical performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.