* 2223827
* EFRI BRAID: DenPro3D – Dendritic Processing of Spike Sequences in Biological and Artificial Brains
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Kwabena Boahen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has progressed rapidly over the past decade, but
the cost of deploying and operating AI in energy, dollars, and carbon emissions
is growing unsustainably. Users currently access AI through the cloud,
sacrificing personalization and privacy. This project uses inspiration from the
brain, including learning with dendrites that neuroscientists have recently
discovered, to reverse engineer the brain's learning rules guided by
neuroscience theory and experimental techniques. These insights will be
implemented in a novel neuromorphic chip using emerging three-dimensional (3-D)
fabrication techniques. The success of such an approach would allow AI to run,
not with megawatts in the cloud, but rather with watts on a smartphone. Thus,
learning with dendrites could reign in unsustainably growing costs, distribute
productivity gains equitably, personalize user experience, and restore privacy.
This project also aims to increase opportunities for underrepresented students
by recruiting black teenagers, particularly girls, through ongoing summer
internship programs and new outreach efforts (Demo Day on campus for high-
schoolers and Engineering Night at underserved high
schools).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tiling computing units and stacking them in the
third dimension shortens distances and cuts the energy communication uses, which
now dominates the energy budget of today’s processors. But stacking reduces the
surface area for dissipating heat, restricting a 3-D processor to serial, rather
than parallel operation. Less heat would be produced if units communicate
sparsely. This could be accomplished by exchanging patterns of binary-amplitude
signals (e.g., high or low voltages on a digital bus) for sequences of unary-
amplitude signals (e.g., spikes from an ensemble of neurons). But this would
require synthesizing connections to precisely order synaptic inputs on a
dendrite-like device, shifting the prevailing abstraction of a brain centered on
learning with synapses to one centered on learning with dendrites or what the
project team refers to as dendrocentric learning. To accomplish this goal, three
objectives are proposed: (1) Identify how spiking sequences represent
information as subsequences across cortical columns and model how a column
learns to generate its subsequence. (2) Establish the combinatorial logic
neighboring stretches of dendrite use to decode a sequence’s subsequences and
model how a stretch of dendrite learns to detect a subsequence. (3) Emulate a
stretch of dendrite’s sequence selectivity in a nanoscale electronic device,
integrate it in 3-D, and design a switching network to implement the learning
rules formulated in objectives 1 &amp; 2. Achieving these objectives would
enable learning in sparse environments with extreme energy efficiency leading to
a transformational impact on how information technology serves society while
ensuring equity and access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.