* 2223035
* CPS: Small: Data-Driven Modeling and Control of Human-Cyber-Physical Systems with Extended-Reality-Assisted Interfaces
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Weiming Xiang, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,000.00

Human-cyber-physical systems (h-CPS) are interactive engineered systems that
collaborate or interact with one or more human beings to leverage the
complementary strengths of both human and autonomy technologies. Medical
devices, robot assistive systems, teleoperation, semi-autonomous systems, and
other technology-assisted applications are all examples of h-CPS. Because human
operations are deeply intertwined with cyber and physical processes in h-CPS,
new technical challenges for h-CPS analysis and design emerge, particularly in
modeling complex human behaviors, enabling effective human-machine interactions,
and developing reliable and high-performance controllers. Furthermore, as
envisioned in future h-CPS subject to a large amount of data of adequate quality
and quantity available from rich sensing modalities, modeling, interaction, and
control procedures are shifting from model-based to data-driven, and new
challenges such as trustworthiness and learning efficiency of data-driven
methods are expected to arise. This project targets the unique challenges of
data-driven modeling and control of h-CPS by developing a holistic data-driven
design framework, accounting for addressing todayâ€™s major barriers to apply
data-driven approaches for modeling, interaction, and control of h-CPS.
Educational and outreach activities are well-integrated into the research and
include CPS workforce training, interdisciplinary research and curriculum
development, and K-12 STEM outreach activities. The designed activities are
uniquely positioned to attract members of underrepresented groups with a focus
to enhance the diversity of the federal, state, and local CPS
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the synergistic
integration of data-driven modeling and control methods such as neural networks,
reinforcement learning, and model-based methods such as hybrid systems, and
model predictive control. This project will also explore the benefits of
extended reality (XR) in building human-machine interfaces for effective
communication and interaction between human users, machines, and environments.
Specifically, the research activities in this project will lead to new
discoveries of h-CPS in that: (1) a new hybrid learning architecture will be
developed for data-driven modeling of human behaviors to accurately capture both
human maneuver dynamics and human decision-making processes, (2) XR-assisted
interfaces will be developed to interact with semi-or fully-autonomous systems
to enhance control capability and performance, and (3) a model-based and data-
driven control co-design framework will be developed to enable adaptable and
reliable control in human-in-the-plant scenarios, and a co-design framework of
outer-loop and inner-loop controllers will be developed to assist human users to
augment human control capability. Validation experiments will be conducted using
h-CPS testbeds with XR interfaces, such as eye-tracking, gaze-based control, and
3D drone teleoperation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.