* 2223338
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Organization and Lithic Production
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Kenichiro Tsukamoto, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,200.00

This project examines the relationship between craft production and
socioeconomic inequality in a rural ancient community. To this end, researchers
will explore households to assess if inequality resulted from access to
specialized production of stone tools. Archaeology is uniquely able to provide
the time depth necessary to seek the genesis of socioeconomic inequality and
within this context, this research will scrutinize its articulation with craft
production. This project will train a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in archaeological field and laboratory methods, as well as
data analysis, grant writing, and conference presentations. Beyond training
scholars, the project works to engage the local community in the archaeological
process and the preservation of cultural heritage through site visits and talks,
as well as participation in the research. Finally, the results of this research
will be shared through academic presentations, journal articles, and public
events to provide access to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Craft
specialization is an important social process that influences and is influenced
by many other aspects of life among community members. These social and economic
processes are particularly important in communities of practice. Communities of
practice are defined by a collective pursuit of a particular endeavor, often a
specific industry or craft. This research will expand the understanding of such
communities of practice and the socioeconomic dynamics adjacent to specialized,
large-scale production. To accomplish this, the project will focus on households
at a single site which produced millions of stone tools that were essential for
nearly all daily tasks including agriculture, construction, and food
preparation. However, households in the community had varied proximities to the
stone tool production areas, suggesting different relationships to the
production activities. The research team will explore household compounds that
form plazas in the community to identify socioeconomic differences in the
material remains and activities of each. This project builds on previous surveys
and excavation of the community and implements a three-phase methodological
approach, targeting three plazas through 1) systematic shovel testing, 2) test
excavations, and 3) extensive laboratory analyses. Analyses will first establish
a chronology of the households, and then make comparisons about the access to
long-distance trade goods and prestige materials, as well as the activities that
occurred within each household. Results from this research will provide an
important case study to understand how collective activities produce
socioeconomic differences among households in communities of
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.