* 2223930
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Exploring the Response of the Magnetosphere to Terrestrial Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Federico Gasperini, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 289,049.00

The extent to which terrestrial meteorology can influence the Mesosphere-
Ionosphere-Thermosphere system (MIT, ca. 70-500 km altitudes) across a wide
range of spatial and temporal scales is an important discovery of the past two
decades. Sudden stratospheric warmings (SSWs) are prominent events that couple
dynamical variability in the lower atmosphere with upper atmosphere
perturbations. This project will explore novel fundamental connections in the
coupled MIT system leveraging the state-of-the-art and fully two-way coupled
Multiscale Atmosphere-Geospace Environment (MAGE) model, and ground- (SuperMAG)
and space-based (GOES-14 and -15) magnetic field observations. Understanding the
sources of ionospheric and magnetospheric variability is a necessary first step
in developing predictive capabilities of critical importance to the operation of
navigation and communications systems that support our modern society. This
research will result in a better understanding of how terrestrial weather
interacts with the ionosphere to produce variability in electric fields that
redistribute plasma at higher levels in the upper atmosphere. In addition, the
research effort will broaden participation by involving and training a UCAR
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS) protégé
from the historically underrepresented communities in a multi-year mentoring and
career development experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative award is
aimed at establishing and quantifying the extent to which lower atmospheric
forcing can impact the spatial and day-to-day variability of the magnetosphere
and explore what coupling mechanisms may be at play. Three science questions
will be investigated: 1) To what extent can Sudden Stratospheric Warmings (SSWs)
impact the spatial-temporal variability of the upper ionosphere and
magnetosphere? 2) How well does MAGE approximate the SSW-induced variability
observed in the magnetosphere? And 3) What roles do large-scale waves play in
dynamically coupling this lower atmospheric variability into the magnetosphere?
This study will for the first time: (1) establish and quantify the extent to
which large-scale lower atmospheric forcing can impact the spatial and temporal
variability of the magnetosphere and (2) explore what coupling mechanisms may be
at play and elucidate the contribution of lower atmospheric disturbances in
coupling terrestrial weather with the entire MIT system, thus addressing
outstanding issues of critical importance to both the CEDAR and GEM
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.