* 2223128
* SBIR Phase I:  City-scale flood mapping using real-time sensor data
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Brandon Wong, HYFI LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 274,391.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses major
fundamental knowledge gaps underpinning the ability to create accurate flood
maps. This proposal will advance new knowledge on the use of advanced analytics
for the estimation of floods, thus transforming the tools available to respond
and plan for flooding. The working hypothesis of this proposal is that building-
scale flood detection will be achieved through a combination of existing sensors
and advanced analytics. This SBIR project will research and develop data-driven
flood maps to support targeted flood response and long-term infrastructure
planning. Using advanced analytics, existing sensor data will be spatially
distributed to create real-time flood maps. The method will be validated using a
highly dense sensor network in the Great Lakes region. The technical results of
this project will yield unprecedented insights and measurements of uncertainty
related to flood estimation at urban scales. The resulting real-time flood maps
will allow stormwater managers to stay ahead of resident complaints, while
saving lives and property by sending their crews to the most important
locations. Improved flood maps will also allow stormwater managers to maximize
the impact of long-term infrastructure investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's goal is to make all communities resilient to floods and climate
change. To that end, this proposal will show how advanced analytics, driven by
wireless sensing, will transform the ability of first responders to save lives,
while helping stormwater managers maximize long-term infrastructure investments.
The key innovation of this proposal is a data methodology, which will convert
raw, spatially distributed sensor data into actionable, real-time flood maps.
This data-driven technique will enable the first of its kind tool to detect
floods at the scale of individual buildings, without requiring a sensor at every
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.