* 2223486
* Manipulation of single spins in ferroelectric oxides from first principles
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Elizabeth Nowadnick, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2025
* USD 250,599.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research into
materials that may provide new ways to store or process information. In
computers, information is encoded in a sequence of bits, each of which can have
a value of 0 or 1. Implementing these bits physically requires a system that can
be switched between two possible states, such as on/off or up/down. One of the
smallest platforms for storing and processing information is a quantum
mechanical property of electrons called “spin”, which can take on two possible
values (up/down). However, controlling these single spins is challenging,
because it is difficult to attach control knobs to
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore ferroelectric oxide
materials containing dilute concentrations of magnetic dopant atoms as a system
for realizing single spin control. Ferroelectrics are materials that exhibit a
spontaneous electrical polarization, the direction of which can be reversed by
applying an electric field. When an isolated magnetic dopant atom is inserted
into the ferroelectric, the local spatial environment of the magnetic dopant
atom impacts the direction of its spin. Furthermore, electric field-based
polarization reversal changes the local spatial environment in a ferroelectric
crystal, and hence has the potential to modify the spin’s direction. The goal of
this project is to understand how to manipulate the direction of magnetic spins
inserted into a series of ferroelectric oxide materials by utilizing a
combination of quantum mechanical computer simulations and theoretical symmetry
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This scientific research will be complemented by
efforts to increase the diversity of students and researchers participating in
the materials science and engineering discipline. In particular, via research
collaborations this project will increase the exchange of students and
scientific ideas between the University of California, Merced, which serves a
large number of students who are underrepresented minorities and/or first-
generation college students, and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. In
addition, the training of a postdoctoral researcher will contribute to
scientific workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research on the manipulation of single spins – one of the smallest platforms to
store and process information – with electric fields. The project will focus on
magnetic dopant atoms inserted into ferroelectric oxide host crystals as a
platform to realize and explore this concept. The preferred orientation of a
spin is connected to its local crystallographic environment via the spin-orbit
interaction. In a ferroelectric, this local environment can be modified by
structural changes that occur during polarization switching under applied
electric fields, which provides a path towards the electric field control of the
spin directionality. In addition, tuning a ferroelectric to near a structural
phase transition may further facilitate abrupt electric field-induced changes to
spin orientation. Using a combination of density functional theory calculations
and group theory analysis, this project will advance fundamental understanding
of electric field-based single spin manipulation in a series of perovskite and
hexagonal oxide ferroelectrics. The project will also explore the directionality
of single spins inserted in topological defects in ferroelectrics, such as
domain walls and vortex structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This scientific
research will be complemented by activities geared toward increasing the
diversity of students and researchers participating in the materials science and
engineering discipline. These activities will focus on increasing the exchange
of students and scientific ideas between the University of California, Merced,
which serves a large number of students who are underrepresented minorities
and/or first-generation college students, and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. In addition, the training of a postdoctoral researcher as a part of
this project will contribute to scientific workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.