* 2223164
* SBIR Phase I:  Scaling Up Open Innovation with Crowd Wisdom and Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Smarter and More Sustainable Fashion
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2023
* HAIYONG ZHANG, ILAMBDA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 274,667.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
leverage an innovative hybrid intelligence, i.e., a unique combination of Big
Data and artificial intelligence (AI) technologies with the wisdom of crowds, to
help connect and empower both independent designers and small-to-medium-sized
retailers/fashion buyers (together with supply chain partners), to help bring
the original, unique, trendy designs with great garment quality to fashion
consumers. The project also aims to help the fashion industry to tackle some of
its hardest, most critical, and most urgent challenges in overproduction and
waste (resulting in environmental issues). The project will advance
recommendation technology and fashion intelligence by developing novel deep
learning-powered fashion recommendation models, and effectively combine and
integrate human fashion expertsâ€™ input and deep learning predictions. These
techniques will help match fashion retail buyers and design(er)s, with the
consideration of uniqueness and exclusivity. The project will also help evaluate
key aspects of the fashion designs, such as uniqueness and trendiness, and
provide more accurate predictions on fashion demands and sales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technology innovations are two-fold. First, a
novel self-supervised and deep learning-powered fashion recommendation engine
will effectively utilize the heterogeneous fashion data (images, text,
behaviors, and sales) to help accurately match fashion buyers and manufacturers
with the (new) design(er)s under style compatibility and other requirements.
Second, a hybrid intelligence engine will effectively combine and integrate
fashion buyers' input (votes and orders) with deep learning models to help
measure fashion uniqueness, trendiness, and sales forecasts, etc., of the new
designs. The project can help both designers and retailers track the trends and
the demands and stay ahead of the fashion curve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.