* 2223197
* SBIR Phase I:  Hydrologic Open Cooling System (HOCS) for low-energy refrigeration
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Sanza Kazadi, KAZADI ENTERPRISES LTD.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a technology enabling low-
energy, resilient cooling that is capable of mitigating the environmental
impacts and high costs of conventional refrigeration. There is a critical need
for sustainable cooling solutions that provide an alternative to
hydrofluorocarbon-based refrigerants that rely on carbon dioxide (CO2)-emitting
systems. This project seeks to develop a Hydrologic Open Cooling System (HOCS)
that can maintain cooling chambers at 1.5-5°C utilizing 10% or less of the
electrical power of conventional systems. This project unlocks environmental
heat as an energy reservoir and offsets significant energy costs of conventional
cooling systems. The technology can support highly efficient refrigeration at a
fraction of the operational cost and electrical demand of traditional systems.
Adoption of this cooling technology by small- to mid-size supermarkets would
enable significant cost savings for electricity. On a broader scale, widespread
implementation of this innovation across a variety of refrigeration applications
would reduce greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption, meeting the need
for sustainable technologies to support food and energy security while upholding
climate goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project develops a
renewable, closed container cooling system incorporating a rechargeable vacuum
insulation and a novel two-stage heat pump. This project involves 1) developing
a rechargeable vacuum insulation technology that does not use vacuum pumps; 2)
creating a modified dewar connected to a fully renewable cooling system enabling
cooled inner chambers; and 3) evaluating the ability to use environmental heat
to restore the solutions that power the cooling system allowing their reuse. The
novel heat pump technology is based on two asynchronous stages: the first
utilizes concentration gradients as a driving mechanism enabling thermal
transfer, while the second uses environmental heat to re-concentrate saline
solutions after dilution during stage one. Together, these two stages enable
cooling of a closed container. The project will examine system configurations
able to generate large thermal gradients, enabling maintenance of 1.5-5°C
temperatures within the dewar. Advantages of this system include 1) the system’s
ability to cool continues in the absence of electricity making it resilient to
power outages from itinerant weather, wildfires, and earthquakes; 2) lossless
storage of cooling capacity; and 3) significantly reducing the greenhouse gas
footprint compared to conventional refrigeration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.