* 2223098
* Rheology for near real time forecasting of lava flows
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Stephan Kolzenburg, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 01/31/2026
* USD 410,626.00

Effective civil protection during effusive volcanic eruptions relies on accurate
assessment of three main questions: 1. Where is the eruptive vent? 2. What areas
will the lava flows affect? and 3. How fast will lava reach certain areas?
Forecasting methods for lava flow paths and velocities require a detailed
understanding of the lava’s flow properties (i.e. how viscous it is), the slope
of the ground that the lava is flowing on and how much lava is erupted over a
certain time interval. As lava flows down a volcano, it cools, crystallizes, and
forms and/or loses bubbles, all of which affect how fast and how far lava may
flow. An incomplete understanding of how the lava’s flow properties change makes
accurate lava flow forecasting, and with that, hazard mitigation ahead of
effusive eruptions, civil protection, and management of ongoing eruptive events,
difficult. This project is motivated by 1) an incomplete understanding of lava
flow properties, 2) a lack of integration of accurate flow properties in lava
flow models and 3) the need for shorter response times between eruption onset
and availability of lava flow-path forecasts. The project will tackle these
challenges using the two most hazardous effusive volcanoes in the world,
Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira as type localities. As an example, the 2021 eruption
of Nyiragongo claimed over 30 lives, left &gt; 20,000 homeless, destroyed &gt;
3,500 houses, 12 schools, and 3 hospitals – a powerful expression of the impact
lava flows can have on human lives. The core objectives are to 1) reconstruct
the lava’s flow properties from natural samples 2) measure the lava’s viscosity
at conditions relevant to its emplacement, and 3) integrate these data into a
framework of satellite informed lava forecasting models. This may enable the
development of a satellite-data-driven near-real time protocol for rapid and
accurate forecasting of lava flow paths, which can then be applied during
effusive eruptions to help guide decision making in civil protection efforts.
Project results will also be incorporated into the SUNY Buffalo EarthEd program,
providing content for K12 educators serving underrepresented communities,
promoting science literacy. The project will support a graduate student at SUNY
Buffalo and involves international collaborations (USA, Italy, France, DR Congo)
in academia, development aid, and at volcano
observatories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lava rheology varies as a function of
temperature, melt composition, crystal, and bubble content as well as strain
rate. From eruption to flow cessation, basaltic lavas traverse a range of up to
10 orders of magnitude in their effective viscosity. The resulting non-linear
changes in the lava’s transport behaviour determine how it accommodates
deformation during emplacement and how fast and how far a lava can flow. The
core objectives are to 1) reconstruct the lava’s rheology from natural samples
2) map the lava’s rheology over conditions relevant to their emplacement, and 3)
integrate these data into a framework of satellite informed lava emplacement
models. Using careful experimental characterization of the lava enables
adaptation of a satellite-data-driven near-real time protocol to develop a tool
for rapid and accurate forecasting of lava flow emplacement paths. The project
will integrate field measurements, textural analysis, and targeted high
temperature rheology experiments to generate the first complete rheological flow
law for a basaltic lava that is derived from measurements at conditions relevant
to lava emplacement and validated with field constraints. Using this flow law,
the project will optimize a lava flow emplacement model, and integrate it into
an existing near real time satellite monitoring system. This will create a
highly adaptable tool for predicting lava flow paths and advance rates that is
rooted in and optimized for the core physical property – lava rheology. The
project sets out to: 1) Perform detailed petrographic analyses of natural
samples and collect and evaluate field data of lava flow geometries 2) Use these
in concert with viscosity measurements in controlled atmospheres to reconstruct
the lava’s rheology during emplacement. This includes generating critical new
data at reduced conditions, which are extremely scarce. 3) Employ the derived
data to initialize and calibrate a deterministic lava flow model. This tool may
enable near real time lava emplacement forecasting during future eruptions as
well as forensic investigations of previous eruptions. The selected type
localities enable testing both cooling- and volume-limited lava emplacement
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.