* 2223680
* TRAVEL PROPOSAL: STUDENT PROGRAM OF THE FIFTH CONFERENCE ON AI, ETHICS AND SOCIETY (AIES 2022)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Kristen Venable, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This grant supports to student travel for select students participating in the
student program at the 5th Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES) that
will be held in August, 2022 in Oxford, UK. AIES is an up and coming
international conference for researchers that investigate that impact that
artificial intelligence has at various levels of society. This activity will
bring together a broad community of researchers in this important field and
supports junior researchers at this critical early-career stage. The student
program creates the opportunity to bring in participants who might not have
attended an AI conference due to lack of resources. This is especially true for
those at smaller institutions and those which have less developed AI programs.
Engaging such participants has the potential to draw more talent into AI
research, improve research ideas in their formative stage, and engender
collaborations across the breadth of disciplines. This event provides students
with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical
time in their research and enables them to explore their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.