* 2223070
* Exploring the Impact of Future Land Use Change on Global Air Quality and Nutrient Deposition
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Colette Heald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2025
* USD 649,388.00

The objective of this project is to characterize the impact of anticipated land-
use change over the next century on air quality (ozone and fine particulate
matter, PM 2.5) and nutrient deposition (nitrogen and phosphorus) from the
atmosphere. This effort includes coupling the results of a land-use model with a
global chemical transport model to better predict biosphere-atmosphere exchanges
that are modulated by land use change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
couple output from Community Land Model (CLM2) simulations, driven by the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) land use change scenarios, to the global chemical
transport model, GEOS-Chem. Four modules will be modified: biogenic VOC
emissions, soil NOx emissions, bioaerosol emissions, and dry deposition. The
project includes the development and observational evaluation of a phosphorus
model and a harmonized land use scheme for GEOS-Chem. There are two overarching
goals for this project: (1) Assessing the impact of projected land use change on
short-lived atmospheric constituents (O3 and PM); and (2) Assessing the impact
of projected land use change on nutrient deposition (phosphorus and
nitrogen).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will be led by a graduate
student and a postdoctoral fellow. Continuation of the Frontiers in Atmospheric
Chemistry Seminar Series (FACSS) will also be supported by this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.