* 2223957
* A light-sheet microscopy (LSM)-based, spatially-resolved 3D dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) instrument for developmental biology and physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jianjun Sun, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2025
* USD 364,576.00

An award is made to the University of Connecticut to develop an instrument and
method that integrate light-sheet microscopy (LSM) and dynamic mechanical
analysis (DMA) to characterize the dynamic mechanical properties of live tissues
and organs. The instrument's capability to quantify the process of tissue
development will greatly advance the study of developmental biology and
physiology. The measurement of tissue material properties will also provide
vital information to neurobiology, cardiovascular biology, and research on aging
because the functions of any organ system are correlated to its structural
characteristics. The instrument will be built on an open-source platform, making
it widely accessible to the scientific community. This project aims to
demonstrate the applicability of the instrument through the analysis of three
animal models widely used in biology, namely, Drosophila, zebrafish, and mouse.
The time-course 3D visualization of tissue and organ development enabled by the
instrument will promote the public understanding of health issues such as
infertility, embryonic diseases, and cancer progression. The development of the
instrument will also lead to the design of low-cost tools for K-12 education,
which will benefit underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities who have
limited access to engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSM is an emerging
technology that enables 3D imaging of live biological samples with high temporal
and spatial resolution over a long time period. It allows observation of whole
organ/tissue development and high-resolution tracking of cell differentiation
and migration. DMA is widely used in industry, science, and engineering to
characterize the viscoelastic properties of polymers and biomaterials. The
project's innovation is the integration of a miniature robotic precision
manipulator and image-based 3D structural analysis that combines the benefits of
LSM and DMA and creates a novel instrument capable of spatially-resolved dynamic
mechanical analysis of growing tissues and organs. During organ development,
physical forces push or pull tissues. Dynamic tissue material properties define
how tissues respond to those applied forces and control the formation of organ
shapes. Although the mechanisms of cellular forces are well studied, the role of
tissue material properties on morphogenesis is yet to be studied. The instrument
will be capable of measuring both dynamic material properties and forces,
providing vital information for studying one of the most fundamental questions
in biology: "how are organs shaped?" through whole-organ 3D analysis that is
difficult with conventional methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.