* 2223518
* Deformation and Failure Mechanisms in Carbon Nanotubeâ€“Metal Matrix Composites at High Strain Rates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Weinong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 587,402.00

Carbon nanotube-metal matrix composites are a new class of material systems with
desirable properties, such as higher strength, hardness, and impact resistance,
making them suitable for applications in aerospace, automotive, construction,
sports, space, and other industries. High- rate of deformation is encountered,
e.g., in manufacturing processes or during service of the composite structures
or parts, such as in dynamic sports contact and automobile collisions. The
operative deformation mechanisms during high-rate loading of carbon nanotube-
metal matrix composites, however, have not been adequately quantified and
understood. This award supports integrated experimental and computational
research at multiple scales to develop this fundamental understanding based on
hypotheses. The knowledge gained will promote product quality, reliability,
safety, and use of carbon nanotube-metal matrix composites applications.
Furthermore, the award supports curriculum improvements, underrepresented
minority student participation in summer research programs and long-term
projects, and hands-on demonstrations at a public facility for STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
how carbon nanotubes influence the mechanical properties and behavior of carbon
nanotube-metal matrix composites at high strain rates, as compared to the base
metal. To achieve this objective, multiple inter-related research tasks will be
performed. Task 1 is to synthesize the base metal and the composite specimens by
laser-based additive manufacturing and conduct quasi-static mechanical
characterizations. Task 2 is to: (i) conduct Kolsky bar experiments to obtain
stress-strain relations, (ii) perform in-situ X-ray imaging to observe cracks,
and (iii) characterize microstructural changes due to Kolsky bar impacts. Task 3
is to: (i) conduct projectile impact experiments to measure Hugoniot elastic
limit, dynamic strengths, and shock responses, (ii) characterize impact-induced
structural changes, and (iii) &amp; (iv) conduct hydrodynamic and molecular
dynamic modeling to understand shock responses and dissipation mechanisms at the
macro and atomic scale, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.