* 2223926
* Conference: Biology in the Age of Gene Editing: New Tools and Novel Insights into Organismal Biology and the Neural Basis of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Scott Juntti, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 12,751.00

The genomic revolution has ushered in a new era of biological research. Genomes
have been sequenced for not only humans and traditional laboratory animal models
such as mice and fruit flies, but thousands of diverse organisms. However, to
turn this data into a deep understanding of how genes function, scientists need
the ability to manipulate these genes in the newly sequenced species. Recent
years have seen dramatic technological improvements to genome editing in several
of these species, enabling direct tests. An NSF-funded symposium at the Society
for Integrative Biology (SICB) in Austin, TX in January 2023 will shine a
spotlight on research in diverse species to reveal new principles of biological
function. Work presented aims to accelerate development of these tools in
additional species by gathering gene editing experts to teach their methods to
others. Using tools like CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing, speakers have modified the
genomes of species from jellyfish to mammals and many species in between.
Studying many of the unique model organisms represented at SICB may have broad
impacts including transformative knowledge advances, an understanding of
ecologically important species, or medical insights. This symposium will help
democratize gene editing tools to many species and advance knowledge of
fundamental biological principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of genetic
manipulations has enabled incredible insights into genetic mechanisms that
control biological processes. However, it has also promoted the consolidation of
research into a limited number of species (eg, fruit fly, mouse, zebrafish, C.
elegans). As a result, the genetic regulation of a tremendous variety of
evolutionary adaptations across species have been understudied at a mechanistic
level. The development of CRISPR/Cas genome editing, in particular, enables an
expansion of the number of species in which genetic experiments can be
performed. Some progress has been made in using gene-edited species to
understand organismal biology in ways inaccessible with traditional model
organisms. The goal of this symposium is to catalyze the transfer of knowledge
and skills from researchers who have applied these technologies in new model
organisms to scientists who would like to bring these approaches to their own
research programs. A symposium at the 2023 Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB) conference, which will feature talks, discussions,
and a workshop. The speakers (who span institution types, locations, genders,
along a spectrum of career stages) have modified species from jellyfish to
mammals and many species in between. There will also be an educational event in
which speakers from the symposium provide small-group consultations plus a panel
discussion. To disseminate this work, all speakers have agreed to publish data
presented at SICB in Integrative and Comparative
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.