* 2223365
* ISS: Engineering Scaffold-free, Biomimetic Neocartilage in Microgravity to Guide Terrestrial Tissue Engineering Strategies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wendy Brown, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,685.00

Microgravity onboard the International Space Station (ISS) can replicate the
conditions in which cartilage naturally forms in the body. Cartilage serves an
important role in providing structural support and mechanical function
throughout the body. Damage to cartilage causes pain and disability and lowers
the quality of life for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. Once damaged,
cartilage does not heal on its own. While some cartilage implants are already
available, more progress must be made to create implants that replicate real
cartilage structure and function, and that completely heal cartilage injuries.
In this project, the key steps to creating cartilage implants will be studied in
microgravity on the ISS to develop innovative engineering strategies that can be
used on Earth. This project also includes the training of scientists from
underrepresented backgrounds and the creation of outreach materials and
activities to inspire grade-school students to be interested in tissue
engineering in space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
employ microgravity to enhance key steps in Earth-based cartilage tissue
engineering. Current cartilage tissue engineering processes are limited by
gravity and will therefore be investigated in the microgravity environment of
the ISS. The investigators will examine the redifferentiation of expanded
chondrocytes via aggregate rejuvenation. Single cell RNA-sequencing with pathway
analysis will be used to identify genes that are differentially expressed by
both articular chondrocytes (ACs) and costal chondrocytes (CCs) after
redifferentiation in microgravity versus on Earth, as well between the cell
types in each gravity condition. Gene targets will be identified to inform the
development of Earth-based strategies to enhance chondrocyte redifferentiation.
In addition, scaffold-free self-assembled neocartilage comprised of ACs and CCs
will be engineered in microgravity and on Earth. The differences in cellular
spacing, gene expression, matrix content, and mechanical properties of
neocartilage generated in each gravity condition will elucidate mechanisms of
neocartilage formation and molecular targets for neocartilage stimulation.
Finally, tension-stimulated neocartilage maturation in microgravity will be
assessed to elucidate mechanotransduction pathways for generating mechanically
robust neocartilage. Overall, this work will contribute to the development of
biomimetic tissue-engineered cartilage implants that will benefit millions of
people who suffer from cartilage afflictions and to the understanding of
cartilage development. Additionally, the understanding of cell and cartilage
function in microgravity that will be obtained may also help develop fitness
regimens to maintain astronautsâ€™ cartilage health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.