* 2223705
* Directing Self-Assembly of Liquid Crystalline Block Co-Oligomers in Combined Optical and Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Chinedum Osuji, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials scientists seek to
understand how the properties of materials are related to their structure and to
develop methods to create the structures needed to achieve desired properties.
Traditionally, scientists have focused on structure in terms of the arrangement
of atoms and molecules that result naturally from the chemical composition of a
material. However, in recent years new research has demonstrated that novel and
often unanticipated properties can be realized by using human-made or synthetic
material structures. This project aims to enable the creation of programmed
spatial variation of optical and mechanical properties in polymeric materials as
a new route to realize synthetic structures that can give rise to useful
properties. This project aim will be advanced by fundamental studies that
examine optically-driven structural transitions in designed light-responsive
polymers and the magnetic field response of such polymers. Synthetic structures
will be developed by the use of spatially-controlled dynamic light exposure in
concert with magnetic fields. This project addresses a fundamental knowledge-gap
regarding optically driven structural transitions in polymers, and processing
methodologies to readily create spatial variation of properties in such systems.
Controlling the spatial variation of properties provides a route for programming
material function, and is sought in a variety of energy and microelectronics-
related applications. It is therefore anticipated that this project will have
broader impacts given the implications for the development of new materials in
these sectors. This project involves a range of additional broader impacts
including a new K-12 outreach program, the development of curriculum, a focus on
recruiting diverse researchers, and the involvement of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling structural order in self-assembled
polymers remains a critically important focus of research for materials
scientists. Spatio-temporal control of optical fields, in concert with magnetic
fields, could provide a highly versatile means of processing such materials. In
this context, there is a critical need to understand and engineer
photoswitchable ordering self-assembling polymers, and to develop new modalities
for guiding self-assembly using optical fields. This project is centered on
molecular design and characterization of photoswitchable liquid crystalline
block co-oligomers (LC BCOs), and the development of strategies for controlling
their structural order using optical fields, and optical fields in combination
with magnetic fields. These systems provide a rich landscape in which to explore
ordering transitions in the presence of optical fields, and in which to develop
new modes of directed self-assembly using optical fields in concert with
magnetic fields. The proposed work targets these opportunities and is geared
overall towards developing new materials and understanding their structure-
property relationships, and leveraging photo-responsive ordering to realize new,
more versatile, modalities for directed self-assembly. The specific objectives
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Elucidate phase behavior and photo-driven ordering in LC BCOs
and their blends&lt;br/&gt;2. Create spatially-varying textures programmed by
spatially-varying optical fields&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop combined optical and
magnetic field processing&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit stems from the
systematic exploration of self-assembly and phase behavior of a still emerging
class of macromolecules, and the realization of a versatile modality for
directed self-assembly that has been elusive to date. Successfully executed, the
proposed work will provide critical insight regarding the manipulation of
effective interactions in LC BCOs using optical fields and will enable the
realization of complex spatially varying textures with unprecedented
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.