* 2223461
* NSF-DFG Confine: Spin-Probe-Enabled Sensing of Fluids in Confined Geometries and Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program (CMI) in the
Division of Chemistry, Carlos Meriles of CUNY City College and Nicolas
Giovambattista of CUNY Brooklyn College are using atomic defects near the
surface of a host crystal as nanoscale probes to characterize the structure and
motion of water molecules confined to extremely small spaces (at the nanometer
scale). Strong confinement modifies water in ways that are central to
technological applications, but the small sample dimensions and the
heterogeneities of the confining surfaces makes it challenging for
experimentalists to provide detailed information on the molecular behavior at
the nanoscale. To mitigate these limitations, Dr. Meriles and his students are
developing a sensing approach based on individual point defects in diamond that
can serve as a detector of small amounts of liquids in general, and water, in
particular. Dr. Giovambattista and his students are using computer simulations
and theoretical modeling to help interpret the signals that come from these
point-defect-aided measurements. Activities also include the exchange of
graduates and postdocs between the US and collaborators at the University of
Stuttgart in Germany, an initiative aimed at simultaneously enriching the
professional training and networking opportunities of all participating
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Enabling this research program is the so-called
nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond, a paramagnetic defect whose charge and
spin states can be prepared and readout by all-optical means. The overarching
goals revolve around two research thrusts: (i) The first one capitalizes on
novel NV-based magnetic resonance spectroscopy methods to investigate water
diffusion under variable confinement and surface hydrophobicity within ad-hoc
nanostructures produced via 2D-material engineering; also part of this effort is
the development of alternative sensing strategies adapted to heavy water, an
area where activities include both experiments and path-integral molecular
dynamics simulations. (ii) The second research thrust zeroes in on the use of
external magnetic gradients, here leveraged to non-invasively probe molecular
diffusion and image surface-induced order in confined water. Of special interest
is the investigation of hydration at boundaries separating hydrophobic and
hydrophilic sections of engineered substrates based on 2D materials. The results
derived from this effort may prove relevant to various open problems of
fundamental and practical importance, such as the interplay between nanoscale
confinement and chemical reactivity, or the impact of confined water in
biological processes such as ion flow in cell
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.