* 2223537
* EFRI ELiS: Autonomous Engineered Living Materials for Construction and Repair of Outdoor Built Environments
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Shota Atsumi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 10/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Engineered living systems (ELiS) for the built environment have the potential to
attain a level of precision, control, and sustainability that is not achieved
with traditional construction materials. The three primary aims of this project
are to develop low-hydration ELiS that self-strengthen/repair, create hydroponic
ELiS with bio-sustained function and biocontainment, and use additive
manufacturing (also known as 3D printing) techniques to fabricate fasteners,
joints, and prototype panels for the built environment. This project will meet
the national need for advanced manufacturing methods for more sustainable built
environments via reduced carbon footprint (reduced transport costs and greener
production) and chemical circularity (chemical recycling of protein-based
materials). This project also addresses the national need to develop the next
generation of a highly skilled and diverse future workforce and will increase
adoption of biological components in architectural design through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
address key fundamental challenges associated with the integration and
sustenance of metabolically engineered microbial organisms in materials designed
for the built environment. In order to propel ELiS forward and provide real-
world engineering solutions for built environments, ELiS must have the requisite
mechanical properties to be used for structural and constructural applications,
be manufacturable as a variety of form factors, and need to be sustained under
deployment conditions that may not naturally support the sustenance and
proliferation of microbial organisms. Native soil microbes and cyanobacteria
will be utilized as the cellular platforms for genetic engineering and will be
sustained for the lifetime of the material. The team will fabricate, model, and
test capillary microfluidic channels that transport water and nutrients. The
transformative scientific aspects of our proposal are (i) genetic engineering of
microorganisms for dynamic and extreme environments, (ii) design and synthesis
of mechanically stiff protein-based hydrogels for 3D printing ELiS, and (iii)
the integration of capillary microfluidic channels for autonomous fluid
transport. Additionally, 3D printing enables the distributed manufacturing of
parts, as well as custom designs that can be created by architects, engineers,
and other users. Additive manufacturing techniques will be used to fabricate
prototype fasteners, joints, and panels for the built environment. The project
will also develop outreach activities to engage and recruit diverse citizen
scientists and researchers with a design competition to introduce living
materials into a “living” room.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.