* 2223946
* I-CORPS: 3D Bio-printing for craniofacial reconstruction
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Scott Hollister, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a 3D printed bio-tissue platform that allows for customized,
patient-specific devices for craniofacial reconstruction and augmentation.
Current reconstructive support devices are not anatomically and functionally
patient-specific, do not allow for precise fit, require time-consuming and often
multiple surgeries, have sub-optimal tissue ingrowth, and may migrate, causing
tissue erosion. Permanent cosmetic implants often need to be ex-planted due to
systemic health concerns and adverse immune reactions to the implants.
Furthermore, traditional manufacturing is unable to address the needs of
traumatic and rare disorder populations due to the prohibitive cost of
infrastructure and operational expenditures involved in customizing patient-
specific devices. The proposed 3D printed bio-tissue platform allows for
customized anatomic and functionally patient-specific devices that may reduce
operative time, anesthetic risk, perioperative risk, and patient recovery times.
In addition, the proposed technology may provide superior patient outcomes with
considerable reduction in costs, surgical time, and hospital stays, which may be
a benefit to patients, hospitals, and health insurers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a 3D bio-tissue platform for the
craniofacial reconstruction and augmentation industry with customized, patient-
specific devices (including ear, nose scaffolds and spreader grafts). The
proposed 3D printed resorbable bio-tissue technology uses an integrated design
and manufacturing process that allows the devices to transition to native tissue
over time, reducing the risk of long-term infections and offering safe,
reproducible, and predictable aesthetic outcomes. Multiscale computational
simulation software and proprietary toolsare utilized to design structurally-
sound implants used as scaffolds in head and neck reconstructive surgery. The
safety and efficacy of the 3D printed resorbable bio-tissue technology have been
proven with airway support devices implanted in 25 patients under FDA expanded
access. The intent of this project is to explore a wider application of
technologies in the craniofacial reconstruction and augmentation industry,
specifically for rhinoplasty and ear and nose reconstruction
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.