* 2223007
* CAREER: Vibration-Assisted Laser Keyhole Welding to Improve Joint Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Wenda Tan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2024
* USD 215,255.00

Welding-critical industries represent about one-third of the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) of the United States, and as such this project on vibration-
assisted laser keyhole welding advances the national prosperity and welfare; it
also has numerous defense applications so that this project secures the national
defense. Any improvements in welding productivity and performance can
potentially save billions of dollars for the country. Laser welding is a
promising process that can improve the welding speed by tens and even hundreds
of times compared with conventional welding processes such as arc welding and
electric resistance welding. However, laser welding can suffer from several
problems, including high porosity, coarse grains, and brittle intermetallic
compounds in the joints, all of which can reduce performance. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) project is focused on a novel process called
Vibration-assisted Laser Keyhole Welding (V-LKW) and aims to study how the laser
vibration will help to solve the aforementioned problems in laser welding.
Experimentation and numerical modeling will be used simultaneously to
investigate the fundamental physics in V-LKW. The research, if successful, will
significantly advance scientific understanding of the complex phenomena in
V-LKW, and promote the applications of this novel process in the manufacturing
industry (especially the automotive and aerospace sectors) for the improvement
of welding productivity and performance. The educational objective of this
project is to engage and prepare students for the intellectual challenges in
modern manufacturing technologies. Outreach activities to high school students
will be conducted to cultivate their interests in manufacturing technology and
encourage them to explore engineering as their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will focus on a novel
Vibration-assisted Laser Keyhole Welding (V-LKW) process. The research objective
is to test the hypothesis that the properties of V-LKW joints can be
significantly improved through the mechanisms of porosity reduction, grain
refinement, and intermetallic reduction, all of which are functions of the
vibration direction, amplitude, and frequency of the laser. In-process time-
resolved observation techniques, post-process microstructural/mechanical
characterization methods, and a multi-physics numerical model will be used to
identify the process-structure-property relationship of V-LKW and understand the
fundamental physics in V-LKW. If successful, this project will advance our
understanding of laser-matter interaction, keyhole dynamic behavior, vibration
generation/transmission, multi-phase thermo-fluid flow, and solidification
phenomena in V-LKW. The research will enable the improvement of welding
productivity and joint properties in the manufacturing of many products,
including but not limited to automobiles, thermal management devices, electronic
devices, and medical devices. The outreach and education activities will improve
the education of manufacturing science and engineering at the University of
Utah, attract more high school, college, and minority students to choose careers
in engineering and manufacturing, and strength the university's connection to
local communities. Research results will be disseminated in a timely manner
through journal/conference publications and interactions with
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.