* 2223081
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Distributed Ledger System to Track Environmental Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Tara Gupta, MAP-COLLECTIVE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2025
* USD 925,833.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project centers around its potential contribution to the coordination
of climate change mitigation performance of governments, industry, and
individuals towards a carbon negative future. The automated system for carbon
tracking and visualization that this project is evolving could allow it to
network many organizations that are trying to pursue carbon reduction activities
on a verifiable map, coordinating otherwise disparate efforts. Regional,
national, and global coordination are important as the world attempts to solve
the global climate change problem. The proposed platform not only envisions
aggregate multisector information on the global level, it allows for
collaboration among organizations by sharing carbon goals and decarbonization
investments through carbon easements or credits. The solution also
contextualizes carbon footprints on the entity or region-level within the
planetary carbon usage and planetary carbon boundaries. This visualization tool
used for coordination is expected to help accelerate public-private partnerships
in the sustainability space, and help organizations collaborate around resource
management, and support economic activities and job creation through
connectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this research is
the visual coordination of all the simultaneous, multi-level, decarbonization
efforts onto one map. Regional coordination remains one of the biggest obstacles
to widespread climate action. Even when a county-level climate action plan is
pursued, cities within the counties may not implement goals evenly, as there are
often inequities in resource distribution. Similarly, there is often a lack of
coordination within industries; Companies may have trouble mapping scope data,
let alone collaborating with other industries. The project is likely to make
collaborations more accessible for companies and governments by visualizing
potential partners’ goals and trajectories publicly. Companies that provide
verified footprints may have advantages of more thorough data, more accurate
data, and recommendations offered to them. In this research, the team intends to
pursue the development of a carbon negative budget for users, map out past and
future carbon usage, automate emissions data uploads, build out maps for
internal facilities or assets of a user, and build out a decarbonization model
tool for users to explore solution scenarios enabling tokenized on-platform
carbon trading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.