* 2223192
* ECCS/EPMD: Single-photon quantum information processing with nonlinear photonic integrated circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kejie Fang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,083.00

Creation and control of quantum correlations and entanglement between photons is
critical to quantum information processing and particularly for quantum network
protocols, including two-photon quantum logic and efficient entanglement
swapping, which requires photon-photon interaction. Strong photon-photon
interaction is typically achieved via highly nonlinear systems, such as cavity-
quantum electrodynamics (QED) systems consisting of atoms coupled with high-Q
optical cavities, or by measurement-based, post-selection methods. Despite
successful demonstrations, these approaches involving complicated setups and/or
stringent experimental conditions are arguably difficult for more complex and
upscaled quantum information tasks. It is thus highly desirable to realize
photon-photon interaction based on bulk optical nonlinearities without resorting
to quantum emitters. However, because of the weak bulk optical nonlinearity,
quantum photonic systems, including both bulk crystals and integrated photonic
circuits, are almost exclusively operated in the parametric regime for
applications such as heralded single-photon sources and continuous-variable
quantum information tasks (except for measurement-based protocols which are
typically probabilistic). It remains an outstanding challenge to realize single-
photon nonlinearity with bulk materials and substantial photon-photon
correlations that are useful for quantum information applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this program, we will tackle this fundamental challenge
using an approach combining a state-of-the-art integrated quantum photonic
platform and innovative quantum optical methods that will lead to critical
quantum optical protocols, including quantum non-demolition measurement of
photons—a capability that could revolutionize all of optical quantum information
processing. We will realize few-photon quantum coherence all-optically,
capitalizing on our recently developed integrated quantum photonic platform with
a record-high optical nonlinearity. Our approach, based on quantum interference
via waveguide-coupled nonlinear optical cavities, will enable generation and
manipulation of few-photon quantum correlations in the integrated photonic
system by controlling its linear response. This will allow us to demonstrate
several critical quantum optical protocols including quantum non-demolition
measurement of photons and synchronous entanglement swapping with high fidelity.
The outcome of this program will have broader impacts in harnessing quantum
coherence, enhancing photonic quantum information processing, and paving the way
towards repeater-enabled quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.