* 2223317
* Microstructural patterning of thin films using extrinsic seed crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jagannathan Rajagopalan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2025
* USD 418,864.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin films have a wide variety of
applications ranging from computer chips and solar cells to cutting tools,
optical lenses and biomedical devices. Depending on the application, the thin
films need to exhibit specific mechanical and physical properties. For example,
thin metallic films used in computer chips must have high electrical
conductivity and be able to operate at elevated temperatures without failure.
These properties are determined to a large extent by the microstructure (size,
shape and orientation of crystals) of the thin films. Therefore, if the
microstructure of the thin films can be controlled, their properties can be
altered as desired, which will lead to considerable improvement in their
performance. The ultimate result would be lower power consumption in electronic
devices, greater efficiency in solar panels, higher lifetimes for cutting tools,
to name a few. This award supports fundamental research that enables the
fabrication of metallic alloy films with precisely controlled microstructures
and addresses critical questions related to how crystals form and grow in
metallic alloys. The research activities are integrated with education and
outreach efforts that include a mentoring program for undergraduates, hands-on
activities and demonstrations for school students to encourage them to pursue
careers in materials science and engineering, and training of graduate students
in materials synthesis and characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing thin films with unique physical and
mechanical properties requires explicit control over a wide range of
microstructural parameters including the mean grain size, grain size dispersion,
texture and phase composition. But despite substantial advances in thin film
processing techniques, our ability to independently tune multiple
microstructural parameters is still limited. This fundamental problem is
addressed by the development of a novel synthesis method based on the following
hypothesis: Amorphous precursor films embedded with appropriate seed crystals
can be controllably crystallized to obtain precisely tailored microstructures.
To validate the proposed hypothesis, amorphous NiTi films embedded with
carefully chosen seed crystals are synthesized by magnetron sputtering and
crystallized by controlled thermal annealing. A combination of advanced
transmission electron microscopy techniques are used to reveal how the spatial
distribution and orientation of seed crystals in the amorphous films influence
the final microstructure the crystallized films. Apart from tailoring the
overall grain size distribution, texture and phase composition of thin films,
the method can be used for location specific variation of these parameters,
which enables local control of the mechanical and physical properties. Education
and outreach activities include the Materials Research Ambassadors (MRAs)
program through which a diverse set of undergraduate students are recruited to
work on this project and perform outreach activities. The MRAs engage school
students visiting Arizona State University (ASU) with hands-on activities, and
visit local middle schools to perform demonstrations and introduce students to
materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.