* 2223204
* EAGER: A novel approach to measure greenhouse gas emissions from coastal marine ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Peter Berg, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2024
* USD 296,671.00

The PI requests EAGER funding to develop a better and more accurate approach for
determining greenhouse gas exchange between shallow-water marine systems and the
atmosphere. If successful, this would transform our ability to accurately
measure air-water exchange of greenhouse gasses in shallow-water marine
ecosystems. The results of this EAGER project would increase our understanding
of how aquatic ecosystems can help mitigate the impacts of human generated
greenhouse gas emissions. More accurate and process-based knowledge on this
topic is needed to allow better predictions of climate change impacts that would
be expected and to outline local and global mitigation
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accelerating warming of Earth has spurred
an intense and global focus on greenhouse gas exchange between the atmosphere
and aquatic systems, including coastal waters. As direct measurements of air-
water exchange of greenhouse gasses, here defined as CO2, CH4, and N2O, are
complex and challenging to perform, most estimates today are based on published
general empirical relationships from which exchange coefficients are estimated
and multiplied with site-specific concentration differences over the air-water
interface. This EAGER research proposes to combine upside-down aquatic eddy
covariance (AEC) measurements of O2 fluxes over the air-water interface with an
array of the best of these new greenhouse gas sensors and, from the prior, to
extract greenhouse gas-specific exchange coefficients in order to calculate air-
water greenhouse gas fluxes. If the new approach works, it would be
transformative and have two major outcomes: it will vastly improve estimates of
greenhouse gas air-water exchange where it is applied; and it will lead to new
lines of research on the complex controls of this greenhouse gas exchange. Both
outcomes are urgently needed to fill important knowledge gaps on greenhouse gas
exchange in aquatic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.