* 2223124
* Support for Student Participation at 65th International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology &amp; Nanofabrication; New Orleans, Louisiana; May 31 - June 3, 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Chih-Hao Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2023
* USD 18,000.00

This award supports student attendance at the International Conference on
Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN) to be held
May 31 to June 3, 2022, in New Orleans, Louisiana. The EIPBN meeting is a
lithography and nanofabrication meeting which attracts participants and
presenters from academia, industry, and government laboratories. This forum
helps to generate and incubate breakthrough and transformative ideas in many
scientific areas including nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing. This
international conference helps link basic science with engineering towards the
development of useful nano-enabled products, which are significant to the US and
world economies. This conference offers a forum for the open exchange of new and
previously-unpublished scientific research and ideas. This award will partially
support the participation of undergraduate and graduate students who are authors
or co-authors of papers to be presented at the conference. The award will help
to train the next generation of researchers in nanotechnology and
nanomanufacturing and to broaden participation by students who would otherwise
not be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIPBN will provide a forum for
discussion of the latest developments in directed energy-enabled synthesis,
fabrication, imaging, measurement and characterization of nanoscale structures,
multi-layered devices and multi-scale systems. NSF funding will be used to
support about 36 students financially so that students may participate in short
courses, the commercial session, the technical program, and other events. There
are also a number of key student programs, including a career mentoring session
with academic and industry leaders, student breakfast with the organization
committee, and Women in Nanofabrication (WIN) luncheon to discuss diversity
challenges faced by nanotechnology researchers and scientists. The conference
organization committee will reach out to local universities and to
underrepresented groups to recruit student presenters and
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.