* 2223756
* EFRI ELiS: Biofilm-functionalized and -maintained, living infrastructure systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Michael Berry, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,300,000.00

Infrastructure is essential for the safety, economic well-being and health of
our nation. However, continuing to build and maintain infrastructure using
traditional, solely structural materials is environmentally and financially
unsustainable. Sustainable infrastructure development represents a goal for the
United States that can only be met through multi-purpose building materials that
lower the overall energy and environmental footprint of our built environment.
This project contributes to this national need by developing multi-functional
and readily repairable infrastructure materials using immobilized microbial
communities called ‘biofilms’. Biofilms have the potential to meet diverse
infrastructure needs and improve community and environmental health, including
through cleaner air and water. This convergent project will leverage social
sciences and broaden participation by involving groups that have been
disproportionately impacted by environmental harms and infrastructure inequities
to ensure new technologies are safe, acceptable, inclusive and
beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to: (1) structurally
optimize infrastructure materials to enable multi-functionalization and on-
demand repair through engineered living systems (i.e., biofilms); (2) provide
flexibility in functionality via exchangeable, living ‘treatment’ cartridges and
through permanent integration of biofilms into infrastructure; and (3) identify
and address cultural, social and economic challenges that may impede adoption of
engineered, living infrastructure materials through design improvements and
evidence-based communication strategies. This work will address fundamental and
applied questions regarding reactive transport optimization, hydrogel mechanics
and fracturing, building-material optimization, and microbial community
interactions. Coupling computationally supported reactive transport modeling
with biofilm engineering experiments will generate new insights on how to
control desired biofilm functions in infrastructure. Two of Montana State
University’s centers for excellence, the Center for Biofilm Engineering and the
Center for Science, Technology, Ethics, and Society, will collaborate to
integrate Science, Technology, Ethics, and Society (STES) studies and Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) research. This holistic,
innovative approach will allow for assessing and improving the adoption of
transformative technologies by opening channels of feedback between stakeholders
and the technical team and allowing for design changes to better meet community
needs and expectations, particularly for its most vulnerable and marginalized
members. Outcomes at the nexus of engineering, biology and social sciences will
bolster NSF’s Big Idea of Understanding the Rules of Life and contribute to four
of the top seven NSF 2026 Idea Machine topics. This project will work closely
with groups that have been disproportionately impacted by environmental harms
and infrastructure inequities (including American Indian and rural populations
in Montana) and will involve these communities in the research directly to
ensure new technologies are safe, acceptable, and beneficial. The Broadening
Participation Plan includes partnerships with Tribal Colleges across Montana,
recruitment of underrepresented minority students, research experiences for
undergraduates, and recurring mentorship and professional development
opportunities for trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation Engineered Living Systems
(ELiS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.