* 2223822
* EFRI BRAID: Neurally Inspired, Resilient Closed Loop Feedback Control of Learned Motor Dynamics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Timothy Gentner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,960,346.00

This project addresses a critical unmet challenge in the emerging field of brain
machine interfaces (BMIs). By directly mapping brain activity to movement and
speech, BMI technology holds great potential for restoring movement and
communication abilities lost to injury or disease. Existing BMIs only operate
well for specific tasks and situations, however, and restoration capability
remains far from normal levels of skill in hand movements and speech. For
example, BMIs for restoring hand movement can pick up and move objects in
controlled laboratory settings, but may fail catastrophically when a new object
is introduced. Likewise, BMIs that partially restore speech and communication
are limited to vocabularies of only dozens of words, or require words to be
spelled out letter-by-letter. To overcome these challenges and advance beyond
the current state-of-the-art, this project develops BMIs that combine recent,
major advances in the understanding of how the brain controls complex movement.
The main goal is to deliver better BMI algorithms to predict intended movement
and speech from brain activity. The project uses neuroscience-based simulations
of real brain activity to rapidly prototype BMI algorithms that are then tested
experimentally to advance knowledge of how the brain controls movement. This
approach will accelerate the development of BMIs that restore movement and
speech ability to the level of an able-bodied person. To broaden participation
in the computational neuroscience community, the principal investigators will,
in parallel to the research, host workshops for undergraduate students to learn
and apply computational neuroscience skills. To provide educational resources
and connect students to the broader scientific community, a showcase of
students’ work along with the workshop materials will be made publicly
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
apply recent theoretical advances in the understanding of biological motor
control to develop BMI decoding strategies for rapid and effective continual
learning, enabling robust control across multiple behavioral contexts. These
efforts build upon feedforward neural network decoders that have demonstrated
initial success in controlled environments. Existing algorithms will be
augmented with theoretically and empirically motivated features of the
biological motor system. BMI algorithm design is accelerated in silico by
incorporating validated modular recurrent neural networks (mRNNs). By simulating
brain dynamics in the motor areas from which the BMI measures neural activity,
mRNNs emulate the user as a BMI controller. The second objective evaluates
algorithm innovations against existing nonhuman primate (NHP) and songbird
neurophysiology data. These offline, post hoc analyses test the algorithms’
capacity to infer intended motor behavior in open loop. The third objective
evaluates and validates developed strategies with in vivo experiments in NHP and
songbirds. New experiments will collect data for a wider set of behavioral
context manipulations to further test the learning and generalization capacity
of designed algorithms. Critically, NHP experiments will validate algorithms
during closed loop BMI control. By co-developing neuroscience theory and
algorithms across species and contexts, the proposed work has the potential to
develop and validate superior BMI decoding algorithms and to uncover generalized
principles for developing machine learning algorithms that interact with
intelligent controllers with extreme energy efficiency and
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.