* 2223529
* I-Corps: Cryogenic Sample Storage Platform for Environmental and Wildlife Conservation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Claudia Rawn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology using liquid nitrogen cryopreservation to improve
capabilities in biobanking and fertility preservation of rare and endangered
species in the face of climate change, habitat destruction, pollution,
inbreeding, and other dangers. Currently, most of the cryopreservation work is
performed in the lab, which may not be a feasible solution for many valuable
species that exist only in the wild and cannot be easily transported.
Consequently, this challenge has impeded the progress of establishing a
universal, all-comprehensive biorepository that includes all species on the
planet Earth. Further, cryo-storage of biomaterials, including germplasm,
tissue, blood and DNA from wildlife species, offers broad opportunities from
helping to understand the fundamental biology of unstudied species to enhanced
conservation breeding, genomics and veterinary medicine. As the cryopreservation
market continues to grow in the life sciences and biotechnology industries in
the future, advances are needed for cryogenically preserving and storing
biologically important specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a cryogenic sample storage platform that provides a
convenient and portable method to cryogenically preserve biomaterials from rare
and endangered species in the wild. The proposed technology smartly senses the
remaining level of cryogen in a dewar and refills it automatically, thereby
providing a reliable, low-effort supply of liquid nitrogen for on-site storage
and eliminating the significant financial burden of constantly shipping large,
heavy dewars. The proposed platform consists of three distinct, modifiable
modules: a portable liquid nitrogen generator, a transferring mechanism, and a
“smart” storage dewar. A key feature of the portable liquid nitrogen generation
design is the use of thermoelectric Peltier modules for cooling. This design
provides a lightweight and portable solution for liquid nitrogen generation
compared to bulky fractional distillation equipment. It is expected that this
design may be optimized for field work where collected samples need to be
cryopreserved immediately before being transferred to a long-term cryogenic
storage facility. The technology also may have application at sites with a need
for low volume cryopreservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.