* 2223628
* Collaborative Research: Lifelong Human-in-the-Loop Multiagent Learning for Decentralized Restoration of Distribution Systems (LifeGuard)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mahdi Khodayar, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This research develops a novel multiagent system to provide a real-time solution
for distribution service restoration that enhances energy supply resilience. The
proposed multiagent framework will 1) leverage the spatiotemporal information
obtained from the graph-structured power system dynamic data to provide accurate
fault identification and location; 2) provide a distributed multiagent learning
framework to find optimal restoration policies for rapid system recovery
considering the scalability and time efficiency of the generated solutions; 3)
obtain lifelong power restoration schemes that are flexible enough to adapt to
new restoration problems by efficiently transferring their knowledge from a
source problem to a target problem where the topology and characteristics of the
power network are changed; and 4) provide an interpretable knowledge base for
the human experts to evaluate the restoration scheme and modify it based on
their prior knowledge and expertise. The academic and educational communities
will benefit from the rapid dissemination of the generated knowledge from this
project. The research plan encourages inventive collaboration among graduate and
undergraduate students to find novel functional solutions to address current
challenges in the distribution network operation. The project will develop a new
curriculum for graduate and undergraduate students, promote interdisciplinary
research, and develop K-12 outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop a decentralized spatiotemporal
artificial intelligence framework for distributed fault detection and
identification, and power system restoration in large-scale distribution power
networks considering the high dimensionality, sparsity, and partial
observability of the system measurements. The project develops a graph capsule
network to recognize spatiotemporal dynamic patterns of distribution systems,
and detect the type and location of faults. Moreover, we devise a novel fully
decentralized multiagent system with actor-critic reinforcement learning to
solve large-scale restoration problems with high-dimensional system states and
actions. Furthermore, we address knowledge transfer of multiagent systems as an
open problem in machine learning and develop a lifelong restoration framework
capable of adapting to changes in the topology and characteristics of the power
system. The project also incorporates attention models into deep reinforcement
learning to develop an interpretable knowledge base for the proposed restoration
framework that can be used for restoration knowledge verification and
modification using human expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.