* 2223639
* SBIR Phase I:  Safe control of herbicide-resistant weeds with a novel natural bioherbicide platform
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Chad Brommer, HARPE BIOHERBICIDE SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2023
* USD 274,927.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in providing solutions to farmers who are facing the
culmination of decades of herbicide resistant weed species evolving from
applications of synthetic herbicides. Creation of herbicides which are
effective, naturally produced, scalable, and deployed using the current
agronomic practices could alter the foundations of crop production in the United
States and around the world. In view of the projected 8% annual increase in
global food and agriculture market, shrinking areas under cultivation that lead
to the need for higher productivity per acre, and increasing demand for
nutritional food items, the need for sustainable alternatives to current
synthetic herbicides that do not promote herbicide resistant weeds is becoming
clearer. Widespread adoption of the proposed technology is expected to benefit
farmers and crop producers reducing societal strain, financial burden, and
environmental stress from crop losses due to herbicide resistant weeds by
eliminating these weeds through an environmentally safe method, without the use
of excess fuel, time, equipment, and synthetic
herbicides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is in
developing a novel natural herbicide product that, when applied to herbicide
resistant weeds, will cause seed or plant cell's membranes to degrade and lose
integrity. Thus, the novel product is intended to work both as pre-emergent weed
prevention and post-emergent weed control herbicide. The product will be an
environmentally safe blend of natural plant extracts and excipients. The
herbicide formulations will be sprayable onto soil or onto plant leaves and
stems. The cost and time needed to initially screen herbicide rates, outcomes,
and best practices typically is many years. The greenhouse screening approach
takes months and provides valuable information to ensure that field trials,
which are more expensive and impacted by changes in weather, are efficient in
cost and outcomes. This project will initially focus on greenhouse validation of
weed control of the most resistant weeds known in different geographical
locations in the U.S. Dose response data for 50%-to-90% inhibition
control/efficacy of herbicide resistant weeds will provide the information to
develop a herbicide use label, directions for best practices, and good
stewardship by using only the amount of herbicide needed for control without
overuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.