* 2223032
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Forensic Coding: Robust Information Embedding in 3D Printed Objects.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Netanel Raviv, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 443,320.00

3D printing brings about a revolution in consumption and distribution of goods,
but poses a significant risk to public safety. Any individual with internet
access and a commodity printer can now produce untraceable firearms (ghost
guns), keys, and dangerous counterfeit products. To combat these threats, it is
important to embed identifying information inside the object, so that the
perpetrator could be identified if the object is confiscated or left at a crime
scene. Embedding information in a 3D printed object is a relatively new area,
and various engineering solutions have been proposed as of late. Yet, for
security applications, information embedding techniques must be resilient to
adversarial tampering, so that the identifying information could be extracted
even if the object was intentionally damaged. To this end, this project focuses
on developing robust methods for embedding information inside 3D printed objects
using the theory of error correcting codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correcting
adversarially induced errors is a well-studied topic in coding theory, and many
good codes exist. However, since adversaries can physically tamper with a 3D
object, 3D printed information is prone to unique noise patterns that are not
addressed by existing codes. In the proposed work, these patterns will be
analyzed and abstracted mathematically, and new codes will be developed to
combat any limited adversary. The project is expected to develop practical
mechanisms for worst-case robustness in 3D information embedding, as well as new
coding-theoretic concepts, and experimental work at the proof-of-concept
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.