* 2223758
* I-Corps: Synthetic secretions
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Adam Braunschweig, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of synthetic mucins (analogs of mucus) to impact the skincare,
healthcare, and materials industries. Initially, the synthetic mucus will be
explored as anti-aging, moisturizing skincare ingredients, and will replace
natural mucins derived from animals. Importantly, the synthetic methods may
allow for the synthesis of diverse mucin analogs, with varying material and
biological properties. Following the development of synthetic mucins for
skincare, the team will develop materials for transdermal delivery,
biocompatible lubrication, and surgical adhesives. The synthetic analogs of
mucus can aid in understanding the role of mucus in digestive, respiratory, and
immune systems. The additional broader impacts include launching a new US-based,
high-tech material manufacturing company, creating new markets for mucins, and
providing nontoxic skincare, healthcare, and biomedical solutions, where no
other adequate alternative exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of synthetic materials that mimic the structures and
properties of animal mucus. Animals secrete different mucus for a variety of
functions, including lubrication, hydration, and adhesion. The team has recently
developed a synthetic analog of snail mucin that is a substitute for the snail
mucus filtrate currently used in hydrating skincare products. The synthetic
mucin is a water-soluble glycosylated polypeptide that can be produced on the
kilogram scale. Currently, synthetic mucins are only produced on the milligram
scale or have chemical compositions that do not fully mimic the composition or
properties of the natural mucins. The proposed technology reresenets a scalable
synthesis of a glycosylated polypeptide that re-creates all the salient
structural and physical characteristics of snail
mucins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.