* 2223442
* NSF-DFG Confine: Diffusion of Water Confined in Patterned Hydrophilic-Hydrophobic Nanopores
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Laura Gagliardi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Laura Gagliardi of the
University of Chicago and Omar Yaghi of the University of California at Berkeley
are combining advanced molecular simulation and chemical analysis tools such as
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to explore and characterize the motion of water
molecules inside metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Water is essential to life and
understanding how water molecules move in confined spaces is of fundamental
interest. This research focuses on MOFs with well-defined patterns of
alternating water attracting (hydrophilic) and water repelling (hydrophobic)
grid-like tiled regions. This project seeks to reveal for the first time the
molecular level details of the diffusion of water within this patterned space
and the interplay between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. Professor
Gagliardi, her student and a collaborator in Germany (Professor Joachim Sauer,
Humboldt University) will perform quantum mechanical calculations to predict
water-MOF interactions, and Professor Yaghi and his student will characterize
the water-MOF interactions with NMR spectroscopic techniques. The discoveries of
this project could lead to a variety of useful applications of MOF materials,
including liquid and gas separations and purification, water harvesting, and CO2
capture. In addition to formal research training activities, the Gagliardi group
also seeks to inspire future generations of internationally aware scientists
through the Chicago chapter of Expanding Your Horizons. This collaborative
project will provide the students involved with a rich interdisciplinary and
international experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor Gagliardi and her
student compute chemically accurate adsorption constants for water molecules on
a lattice of adsorption sites from ab initio free energies; they also compute
chemically accurate diffusion rate constants for jumps of water molecules
between adsorption sites using ab initio transition state theory. To define
elementary diffusion steps, they define adsorption cells and consider all
possible jump pathways between sites in neighbored cells in all crystallographic
directions. Finally, they predict adsorption isotherms and diffusivities as a
function of loading using Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) and kinetic Monte
Carlo (kMC) simulation, respectively, on a lattice of sites. Professor Sauer is
providing ab initio-calculated potential energy surfaces to augment the accuracy
of the GCMC and kMC simulations. Professor Yaghi and his student will synthesize
MOF materials and study the water self-diffusion at different water loadings in
the MOF pores using pulsed magnetic field gradient NMR measurements. This should
allow for a direct comparison with the predicted intrapore diffusion constants.
Additionally, they will employ quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) to gain
more insight about the water mobility in the nanopores at different loadings.
Importantly, QENS would provide exclusive information about the diffusion model
and mechanism in the MOF pores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.