* 2223481
* NSF-DFG Confine:  Chemically-induced phoretic flow, or how to turn a curtain of light into virtual micro-fluidic boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This award is a collaboration between an experimental group at the University of
Potsdam in Germany and a theoretical group at the California Institute of
Technology to study the light-activated chemically induced flow of small
particles in confined geometries. By applying simple optical stimuli, colloidal
particles, both individually and in bulk, can be manipulated with unprecedented
levels of control and precision. The research aims to establish the foundation
for ‘virtual’ microfluidic devices that utilize soft boundaries generated from
light-activated flow patterns whose strength and location are tunable and allow
the manipulation and control of colloidal-scale objects. The research has
potential technological applications in, for example, cell sorting, DNA
manipulation, and the assembly of colloidal-based materials. The collaborative
nature of the award will help broaden the horizon of research students as they
work with others from different countries and backgrounds, which is increasingly
important in this globally connected but fragile
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award builds on and extends the recently
discovered phenomenon of light-driven diffusion-osmosis in which a chemical
surfactant’s hydrophobicity is altered by illumination and generates an osmotic
pressure gradient that drives fluid and particle motion. The study is aimed at a
fundamental understanding of the diffusiophoretic flow; that is, how the motion
depends on the basic physical properties of chemical concentration, ionic
strength, light intensity, etc., as well as the hydrodynamic interactions among
particles and with the confining substrate. Three different processes to
manipulate ensembles of particles adjacent to a boundary are investigated: (i)
global spatial patterns of light intensity that cause particles to accumulate in
(vacate from) regions of low (high) solute concentration, allowing one to
‘paint’ with colloids; (ii) self-generated repulsion between porous (source)
particles that crystalize and enhance motion of trapped passive colloids; and
(iii) self-propelled Janus particles whose speed and duration can be dynamically
controlled. Theory suggests that the light-induced flow profiles, despite being
non-equilibrium phenomena, can be expressed in terms of an equilibrium-like
chemical ‘solute potential,’ which suggests intriguing analogies to
crystallization, phase separation, etc. The award is a close alignment of theory
and experiment regarding a unique non-equilibrium system that touches upon many
cutting-edge problems of phoretically-driven particle dynamics and
hydrodynamics, such as segregation dynamics in mixtures of particles and the
motion of active self-propelled particles in dynamically fluctuating confined
geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the “Chemistry
and Transport in Confined Spaces (NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative
solicitation that involves the National Science Foundation and Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.