* 2223163
* STTR Phase I: Transfer Training Device to Reduce Falls and Increase Mobility in Older Adults
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Blake Terry, TERRY VENTURES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 272,263.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a novel walker with active corrective
feedback and training protocols enabling patients the ability to reliably and
repeatedly transition from a seated position to a standing posture. Falls among
elderly adults are the leading cause of injury resulting in 3 million emergency
room visits and 800,000 hospitalizations. These accidents account for $50
billion in direct medical costs each year. This project aims to develop a novel
device which directly improves the sit-to-stand (STS) transfer phase which
accounts for 41% of falls in elderly and/or cognitively impaired adults. Over
half of individuals using walkers currently do not receive the proper assistive-
device utilization training due to varying therapist techniques, communication,
environment, or the patient's cognitive abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop a
device for ensuring a safer and more consistent transition from a sit-to-stand
posture in patients using front-wheel walkers. Current sit-to-stand training
relies solely upon verbal therapist instruction or demonstration and often
results in lack of consistency in delivery. The proposed device integrates
biomechanical measurements, trained therapist observations, and patient auditory
and visual feedback, in conjunction with an educational and training protocol,
to ensure proper patient biomechanics, in a semi-autonomous manner. A prototype
system will be developed and validated in a patient proof of concept study
demonstrating consistent and reliable posture changes in order to significantly
reduce the risks for falls and injuries, while reducing emotional and physical
demands on patients and caregivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.