* 2223973
* Collaborative Research: Linking social-environmental health to the trophic and disease dynamics of urban carnivores
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Laura Prugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 714,816.00

Urban areas are expanding worldwide, presenting a major challenge to
biodiversity conservation because many species are unable to persist in these
human-dominated landscapes. However, some species do persist and even thrive in
cities, including carnivores that play critical roles in ecosystems. Despite the
ecological and societal importance of urban carnivores, key knowledge gaps
remain in understanding how and why their populations change within and across
cities. In this project, the researchers hypothesize that the same environmental
health disparities that affect people in cities likewise affect carnivore
populations through the joint effects of toxicants, altered diets, and disease
risk. A better understanding of the health and disease dynamics of urban
carnivores could help to prevent future disease outbreaks, because carnivores
are important hosts for many diseases that infect humans. Additionally, urban
carnivores may serve as early warning sentinels of environmental problems in
cities because toxicants and infectious agents can build up in their bodies due
to their high position in the food web. This study will provide insights that
will allow urban planners to better predict how measures taken to address
societal inequities will affect urban ecosystems via carnivores. For example,
the project’s findings will reveal how actions such as pollution reduction or
increasing green space should affect the abundance and health of urban
carnivores. A better understanding of factors driving carnivore population
dynamics in cities will promote biodiversity conservation in a rapidly
urbanizing world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose that urban
carnivore population dynamics are principally governed by heterogeneity in
environmental health via impacts on diet, disease prevalence, and toxicant
exposure. Urban landscapes offer anthropogenic subsidies that fundamentally
alter the risk, reward, and health consequences of foraging behavior compared to
wildland areas. These novel connections among diet, toxicants, and infectious
disease may strongly affect the population dynamics of urban carnivores in ways
that are not possible to predict when each force is examined separately. The
researchers will use health disparity maps along with wildlife camera trapping,
necropsies of carnivore carcasses, stable isotope analysis, and genetic analyses
of scats across three major metropolitan areas in the western US
(Seattle–Tacoma, San Francisco Bay Area, and Los Angeles) to quantify these
linkages. Because diet can strongly affect exposure to toxicants in urban areas,
these factors are difficult to disentangle in studies of wild carnivores. The
research team will therefore experimentally quantify the effect of diet on
immune functioning by using diet trials with captive
coyotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.