* 2223811
* EFRI BRAID: Rapid contextual learning in resilient autonomous systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Nabil Imam, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,999,997.00

Neuromorphic computing seeks to identify key operational principles of the brain
and implement them in artificial computing systems. The effort comprises both
new hardware platforms with architectures based on decentralized brain networks
(such as the Intel Loihi and IBM TrueNorth platforms) and the emerging
computational algorithms that are required to run this new hardware effectively.
In hardware, the diagnostic principles of this new computing paradigm are
parallel, asynchronous local computation and the colocalization of memory and
compute resources. This means that thousands of small processors all operate
separately – without using a common clock, a shared memory store, or any other
common resources that would slow the whole system down to the speed of its
slowest component. The result is a computer system that can perform many types
of tasks much faster, and with much lower energy expenditure, but that requires
a complete rethinking of software algorithms in order to perform real-world
tasks effectively using these fundamentally decentralized circuits. In the
present application, computational principles extracted from biological brain
circuits are employed to develop such working algorithms, and also to identify
and analyze core computational motifs from these algorithms for future
repurposing. Additional principles drawn from neuroscience also will be
implemented and assessed, particularly local complexity and heterogeneity, in
which the “neurons” can be individually complex and very different from one
another, and adaptive network expansion, in which the network itself can grow in
accordance with its acquired learning and expertise. Training and exposure to
these transformative compute strategies will be broadened via multiple
initiatives at Cornell and Georgia Tech, ranging from historically successful
diversity, equity, and inclusion strategies to K-12 partnerships to immersive
STEM teaching facilities and outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential advantages of neuromorphic computing platforms are both clear and
profound, but also are limited by the paucity of well-developed neuromorphic
algorithms capable of leveraging these advantages to address real-world
problems. The Sapinet network, based on computational principles extracted from
the biological olfactory system, shows promise as a neuromorphic algorithm for
signal restoration and identification under noise. Using an explicit theoretical
roadmap, this network architecture will be developed to incorporate additional
brain-inspired strategies for resilient and robust autonomy, such as context
dependence, multimodal integration, rich category learning, and explicit
representations of similarity that together promise to enable superior and more
sophisticated performance. Second, owing in part to the heterogeneity of design
elements that underlie its power, neuromorphic computing presently is limited by
a paucity of formal analysis and optimization techniques. A set of computational
motifs (“numerical recipes”) and analysis strategies for neuromorphic operations
will be developed, in service to future applications that may lack an explicit
parallel in systems neuroscience. Finally, the resulting intelligent systems
will be instantiated in software and in neuromorphic hardware, and ultimately in
prototype devices for real-world deployment and testing. The overall goal is to
construct and deploy locally intelligent, energy-efficient, and portable edge
devices capable of a high degree of performance autonomy; i.e., that exhibit
resilient and context-aware task performance under suboptimal and unpredictable
real-world conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.