* 2223480
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Developing large serine integrases as tools for constructing and manipulating synthetic replicons
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Phoebe Rice, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 11/30/2026
* USD 395,815.00

This collaborative work develops an expanded genetic toolkit to facilitate
asking fundamental questions about how assemblies of genes work together to
perform natural or synthetic functions. This toolkit is intended to be flexible
and useful for the broad variety of creative genetic manipulations envisioned
(past and future) by biologists, including the modular construction and
convenient editing of programmable genetic circuits. The core of this toolkit is
a family of enzymes termed “Large serine integrases (LSIs)” that mediate precise
DNA rearrangements. These rearrangements can be reversed by the addition of a
second protein called a recombination directionality factor (RDF). However, RDFs
have been difficult to identify in natural sources, and how they work is not
well understood. This work uses new approaches to address both of those
problems. The PIs are developing ways to introduce high school students to the
excitement of seeing and playing with the 3D structures of DNA, working with
community groups to discuss the potential power of modern genetic tools and to
encourage enrolment to university STEM-related subjects especially among women
and underrepresented groups, and interfacing with the biotechnology industry to
improve curriculum for industry-bound students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative study between US investigator Rice from the University of Chicago
and UK investigator Olorunniji from Liverpool John Moores University brings
together two groups with long-standing expertise in serine recombinases. The
Olorunniji group’s expertise in synthetic biology and molecular biology is
complemented by the Rice group’s expertise in structural biology. Their combined
efforts will significantly expand and innovate the LSI-RDF toolkit that is
available for use in synthetic cell studies. The project will: (1) identify
novel integrase - RDF pairs with useful properties using both new and
established computational approaches, followed by characterization in in vivo
functional assays; (2) use the tools of structural biology to understand how
RDFs interacts with their cognate LSIs, providing a solid foundation for protein
engineering; (3) develop novel methods to alleviate the current bottleneck in
identifying RDFs and (4) add new functionality to the toolbox by engineering
RDFs to be light-responsive for rapid-response reaction reversal without the
need for chemical inducers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), where NSF funds
the US investigator and BBSRC funds the partners in the
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.