* 2223812
* SHF:Small: More Modular Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 580,000.00

This project will study a class of machine learning algorithms known as deep
learning that has received much attention in academia and industry. Deep
learning has a large number of important societal applications, from self-
driving cars to question-answering systems such as Siri and Alexa. A deep
learning algorithm uses multiple layers of transformation functions to convert
inputs to outputs, each layer learning higher-level of abstractions in the data
successively. The availability of large datasets has made it feasible to train
deep learning models. Since the layers are organized in the form of a network,
such models are also referred to as deep neural networks (DNN). While the jury
is still out on the impact of deep learning on the overall understanding of
software's behavior, a significant uptick in its usage and applications in wide-
ranging areas and safety-critical systems, e.g., autonomous driving, aviation
system, medical analysis, etc., combine to warrant research on software
engineering practices in the presence of deep learning. One challenge is to
enable the reuse and replacement of the parts of a DNN that has the potential to
make DNN development more reliable. This project will investigate a
comprehensive approach to systematically investigate the decomposition of deep
neural networks into modules to enable reuse, replacement, and independent
evolution of those modules. A module is an independent part of a software system
that can be tested, validated, or utilized without a major change to the rest of
the system. Allowing the reuse of DNN modules is expected to reduce energy- and
data-intensive training efforts to construct DNN models. Allowing replacement is
expected to help replace faulty functionality in DNN models without needing
costly retraining steps.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The preliminary work of the
investigator has shown that it is possible to decompose fully connected neural
networks and CNN models into modules and conceptualize the notion of modules.
The main goals and the intellectual merits of this project are to further expand
this decomposition approach along three dimensions: (1) Does the decomposition
approach generalize to large Natural Language Processing (NLP) models, where a
huge reduction in CO2e emission is expected? (2) What criteria should be used
for decomposing a DNN into modules? A better understanding of the decomposition
criteria can help inform the design and implementation of DNNs and reduce the
impact of changes. (3) While coarse-grained decomposition has worked well for
FCNNs and CNNs, does a finer-grained decomposition of DNNs into modules
connected using AND-OR-NOT primitives a la structured decomposition has the
potential to both enable more reuse (especially for larger DNNs) and provide
deeper insights into the behavior of DNNs? The project also incorporates a
rigorous evaluation plan using widely studied datasets. The project is expected
to broadly impact society by informing the science and practice of deep
learning. A serious problem facing the current software development workforce is
that deep learning is widely utilized in our software systems, but scientists
and practitioners do not yet have a clear handle on critical problems such as
explainability of DNN models, DNN reuse, replacement, independent testing, and
independent development. There was no apparent need to investigate the notions
of modularity as neural network models trained before the deep learning era were
mostly small, trained on small datasets, and were mostly used as experimental
features. The notion of DNN modules developed by this project, if successful,
could help make significant advances on a number of open challenges in this
area. DNN modules could enable the reuse of already trained DNN modules in
another context. Viewing a DNN as a composition of DNN modules instead of a
black box could enhance the explainability of a DNN's behavior. This project, if
successful, will thus have a large positive impact on the productivity of these
programmers, the understandability and maintainability of the DNN models that
they deploy, and the scalability and correctness of software systems that they
produce. Other impacts will include: research-based advanced training as well as
enhancement in experimental and system-building expertise of future computer
scientists, incorporation of research results into courses at Iowa State
University as well as facilitating the integration of modularity research-
related topics, and increased opportunities for the participation of
underrepresented groups in research-based training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.