* 2223732
* CAREER: Multifidelity Modeling and Search Using Adaptive Field Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Leifur Leifsson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 09/30/2024
* USD 338,078.00

A variety of high-fidelity simulations are available to engineers in support the
analysis and optimization of engineered systems. However, the computational
demands of these simulation codes often mean advanced computational design
techniques, such as uncertainty analysis and optimization under uncertainty, are
not used to their fullest potential. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) project supports fundamental research to advance techniques for
simulation-based engineering systems design with a goal of making their
application practical on a wider variety of important engineering problems. The
project will result in new understanding about how engineers can utilize rich
information from simulation results to accelerate computational applications
such as uncertainty analysis and optimal design under uncertainty. The
techniques target engineering applications that exhibit complex physics, such as
aerodynamics, electromagnetics and mechanical structures. New methods pioneered
in this project will impact society through more rapid and reliable design of
complex engineered systems across domains such as transportation, energy
harvesting, weather forecasting, and communication. Educational initiatives of
this project focus on instruction and curriculum development for advanced
computational design techniques. This includes a new short course on
computational design for undergraduate students at Iowa State University,
creation of an online hub to make advanced simulation-based design techniques
accessible to students and practitioners around the country, and organization of
mini-symposia on computational design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
pioneers a novel class of methods for using the field responses of simulations
to construct improved multifidelity models in the context of advanced
computational design techniques such as uncertainty analysis and optimization
under uncertainty. The process of extracting and adapting physics-based
information encoded in the field responses of models of varying degrees of
fidelity will be achieved by combining metamodeling techniques and machine
learning, as well as the development of novel adaptation techniques. The new
methods and algorithms will be derived and rigorously characterized through
computational experiments with structural, electronic, and fluid systems case
studies. Additionally, the results will provide an understanding of the impact
of model correlations and the mechanisms controlling the growth of the
computational cost. This will enable the creation of new and unique methods for
the automated setup of multifidelity models and allow us to address problems of
higher complexity than what is currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.