* 2223072
* ISS: Exploiting the Space Environment to Dissect the Molecular Basis of Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) Cardiotoxicity”
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Palaniappan Sethu, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Streptococcus pneumonia (Spn), a Gram-positive bacterium is the leading cause of
community-acquired pneumonia. During severe community-acquired pneumonia, Spn
enters and causes long-lasting damage in vital organs such as the heart. Despite
the use of antibiotics to treat the pneumonia, a large number of these patients
are still at risk for heart disease. Current knowledge confirms that Spn can
infect the heart and establish biofilms within the heart muscle, resulting in
cell death and muscle dysfunction. However, there is still an incomplete
understanding of critical factors that allow Spn to overcome treatment with
antibiotics and cause damage in the heart. In this project, a Cardiac Tissue
Chip (CTC) model will be used to study Spn infections. The space environment
(which has been shown to worsen bacterial infections) will enable the
researchers to clearly identify important factors that play a role in this
process to identify new treatment options. This project will also provide multi-
disciplinary training opportunities for 1 graduate student, 2 undergraduate
students and 2 high school students. The undergraduate students will be
recruited via UABs PARAdiGM program (Preparation for graduate and medical
school), a summer program for undergraduates from disadvantaged and
underrepresented minority backgrounds who are keen to explore the potential of a
future career as a scientific investigator or medical professional. Research
outcomes from this project will be incorporated into modules for two courses
focused on stem cell bioengineering and heart failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to exploit unique phenomena associated with the space
environment to create a model of Spn infection of cardiac tissue to gain an
understanding of critical molecular signaling pathways associated with the onset
and progression of Spn infections that lead to cardiac tissue dysfunction. In
space, multiple factors affect normal tissue and cellular function, such as
promoting cardiac tissue atrophy making it more susceptible to bacterial
infection. There is also sufficient evidence to suggest that the space
environment, particularly microgravity, greatly increases bacterial virulence
and diminishes susceptibility to commonly used antimicrobial treatments. This
project will leverage the space environment to amplify the effects of Spn
infection to more effectively identify molecular changes (gene expression,
soluble factor production) involved in critical events that promote Spn
cardiotoxicity. Elucidation of molecular mechanisms at play will enable
identification of therapeutic targets for early intervention to prevent adverse
cardiac events. Successful completion of this project will confirm that the
tissue-level and organ-level changes engendered by the space environment
accelerate and exacerbate bacterial infection and will yield valuable
information regarding: (a) how Spn infection of cardiac tissue is different on
earth and in space, (b) molecular mechanisms that promote enhanced virulence and
biofilm formation, (c) factors that promote increased drug resistance in space,
and (d) identification of potential therapeutic targets for early intervention
to prevent adverse cardiac events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.