* 2223166
* SBIR Phase I:  Extremely Low Frequency Characterization of High-Risk Lightning
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Istvan Kereszy, HELIOS POMPANO INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,109.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes a notable reduction in the area burned
by lightning-initiated wildfires. Understanding which lightning strikes are
capable of igniting wildfires is critical as in the Western U.S. lightning-
initiated wildfires are responsible for over 70% of the area burned in these
environmental catastrophes. Globally, wildfires are responsible for 6.45
gigatons of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions annually (18% of total emissions).
Detecting high risk lightning strikes (those capable of igniting wildfires) may
also significantly reduce losses of life, wildlife, habitats, property, and
forests as currently lightning-initiated wildfires in the US devastate 4-6
million acres per year. The reduction of wildfires can reduce large evacuations
and smoke-related health conditions, thereby improving the health and welfare of
the American public. Both people and businesses would benefit from lower
insurance rates due to the decreased risk of wildfire damage. Large wildfires
are a constant concern to more than half of the mission assurance priority
military installations due to routine testing and training activities that are
significant ignition sources. The proposed project may also address military
ignition concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires start when a long continuing
current (LCC) strikes the ground at a location where the environmental
conditions are conducive for fire ignition. LCCs are those that last for 40 ms
or longer and are essentially responsible for excessive heating. The
transformative aspect of this research lies in the ground-based characterization
of Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) lightning emissions to identify LCC strikes,
with a 95% target detection efficiency and with 40 m accuracy. While for most
lightning strikes the current ceases to flow after tens of microseconds, a small
portion of lightning strikes (less than 10%) contain a continuing current that
lasts thousands of times longer, from tens to hundreds of milliseconds. This can
be viewed as a quasi-stationary arc between the cloud charge source and the
ground and is detectable through electrostatic field changes and ELF emissions.
A secondary innovative feature lies in the use of machine learning algorithms to
pinpoint high risk lightning ignitions by analyzing the environmental conditions
at the LCC strike location. This technology can identify a fire in seconds,
unlike the present heat or smoke identification systems that can take hours or
days to identify a fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.