* 2223829
* EFRI ELiS: Bioweathering dynamics and ecophysiology of microbially catalyzed soil genesis of Martian regolith
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jean Larson, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

A human mission to Mars is projected to take place by the late 2030s.
Identifying viable sources of food will be critical to a successful mission
given the significant distance between Earth and Mars. However, the Martian soil
contains perchlorate salts at concentrations that are toxic to most forms of
life including plants and crops. The overarching goal of this project is to
explore the development and implementation of a microbially catalyzed soil
genesis process that could remove perchlorate from Martian regolith while
producing a soil containing the required organic carbon and inorganic nutrients
to support plant growth and cultivation. To advance this goal, the project team
proposes to investigate how to tune the bioweathering of Martian soil simulants
by selected microbial consortia to generate viable soils that could support
plant growth and crop cultivation on Mars. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of fundamental knowledge and
the identification of microbial consortia that could convert sterile and toxic
soils, such as the Martian regolith, to organic and nutrient rich soils that can
sustain plant growth and crop cultivation. Additional benefits to society will
be achieved through education and training including the mentoring of one
postdoctoral researcher, one graduate student, and two undergraduate students at
Arizona State University, one graduate student and one undergraduate student at
the Florida Institute of Technology, and one graduate student at the University
of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mars regolith, or the surface material of Mars,
is sterile with high concentrations of toxic perchlorate salts. In addition, the
Mars regolith is devoid of soil organic matter (SOM) making plant cultivation
for bio-regenerative life support and food production on Mars extremely
challenging. The goal of this project is to design and develop scalable
microbiological technologies and solutions to generate an organic and nutrient
rich soil from Martian regolith. The guiding hypothesis of the proposed research
is that the core metabolic processes of selected microbial consortia can be
tuned to couple the production of a chemically diverse and stable SOM with the
microbial reduction of perchlorate salts in Martian regolith. The specific
objectives of the research include 1) experimental investigations of the extents
and rates of perchlorate reduction by the selected microbial consortia under
relevant Mars conditions using unsaturated and saturated regolith simulants, 2)
characterization of the composition of the SOM and the bioavailable
elements/nutrients that are generated from the microbial weathering of Mars
regolith simulants using high resolution mass spectrometry coupled with liquid
chromatography, and 3) demonstration of sustained seed germination and plant
growth in the soil samples generated from the microbial weathering of Martian
regolith simulants. The successful completion of this project has the potential
for transformative impact through the generation of fundamental knowledge and
the development of new methods to enable the conversion of sterile and toxic
soils to organic and nutrient rich soils that could support plant growth and
crop cultivation. To implement the education and outreach activities of the
project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to develop and implement a
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program to support the training of eight
high school teachers at Arizona State University (ASU). In addition, the PIs
plan to integrate the findings from this research into existing
graduate/undergraduate courses and public outreach activities at their
respective institutions including a yearly Open Door public outreach event at
ASU and STEM podcasts of the Florida Institute of Technology NPR affiliate
station with a focus on topics related to bioweathering, microorganisms for
space exploration, and plant growth and crop cultivation in Martian regolith.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the National Science
Foundation, Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities (EFMA)
and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.