* 2223004
* GRANDE: Geoscience Research Programs' Adaptations to Natural Disruptive Events
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Christopher Keane, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 489,305.00

When natural processes and society intersect, daily life can be upended with
impacts ranging from minor delays and interruptions to severe impacts to people
and property caused by major disruptive events. Geoscience programs at colleges
and universities lead the way in new research and educational experiences
related to natural processes as well as in developing the future professionals
that can predict, mitigate, and prevent these societal impacts. Even beyond
normal earth system processes such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and
regular storms, that lead to disruptions, climate change is enhancing the
frequency and intensity of many events, such as storms and floods, and expanding
the range impacted by other processes such as wildfires. Although disruptive
events have been documented as negatively impacting higher education and
research, and especially so for vulnerable populations, they may be potentially
transformative for geoscience programs as they represent direct experiences with
the processes being studied by students and researchers in those programs.
However, such events impact geoscience programs as well. This study will examine
how geoscience programs have managed the impacts of natural disruptive events,
the thresholds at which they have experienced critical negative outcomes, if and
how they have been able to leverage the experience for improved teaching and
research, and how they contributed to resilience strategies for their
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify how U.S.-based
geoscience departments that have been impacted by major natural disruptive
events have changed their programs during the recovery and will highlight new
challenges and opportunities which might have arisen as a result of these
disruptions. The project will also identify specific actions and postures by
geoscience departments that present opportunities to create value in the
geoscience community and mitigate future impacts from disruptive events. The PIs
plan to utilize a spectrum of methods to examine the scope, nature, and
intensity of impacts and resulting operational and policy changes across four
distinct work packages: 1) Quantitatively assess how declared disasters impacted
geoscience education and research; 2) Identify specific operational and
pedagogical outcomes that evolved from disruptive event-impacted departments; 3)
Determine how the geoscience community has leveraged natural disruptions broadly
beyond those departments directly impacted by the events; and 4) Capture the
attitudes and forward perspectives of students and early-career geoscientists on
impacts to the geosciences by climate change and associated disruptive
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.