* 2223561
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2022 ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2022)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Yue Ning, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides support for 25 U.S.-based graduate students to participate
in the 28th ACM SIGKDD conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
2022), which will be held in Washington D.C. from August 14 -18, 2022. KDD is an
annual conference that presents the world's premier research in data mining. In
the past, the total number of KDD participants has been in excess of 3000. The
conference covers topics in the data mining lifecycle, including algorithms,
software and systems, and applications. The conference will also focus on
related areas such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, data
management, and information retrieval. The selection committee will select
recipients of the support based on merit and need and place particular emphasis
on diversity in the selection process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an
interdisciplinary conference, KDD brings together researchers and practitioners
from academia, industry, and governments who work on all aspects of data mining
and data science problems. The conference is highly competitive and focuses on
training and mentoring students. It includes a technical program with regular
peer-reviewed papers in the form of oral and poster presentations, as well as
panel discussions and invited talks by leading experts in academia and industry.
Besides the technical program, the conference features activities such as
workshops, tutorials, panels, posters, project showcases. These will provide a
comprehensive multi-facet learning experience to students at all levels. The
award will be advertised and the results will be announced at the KDD 2022
website (https://www.kdd.org/kdd2022/) as well as various data mining mailing
lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.