* 2223390
* Responses to variation in nutritional environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,996.00

Adequate nutrition is critical for growth, reproduction, immune function, and
prevention of disease. However, variation in environments can pose challenges to
securing adequate nutrition. This project examines how individuals shift
consumption practices across variable environments. Strategies that individuals
may employ range from eating diverse foods with relatively similar nutritional
profiles, targeting specific foods to achieve similar nutrient intakes,
tolerating diets with disparate nutrient ratios, and relying on bacterial
communities in the gut to aid in the digestion of food. To understand how these
nutritional strategies complement each other, the research team investigates
feeding behavior, diet nutritional compositions and gut bacteria in an organism
that experiences disparate nutritional environments. The project offers training
opportunities for undergraduate students, including those from under-represented
groups in STEM, builds research capacity at a minority-serving institution,
disseminates results broadly to academic and non-academic audiences, and
strengthens multi-institution collaborations across diverse fields of study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to contribute to understanding how
living in diverse ecological environments affects nutrient intake and balance.
To understand this issue, the research team investigates the ways in which wild
redtail monkeys make nutritional decisions in three different forests where
plant composition varies widely. Research questions address how ecological
circumstances affect diet and nutrition, the degree of flexibility in diet and
in nutrient balance, and how variation in diet and nutrition correlate with the
composition of the microbiome. The team employs a variety of methods to address
these research questions, including behavioral observations, dietary analysis,
and bioinformatic microbiome analysis. In doing so, they assist in deciphering
the nutritional mechanisms behind dietary generalism to shed light on how
dietary generalists succeed across time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.