* 2223103
* Collaborative Research: The Environmental Data Initiative - long-term availability of research data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Hanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,449,090.00

An award is made to provide support to a collaboration between researchers at
the University of Wisconsin, Madison and the University of New Mexico for the
Environmental Data Initiative (EDI), a comprehensive data repository and data
management support organization for the environmental research community. EDI
facilitates the publication, use and re-use of environmental data generated by
publicly funded research projects. Researchers from a wide range of disciplines
use this rich resource to better understand historic contexts and local
variations of complex environmental processes. EDI’s unfettered and unbiased
data access and public training opportunities have a high potential to broaden
participation in science. Use of data obtained from EDI is demonstrated by over
half a million annual downloads and over 1300 journal publications. As a
comprehensive environmental data curation organization, EDI actively supports
and promotes Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) through its policies,
communication practices, and programs. All team members are DEI trained at their
respective institutions. EDI staff are also actively involved in translating
‘Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility, and Ethics’ (CARE)
concerns into repository best practice recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The EDI data repository and curation services are optimized at the
intersection of reducing the burden of data documentation and formatting efforts
for the data publisher and providing the data user with highly Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) data. EDI approaches the tension
between these two axes of data publication with simple metadata authoring tools
that automate the process as much as possible, clear online guidance
documentation, and staff curators. The repository infrastructure uses a Service
Oriented Architecture (SOA) design pattern where external software clients may
upload, search, and access data through a REST web-service Application
Programmable Interface (API). This architecture and EDI’s data portal provide
the ability for users to access the data manually or programmatically, thus
accommodating advanced data science workflows. The modular software design also
allows for optimal maintenance and upgrade while providing exceptional
availability of service. Support from this award will enable EDI to focus on
core activities, including: (1) outreach (2) data curation training, (3)
providing curation tools and services, (4) improving data discovery and
reusability, while (5) maintaining software and hardware to ensure optimal
functioning of the EDI data repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.