* 2223852
* I-Corps: High-frequency ultrasound technology for the detection of micro and nano porosity, shale softening and anisotropy of materials
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Jay Meegoda, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel ultrasound technology to characterize deep geological
media for energy exploration and waste disposal. The incorporation of high
frequency ultrasound technology is investigated to non-destructively obtain the
rock porosities. By developing an in situ device to determine the porosity of a
rock matrix, the team seeks to determine the extent of softening that occurs due
to fracking. This technology has potential for use in a wide variety of
infrastructure applications. By developing a new method to determine the
porosity of rock matrices and the in-situ rock permeabilities directly in the
field and at a smaller scale (in the nano and micro ranges), this research team
seeks to increase the productivity of companies that require (in)direct seismic
data acquisition (e.g., Drilling Engineers, Wireline Engineers, Seismic
Acquisition Engineers, Seismic Processing Engineers, Petro-Physicists and
Geophysicists).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of high-frequency ultrasound technology. Ultrasound technology is a
non-destructive technology that generates mechanical waves from ultrasound
transducers. The technique has been increasingly utilized in studying the
lithology of the Earth. The in-situ use of ultrasound coupled with a new
modelling capabilities, may provide a quicker, more environmentally friendly,
and inexpensive alternative to field investigation. The new technology will be
used ot determine the porosity of rock matricies as well as the possible
softening that occurs due to fracking. The wave velocity can be determined by
transmitting high-frequency ultrasound waves (&gt;200Hz) through the rock
specimens and relating the measured velocity to micro- and nano-scale voids.
Once the wave velocity function has been determined, the team will transmit a
range of higher frequencies whose wavelengths are closer to the size or micro-
and nano-scale voids in the rock matrix. The attenuation, time, and velocity of
the waves at higher frequencies will be compared to determine the
porosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.