* 2223737
* Diffusiophoretic Bioaugmentation: Boosting the Bacterial Motility in Soil Matrix by Chemical Gradients for Enhanced Bioremediation
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Sangwoo Shin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 11/30/2025
* USD 335,860.00

When a toxic chemical spill occurs, the chemicals often leak into the soil,
making it difficult to remove because the chemicals can easily seep deep
underground. To clean up the spill, chemical-degrading bacteria can be injected
into the contaminated soil. One of the major challenges of this approach is
delivering the bacteria directly to the contaminated site. If the chemicals are
deep in the soil, the injected bacteria must sense and swim towards the
contaminants which can be a slow process. The goal of this project is to speed
up the movement of the bacteria toward the contaminated site by injecting the
bacteria into the ground with additional non-toxic chemicals that can enhance
their motion by creating chemical gradients. Successful completion of this
project will benefit society by developing environmental remediation strategies
to mitigate ecological and human health impacts of toxic pollutants. Additional
benefits to society will be accomplished through student education and training
including the mentoring of a graduate student at the University at
Buffalo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toxic chemical spills require processes to degrade
the chemicals to avoid environmental and human health impacts. Successful
bioremediation of chemical spills requires directing decomposer bacteria to the
target soil micropores that are deep in the subsurface where contaminants are
likely to persist. The small bacteria can passively advect across permeable
regions of the subsurface via pore flow. However, impervious micropores, which
are prevalent in the soil matrix, can only be accessed by active motility or
Brownian motion. These areas often tend to hold a significant amount of
contaminants since they cannot be easily swept away by the pore flow, thus
limiting the remediation efficacy. Therefore, there is a critical need to
develop an effective way to disperse bacteria to hard-to reach spaces. The main
objective of this proposal is to achieve enhanced bioremediation by introducing
chemical heterogeneity in the soil. The central hypothesis is that the chemical
gradients created within the soil matrix during bioremediation can accelerate
the bacterial transport not only by chemotaxis, the movement by intracellular
transduction of an organism in response to chemical stimulus, but also by
diffusiophoresis, the directed migration of colloidal particles along chemical
gradients due to the physicochemical interactions between the surrounding
chemicals and the particle surface. When the chemical and cell surface
conditions are met, diffusiophoresis can enhance the transport of bacteria by
orders of magnitude compared to Brownian motion regardless of the bacteria type.
This investigation will include experimental characterization of the interplay
between chemotaxis and diffusiophoresis in microfluidic systems and laboratory-
scale bioremediation demonstration in the soil matrix. This research aims to
elucidate the fundamental aspects of bacterial diffusiophoresis and demonstrate
an effective, low-cost strategy to enhance bioremediation . Further societal
benefits include introducing undergraduate engineering students to microbial
engineering through a hands-on course that will be developed to include various
aspects from cell culture and microfluidic fabrication to laboratory-scale
bioremediation as well as mentoring of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.