* 2223949
* High Performance Optically-Controlled RF Switches with Ferroelectric Latching for Advanced Reconfigurable mmW-THz Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lei Liu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The project will investigate and develop a novel millimeter-wave to terahertz
(mmW-THz) wideband RF switching technology using lightwave control and the
unique properties of ferroelectric materials to deliver superior performance.
The switches resulting from this project will enable the development of a novel
class of more advanced tunable or reconfigurable circuits and components
required in the next generation mmW-THz sensing, imaging and communication
systems. This is an important technological area with a wide range of
applications that will generate significant benefits to society. For example,
switch-based reconfigurable mmW-THz filters may enable spectroscopic sensing and
imaging for substance or material identification and detection, advanced
chemical and biological sensing, disease or cancer diagnostics, and defense and
security screening. In addition, adaptive mmW-THz communication networks
employing switch-based beam-steering or beam-forming phased-array antenna
systems and tunable filters may have profound impact on future 6G or beyond
cellular networks, the internet-of-things, chip-to-chip ultra-high-speed
interconnections, 4K TV signal broadcasting, multimeda downloading, and secure
military and defense communication links. The project also provides significant
educational opportunities for students. The graduate students working on this
project will be immersed in an interdisciplinary research including
semiconductor physics, electromagnetic wave propagation, advanced THz system
design and characterization from single device to circuit and system levels.
Undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, will be
involved through summer research program or honors thesis research and mentored
by the principal investigators. Finally, this project will also promote science
and engineering education among local middle schools and high schools through
NSF Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program with lab tours and hands-on
STEM activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop and demonstrate a novel mmW-THz wideband switching technology based on
optical-modulation of free carriers in semiconductors (e.g., silicon, germanium,
etc.) using novel device and circuit architectures to deliver superior switching
performance and enhanced functionality. The combination of mmW-THz device design
with optical control of photo-induced carriers in semiconductors, including the
use of non-contact capacitively coupled structures to enhance carrier
modulation, is central to the advancement of device performance beyond the
current state of the art. In addition, switching/latching using ferroelectric
material hafnium zirconium oxide (HZO) will be integrated into the optically
modulated switches, providing the first demonstration of non-volatile mmW-THz
switch state retention as well as low power consumption. Furthermore, the new
switches can exploit spatial optical modulation using computer-programmed light
patterns, making them suitable for large-scale array applications. This research
will lead to optically controlled wideband mmW-THz switches that are compact,
offer low power consumption, and are easy to fabricate and integrate into
circuits and systems, while simultaneously providing performance superior to
conventional semiconductor switches, emerging phase-change material (PCM)
counterparts, and some micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) switches. The new
switches will be employed to experimentally demonstrate mmW-THz tunable and
reconfigurable prototypes including reconfigurable filters based on waveguide
platforms and switch-based beam-steering or beam-forming antennas. By using the
RF switching technology developed in this project, more advanced tunable or
reconfigurable mmW-THz circuits and components required in the next generation
sensing, imaging and communication systems can be
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.