* 2223678
* EFRI ELiS: Living Microbial Sensors for Real-Time Monitoring of Pathogens in Wastewater
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Jonathan Silberg, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID. It can be detected in wastewater. Its
detection can act as a signal to a community that the infection is spreading
locally. The goal of this project is to develop living sensors that can
continuously monitor wastewater for the presence of SARS-CoV-2. Living microbial
sensors are robust and low-cost. They can regenerate themselves and can be
engineered to detect a specific biomolecular target of interest. The modular
design can be easily repurposed to detect and monitor a variety of chemical and
biological targets in the environment. Training undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers will advance the development of a competitive
bioeconomy workforce. The project will also establish new K-12 outreach programs
in collaboration with Houston-area public schools. Enhancing current programs
that offer research opportunities to community college students and K-12
teachers is another objective. Engaging the public and relevant stakeholders to
address ethical, legal, and social implications of living microbial devices is
another important aspect of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and
deployment of living microbial sensors is the overall objective of this project.
These sensors will be based on engineered electroactive microorganisms.
Addressing broader societal challenges related to the potential adoption of
engineered microbial devices, including safety, legal, and regulatory concerns
is another important aspect of the project. Several fundamental science and
engineering challenges must be met to make such devices. Establishing methods
for engineering microbes that can directly detect large macromolecules, such as
the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is one. Developing scalable methods for processing
engineered microorganisms into functional biohybrid materials is another.
Designing compact and low power devices that can amplify electronic signals
delivered by the electroactive microbes is a third. Ultimately, evaluating the
stability and performance of these devices in different environmental settings,
including wastewater, will be critical to establishing the efficacy of these
devices The project team will also identify and conduct in-person semi-
structured interviews with vested stakeholders such as regulators, public health
experts, infectious disease specialists, and environmental advocates. The
interviews will identify major public concerns and regulation that could impede
implementing the proposed bioelectronic technology. Altogether, this work will
provide a solid foundation and analysis for understanding, developing, and
translating living microbial sensors as real-time and low-cost environmental
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities (EFMA) and the Department of Defense – Defense Threat Reduction
Agency (DTRA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.