* 2223413
* WORKSHOP PROPOSAL: GEO HEALTH: IMPACTS AND MITIGATION OF IMPACTS ON HUMAN HEALTH DUE TO A CHANGING NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Barbara Dutrow, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,575.00

Due to climate change and the worldâ€™s growing population, human health is
becoming increasing impacted by environmental changes. These include, but are
not limited to, extreme heat and cold snaps, flooding, wildfires, the northward
migration of tropical insect-borne diseases, the urban heat island effect, the
increasing occurrence of harmful algal blooms, and environmental degradation due
to release and/or burial of anthropogenically-generated pollutants originating
from waste, manufacturing, and mining. Many of the above phenomena, whether
related to climate change or the impact of people on the natural environment,
have imposed significant and serious impacts on human health. To identify
possible solutions, the Geological Society of America (GSA), a professional
society of over ten thousand members and many affiliated geoscience societies
will survey its constituents and collect input on where the geosciences are best
positioned to make fast progress in ameliorating environmental impacts on human
health. Results of their community survey will be summarized in a report that
will be made available to the public. Key outcomes will be the identification of
geoscience-related environmental processes that have the highest human-health
impacts and are primed for immediate resolution and/or intervention. Broader
Impacts of the activity will be to improve our understanding of and better
management of environmental impacts on human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Geological Society of America (GSA) will conduct a broad, inclusive, results-
driven survey of its constituents. Activities will include: feedback via a web-
based submission platform for GSA members, Divisions, and Associated Societies.
There will also be social media campaigns. In addition, GSA will also hold in-
person opportunities for direct contributions at its Section Meetings that have
a large percentage of student participants. The outreach efforts will focus on
broad outreach and ensure wide disciplinary participation reaching students,
early career professionals, and underrepresented groups, as well as experienced
professionals in the geosciences. Direct outreach to selected members of the
broader professional community will also be held, as will online brainstorming
sessions for targeted groups. The goal of the information collection exercise is
to gather ideas and research areas where geoscientists, communities, and medical
professionals can come together to accelerate our nation's ability to mitigate
and minimize the health impacts of changes in the environment due to climate and
anthropogenic activities. Results of the survey will be summarized in a report
and posted on the Geological Society of America website. An important component
of the final report will be the identification of targets that can be addressed
in a significant way within a 2 to 3-year timeframe. Information gathering will
include online survey vehicles, virtual gatherings, one-on-one discussions with
experts, and broad outreach across all fields of geoscience. An important aspect
of the survey effort will be engagement of early career scientists and members
of groups traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.