* 2223089
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing an Automated Outbound Packing System
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Peter DAmelio, GRIDIRON ROBOTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the fast and efficient loading of
parcels into shipping containers ranging from small delivery vans to maritime
shipping containers. This project will focus on demonstrating the feasibility of
an algorithmic approach and robotic development. The technology is a step
towards creating a fully autonomous system with expanded robotics capability to
further enhance the efficiency and speed of outbound shipping for customers.
Over 3,000 parcels are shipped every second. However, in the U.S., one out of
every four trucks is empty, two are less than 50% filled, and only one is filled
over 50% capacity. Initial projections indicate that the technology under
development could decrease trucking costs by 20%, reduce loading costs by
70-80%, and decrease loading time by 30%, all while meeting the demands of peak
shipping seasons. Overall, increasing the density of parcel shipping will reduce
greenhouse gas emissions (400 tons/per truck/per year), reduce traffic
congestion, and enable smaller businesses to compete with large organizations by
reducing their logistics and shipping operating
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will focus on advancing a bin packing algorithm to
minimize void space in outbound shipping containers. The 3-Dimentional Bin
Packing Problem (3D-BPP) is a classic Nonlinear Programming (NP)-hard problem
that has been studied for decades. To solve the problem, an effective and easy-
to-implement constrained, quantum accelerated, deep reinforcement learning model
is being developed. Monte Carlo Tree Search is an unsupervised, heuristic search
algorithm technique in which the learning agent learns to predict the expected
value of a variable occurring at the end of a sequence of states. Deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) extends this technique by allowing the learned
state-values to guide actions which subsequently change the environment state. A
proof-of-concept assessment showed that the learned strategy meaningfully
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Outcome success metrics for this
project are &gt;90% utilization rate, sub 24 hours of model training time, and
&gt;2500 parcels/hour for any given data set. This foundation will be expanded
by integrating many unique box sizes, exploring model performance in the face of
broader circumstances (e.g., lookahead and stacking parameters, General
Processing Unit (GPU) vs quantum training), and developing of a robotic gripper
to enact algorithmic output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.