* 2223935
* Silicate and Thermoelectric Dynamos in the early Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lars Stixrude, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2025
* USD 564,286.00

The magnetic field is an ancient feature of our planet, dating back to at least
3.5 billion year ago. This magnetic field would have shielded the early Earth,
allowing early life to flourish. Yet how the ancient field was produced is
unknown. The mechanism that we think is responsible for producing the field
today and for the last one billion years: a dynamo powered by freezing the
liquid outer core to form the growing solid inner core, could not have operated
because the core was too hot early on. But the core may not be the only metallic
region in the early Earth. The early Earth may have been hot enough to maintain
a deep molten portion of the rocky mantle: a basal magma ocean. Recent results
show that the electrical conductivity of the deep mantle, in molten form, is
much greater than previously thought. These findings highlight the need for a
much greater understanding of how molten rock becomes metallic at high pressure
and temperature, and the investigation of two hypotheses for the origin of the
ancient field: a silicate dynamo, hosted in the basal magma ocean, and a
thermoelectric dynamo produced by currents across the core-mantle boundary, in a
mechanism akin to the operation of a thermocouple. Research under this award
will test these hypotheses by predicting key material properties using first-
principles quantum-mechanical simulations. This research will enrich our
understanding of the early Earth and impact many fields of study, including the
dynamical and chemical evolution of the interior, as well as surface conditions
and the early evolution of life. The research will advance our understanding of
the fundamental physics governing electron transport at extreme conditions, and
help to guide the design of future experiments. The project will support the
training of a graduate student in advanced materials simulation and applications
to geophysics. &lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will subject two
hypotheses for the generation of the early magnetic field to fundamental tests
by predicting ab initio the electron transport properties of silicate liquids at
high pressure: a silicate dynamo, hosted in the basal magma ocean, and a
thermoelectric dynamo produced by currents across the core-mantle boundary. The
project will compute from first principles the key physical properties governing
the possible existence of silicate and thermoelectric dynamos in the Earth. The
focus is on the role of pressure, temperature, and composition on the values of
the electrical conductivity, the electronic contribution to the thermal
conductivity, and the Seebeck coefficient. The electrical conductivity is
important for understanding the possible existence and behavior of a silicate
dynamo hosted in the basal magma ocean. The thermal conductivity is important
for understanding thermal evolution and sets the adiabatic heat flux that must
be exceeded for the silicate dynamo to operate. The Seebeck coefficient is key
to the operation of a thermoelectric contribution to the dynamo. The
simulations, based on density functional theory and the Kubo-Greenwood theory of
electron transport, will provide fundamental insight into the physics governing
electron transport in liquids, and will make direct contact with experimental
measurements via the optical reflectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.