* 2223933
* RAPID: Data-driven Understanding of Imperfect Protection for Long-term COVID-19 Projections
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Ajitesh Srivastava, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,167.00

This project will use data on COVID-19 reinfections and vaccine breakthroughs to
build a model of how imperfect immunity affects SARS-CoV-2 pathogen transmission
dynamics and subsequent effects on numbers of cases, deaths, and
hospitalizations. A key factor dictating the long-term dynamics of COVID-19 is
how population immunity against COVID-19 changes over time and exposure. Data on
vaccination breakthroughs and reinfections in various states of the US and
countries around the world create a unique opportunity to study immunity waning
dynamics at the population level. The project will help understand the long-term
risks of resurgence and severity of COVID-19, contribute to the US COVID-19
Scenario Modeling Hub, the US COVID-19 Forecast Hub, and the European COVID-19
Forecast and Scenario Modeling Hubs, and thus inform policymakers worldwide. The
PI will integrate the lessons learned in an undergraduate on programming and a
graduate-level class on Machine Learning for health. The project will also
provide research and training opportunities through a senior capstone program
and a minority-serving program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model will represent a
class of imperfect protection in the presence of multiple variants. Popular
models such as all or nothing, leaky, and time-dependent waning will be
considered along with interpretable machine learning models. The models will be
validated by their “generalizability” on held-out data. The unified model of
immunity will be developed in a way that it can be integrated with various
epidemiological models. As a demonstration, it will be integrated with a model
that tracks various states an individual can be in, including all permutations
of infections, reinfections, one-dose, two-doses, and boosters. Having these
states over time, age groups, and variants, for a given model of imperfect
protection allows for precise computation of immunity in the population at a
given time. The overall approach will also be evaluated by the accuracy of US
state-level cases, deaths, and hospitalization forecasts it produces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in collaboration with the CDC to
support rapid-response research projects to further advance federal infectious
disease modeling capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.