* 2223987
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Data Driven Modeling and Analysis of Energy Conversion Systems -- Manifold Learning and Approximation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF CPS project aims to develop new techniques for modeling cyber-physical
systems that will address fundamental challenges associated with scale and
complexity in modern engineering. The project will transform human interaction
with complex cyber-physical and engineered systems, including critical
infrastructure such as interconnected energy networks. This will be achieved
through a novel combination of data-driven techniques and physics-based
approaches to give mathematical and computational models that are at once
abstract enough to be understood by humans making key engineering decisions and
precise enough to make quantitative predictions. The intellectual merits of the
project include a novel confluence of emerging data science and model-analysis
methods, including manifold learning and information geometry. The broader
impacts of the project include the training of undergraduates, including those
from underrepresented communities, several outreach activities, and publicly
available open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering requirements
often make incompatible demands on models. Detailed models make highly accurate
predictions, but coarse models are easier to interpret. This project will
develop techniques to overcome this inherent contradiction. On the one hand,
data science and machine learning techniques allow us to efficiently construct
black box predictive models with limited generalizability. At the same time,
recent advances in information geometry have produced model reduction methods
that systematically derive simple, interpretable models from physical first
principles that summarize relevant mechanisms needed for model transferability.
Combining these technologies will enable useful mappings between “physically
explainable” reduced models and quantitative data. These data-driven tools will
enable “the best of both worlds” – physically interpretable models that make
quantitative predictions. We will combine a meaningful, qualitatively correct
but quantitatively inaccurate reduced model with a data-driven transformation.
The project team brings together domain-specific expertise in physical modeling,
energy systems, and data-driven learning. We will apply this approach to address
key operational challenges in interconnected energy networks. The enabling
technology will apply to modeling any complex cyber-physical
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.