* 2223203
* RAPID survey of the bathymetry of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai caldera
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 136,482.00

RAPID Survey of the Bathymetry of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Haʻapai
Caldera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano in the Kingdom of
Tonga in the SW Pacific Ocean north of New Zealand erupted very violently on
January 14, 2022, sending an ash cloud ~44 km into the air and causing a tsunami
up to 15 m high. The violent nature of the eruption makes it likely that the
vent was very shallow, near the summit of the submarine volcano. The effects of
the eruption on the seafloor are poorly understood and will be investigated in
this joint US-New Zealand seagoing program. The expedition will use a small ship
equipped with modern seafloor mapping equipment to map the changes the eruption
made near the top of the submarine volcano at its summit. A short (~5 min.)
video explaining the operations and scientific activities on the expedition will
be produced and disseminated to the public on
YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano in the Kingdom
of Tonga in the SW Pacific Ocean north of New Zealand erupted very violently on
January 14, 2022, sending an ash cloud ~44 km into the air and causing a tsunami
up to 15 m high. The violent nature of the eruption makes it likely that the
vent was very shallow, from a submarine caldera near the summit of the volcano.
The effects of the eruption on the seafloor are poorly understood and will be
investigated in this joint US-New Zealand seagoing program. A 28 m-long,
shallow-draft New Zealand research vessel (R/V Kaharoa) equipped with modern
seafloor mapping equipment will map the seafloor to determine changes caused by
the eruption at the summit and flanks of the submarine volcano. The expedition
will also make other geophysical measurements: 1) a towed magnetometer will
measure the magnetic signature of the caldera; 2) a shipboard gravimeter will
measure the gravity anomaly over the caldera; and 3) a Digital Optical
Absorption Spectrometer Scanner will determine gas compositions in the survey
area over the caldera. In addition, if it is deemed safe to do so, a shore team
will collect ash and rock samples from one of the remaining islands. This work
will benefit the scientific community, hazards specialists, the Kingdom of
Tonga, and the general public. A short (~5 min.) video explaining the operations
and scientific activities on the expedition will be produced and disseminated to
the public on YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.