* 2223447
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Atomically Dispersed Metal-Site Air Cathodes via Electrospinning at Multi-Scales for Low-Temperature Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ling Fei, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 239,087.00

Hydrogen proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are vital for future
vehicle electrification, particularly in heavy-duty and long-range
transportation applications, due to their high-energy density and high
efficiency. However, the expensive and scarce platinum catalysts hinder the
widespread applications of PEMFCs and should be replaced by earth-abundant
elements. Atomically dispersed and nitrogen coordinated transition metal sites
(e.g., iron, cobalt, and manganese) embedded in carbon have emerged as promising
low-cost air cathodes in PEMFCs. One technical barrier concerning the catalystâ€™s
use is that their intrinsic activity is difficult to transfer in the membrane
electrode assemblies in actual hydrogen fuel cells because of insufficient
stability, low catalyst utilization, severe carbon corrosion, and inferior mass
transport. This project's outcomes will advance the knowledge of designing
sustainable and earth-abundant catalysts and their integration into high-
performance electrodes for hydrogen fuel cells and other electrochemical energy
technologies. Such inexpensive and clean energy technologies directly benefit
transportation electrification and grid-scale renewable energy storage and
conversion, which are essential for energy and environmental sustainability. The
joint project also provides excellent opportunities for education and outreach
activities associated with hydrogen energy science and technologies for under-
representative students in southern Louisiana and western New York.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative project aims to incorporate highly
active single metal site catalysts into fibrous electrodes via electrospinning
approaches to establish favorable and robust three-phase interfaces for
efficient air cathodes. The electrospinning technique could also construct
effective nanofiber-based morphology and ensure sufficient meso- and macro-
porosities in catalytic layers for efficient mass/charge transports and critical
proton conductivity, leading to significant performance and durability
improvements. The ligand coordination environments and local carbon structures
of atomically dispersed active metal sites will be regulated through controlling
catalyst precursors and electrospinning polymers. Innovative strategies will be
developed to construct fibrous electrode architecture with balanced porosities
and morphologies for favorable mass/charge transport, uniform ionomer
dispersion, maximized catalyst utilization, and improved stability. The
fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from this project include the
rational design of catalyst precursors in boosting intrinsic activity and site
density based on innovative metal-organic frameworks, the correlations between
chemistry and structures of polymer fibers and the derived carbon nanostructure
and morphologies, and the precise control of the pore structures and geometry of
the derived carbon nanofibers within the three-dimensional air
cathodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.