* 2223283
* Student Support: 2022 Solid State Studies in Ceramics Gordon Research Conference: Coupled Phenomena in Ceramics Across Length Scales; South Hadley, Massachusetts; 7-12 August 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Ivar Reimanis, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 10/31/2022
* USD 10,350.00

This grant will support the registration fee costs for graduate students to
attend the 2022 Solid State Studies in Ceramics Gordon Research Conference,
subtitled Coupled Phenomena in Ceramics Across Length Scales. The subtitle
reflects basic science topics that capture the key challenges in ceramics,
including in particular the advancement of manufacturing for the next generation
of engineering materials, with applications in a wide variety of sectors from
energy, aerospace, automotive and microelectronics. The conference will be held
August 7 - 12, 2022 at Mt. Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA. The purpose of the
conference is to bring world experts together to discuss the forefront of
ceramics research to advance research and engineering in the United States and
to expose graduate students and early career professionals to the latest
findings in the science of ceramics so that they may become the leaders of
tomorrow. The funding is meant to encourage graduate students, particularly
those from underrepresented groups, to participate to enhance their engineering
and science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the most interesting and
technologically relevant properties of ceramics derive from coupled phenomena
(mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, optical) that originate at
the atomistic and nanometer length scales, but manifest across all scales. The
complex behavior of ceramics under extreme conditions and/or away from
equilibrium leads, on the one hand, to challenges in deciphering behavioral
mechanisms, and on the other, to opportunities to create ceramics with
unprecedented properties. Advanced manufacturing depends on these types of
scientific advances. A wide variety of experimental and theoretical tools have
recently emerged to reveal multiphysical, multiscale mechanisms that govern
material behavior during processing and service. These specifically include the
emergence of data driven atomistic and mesocontinuum computational modeling
approaches, novel in situ experiments, and measurements under extreme
conditions. Advanced manufacturing is a critical part of the future of ceramics
and will be embedded in sessions for the entire conference. Sessions that will
explicitly address advanced manufacturing include Achieving Exceptional
Responses in Structural Ceramics and Processing of Complex Structures. The
conference is designed to advance the field of ceramics by bringing together
experts across various disciplines to discuss the latest discoveries and
advancements and define where the field will go.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.