* 2223528
* The Roles of Mitochondrial Behavior and Morphology in Animal Performance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Wendy Hood, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 950,000.00

Mitochondria are components of cells that produce energy in the form of the
chemical ATP and perform numerous other core cellular processes. This project
investigates how the shape and connectedness of mitochondria affect energy
production at the cellular and whole-organism levels. ATP fuels nearly all
physiological processes that occur in the body, shaping the energy utilization
strategy and pace of life for each species. Mitochondria alter their shape
(morphology) and move within the cell to interact with one another, a process
referred to as mitochondrial behavior which appears to affect ATP production.
The following hypotheses are being tested: 1) Changes in mitochondrial
morphology and behavior increase ATP production, and 2) Mitochondrial behavior
and morphology play key roles in the performance of animals, as indicated by how
they respond to low food availability, reproduction, and aging. These ideas will
be tested in two distantly related species, a copepod (a species of zooplankton
found in tide pools) and the house mouse. In addition, research on mitochondria
will be used as a platform for science education and the improvement of science
literacy in Alabama. In collaboration with local biology teachers, an
integrative and inspiring laboratory for high school students will be created.
Teachers in East Alabama will be trained in the application of this laboratory.
Once completed, the laboratory will be submitted to the Alabama State Board of
Education for review. If approved, it will be available for use in every high
school biology classroom in Alabama. The project also involves training and
mentoring of graduate students, and a collaboration with a rural nature center
to provide outdoors, hands-on experience with invertebrate biodiversity to more
than 600 local participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms convert chemical
energy into ATP to support essential processes including growth, self-
maintenance, and reproduction. Mitochondria synthesize the majority of ATP that
fuels energetically demanding processes in the body through oxidative
phosphorylation. Mitochondria alter their shape, i.e., mitochondrial morphology,
and move within the cell and interact with one another, a process termed
mitochondrial behavior. Modifications to mitochondrial morphology and behavior
affect the process of ATP synthesis. Biomedical research has shown that abnormal
mitochondrial behavior and morphology can lead to disease. However, while
mitochondrial behavior and morphology are altered under extreme conditions
(e.g., parasitism, starvation), limited data exist that investigate how these
key changes impact typical energetically demanding animal behaviors and life
history strategies. The following overarching hypotheses are being tested in two
distantly related species, the aquatic copepod Tigriopus californicus and the
terrestrial house mouse Mus musculus: 1) Increased expression of inner
mitochondrial membrane and inter-mitochondrial junctions improve the performance
of the electron transport system, and 2) Mitochondrial behavior and morphology
play key roles in the performance of animals, as indicated by how they respond
to low food availability, reproduction, and aging. This project utilizes an
integrative approach by linking cellular processes to whole-animal performance
traits and by incorporating a wide array of research tools, including
transmission electron microscopy, whole-organism and mitochondrial respiration
assays, cell perforation, mitochondrial protein analysis, and direct
manipulations of mitochondrial function and structure, including the alteration
of electrochemical gradients within the electron transport
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the BIO-IOS-
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.