* 2223689
* Nanomanufacturing of Hybrid Nanocarriers and Understanding their Physicochemical Properties for Targeted Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Donald Sakaguchi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2025
* USD 649,999.00

Therapeutic nanocarriers have transformed the landscape of multiple diseases by
enabling site-specific drug delivery. The localization of nanocarriers in
biological cells is controlled by their physical and biochemical properties. The
goal of this award is to design and manufacture hybrid liposomal nanocarriers,
simultaneously tuning their mechanical and molecular properties to achieve high
cellular uptake. This project demonstrates this goal in a brain model since
nanocarrier transport through the blood brain barrier remains a critical
challenge. Further, this work examines spatiotemporally controlled drug release
from these nanocarriers using light to enable safe and targeted therapeutics.
The research establishes mechanisms that show drug transport is controlled by
novel physicochemical properties allowing the tailoring of a new class of
nanocarriers targeted to study biological interactions. This class of
nanocarriers advances drug delivery in difficult to treat disorders of the
brain. The principles learnt can also be extended to achieve therapeutic
response in other diseases, thus meeting national healthcare needs. This project
seamlessly integrates research with education to transition this work through
‘lab-bench-to-classroom’ activities and by dissemination of ‘Fun with Color
Capsules’ kits to K-12 students targeting underprivileged youths. By leveraging
established and effective outreach programs, this work enables training of
undergraduate and graduate students for the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physicochemical behavior of therapeutic
liposomal nanocarriers drives their interaction with biological interfaces and
controls endocytosis in cells. Yet which properties should be tuned to enable
efficient nanocarrier transport through biological barriers remains paradoxical.
Therefore, approaches that leverage unexplored properties of nanocarriers are
imperative to enable a paradigm shift in spatiotemporally controlled drug
delivery. The goal of this project is to design and manufacture unconventional
nanocarriers via bottom-up, directed self-assembly approaches. The research
involves fabricating hybrid liposomal nanocarriers (LNCs) that synergize the
properties of soft (liposome) core and hard (gold) shell nanoparticles in a
single manufacturing platform enabling tunability of the elastic modulus and
surface ligands. The research hypothesis is that these properties are mutually
dependent, and when simultaneously tuned, achieve cell- and phenotype-specific
targeting and therapeutic function demonstrated in an in vitro blood brain
barrier (BBB) model. Further, LNCs are functionalized with antibody fragments
that specifically target cells in the BBB. Another aim is to track LNCs in both
cells and neurospheroids and pursue combinatorial optimization of the ligand
density with elastic modulus to determine the stiffness-ligand regime that
impacts cell-specific targeting. Finally, the project aims to demonstrate that
these properties of LNCs enable effective photothermally actuated drug transport
across the BBB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.