* 2223669
* ENG-EPSRC EFRI ELiS: Developing probiotic interventions to reduce the emergence and persistence of pathogens in built environments
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,486,453.00

The risk of infection in built environments (BE) is unavoidable. Inhabitants
carry infection agents in their lungs and sinuses, and on their skin. They can
also acquire infectious agents through contact with contaminated surfaces. Dry,
nutrient poor healthcare environments are model systems to understand how
virulence and drug resistance emerges and persists on surfaces. Bacillus spore
containing cleaning products have been shown to reduce Multi-Drug Resistant
Organism (MDRO) abundance on hard surfaces by 50-89% when compared to
traditional cleaning products. Preliminary data suggests that Bacillus can
competitively exclude MDROs on surfaces. This requires continual reapplication
of active Bacillus, which is not feasible in many settings. Therefore, it is
proposed to engineer new Bacillus species that promote long-term viability and
reduce abundance of MDROs. These will be integrated into new surface materials.
Finally, ethical oversight studies with building participants will be performed.
The team will attempt to understand how deployment of Bacillus-active materials
can be used improve civic responsibility for these innovations as well as define
the parameters for their use. This project will also promote equitable
recruitment and transdisciplinary training opportunities for underrepresented
minorities and broad approaches to disseminate results to national
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to engineer
Bacillus strains for survival and pathogen exclusion and deploy them onto or
into porous building materials. The PI and Co-PIs will engineer Bacillus strains
that exhibit survival and pathogen exclusion traits when integrated into porous
building materials. Efficacy will be quantified by competitive exclusion of
MDROs and long-term viability. Deploying an iterative process of (i) biochemical
modeling of Bacillus-pathogen competition on different surface materials, (ii)
genetic manipulation of the B. subtilis strains to improve activity and
persistence, and (iii) integration of strains into composite materials will help
to develop optimal strain constructions. To quantify perceived human and
environmental health impacts from material deployment, building inhabitants will
be surveyed to understand perceptions of civic responsibility for these
innovations and social barriers to adoption. The proposed work will have broad
impact. The team will promote the equitable recruitment and mentorship of
trainees underrepresented in Engineering. Graduate industry internships will be
provided in molecular engineering through two internships with Novozymes and
Clorox who are actively pursuing probiotic cleaning product development. An
independent research group will perform formative and summative assessment of
the program elements. Finally, collaboration with ASHRAE will facilitate
dissemination of the results of these investigations broadly within the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.