* 2223843
* RAPID: Statistical inference of incidence of SARS-CoV-2 in the US using multiple data streams to identify levels of immunity and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Derek Cummings, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this study is to integrate multiple, independent data sources to
estimate the rate of SARS-CoV-2 infections across the US over time. Population-
based SARS-CoV-2 serological assays are critical for understanding cumulative
incidence and population-level immunity. The US CDC, in partnership with a
number of laboratories, has conducted nationwide serosurveys which can help
retrospectively assess the cumulative number of total infections. However, data
from these surveys may be difficult to interpret due to heterogeneity in
antibody response across individuals, by assay, and over time since infection.
Reconciling patterns observed in seroprevalence with other data sources
including reported COVID-19 cases and deaths can explain variation in
seroprevalence across space and time in the US CDC. In addition, the project
will estimate the proportion of the population with recent immunizing events
(infection or vaccination) to understand the immunity landscape prior to the
Omicron-variant-driven wave in 2021-2022 in the US. The project will develop
tools to jointly analyze serology, case&lt;br/&gt;and death data, and contribute
to the training of a post-doctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective in this study is to integrate multiple independent data streams using
statistical and mechanistic models to estimate the rate of seroreversion in
assays used in serosurveys across the US, and estimate seroprevalence and
cumulative incidence over time by state. The model will provide information
about SARS-CoV-2 transmission from case, hospitalization and death data by
taking a multi-objective approach and adapting fast inference techniques that we
have developed. Methods such as these have been applied to state-
level&lt;br/&gt;data on COVID-19 incidence, including by this group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in collaboration with the CDC to
support rapid-response research projects to further advance federal infectious
disease modeling capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.