* 2223497
* ISS: The Effects of Age on the Mechanochemical Feedback Loop for Extracellular Matrix Production by Fibroblasts in the Context of Wound Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Lauren Black, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the impact of ageing on the healing
process. As people age, they heal less efficiently in response to inflammation
and injury. There is evidence that changes within fibroblasts, the cells
responsible for production of extracellular matrix, play a significant role in
alterations to healing response. In this project, a team from Tufts University
will assess the impact of cellular age and the age of the extracellular matrix
on models of wound healing. The unique environment aboard the International
Space Station (ISS) will be leveraged to simulate processes associated with
ageing. The outcomes of this project will serve the national interest by
training the next generation of scientists, encouraging students at the middle
and high school levels to pursue careers in research, and by advancing health
via a more fundamental understanding of wound healing with
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to explore how changes associated
with ageing of the extracellular matrix and fibroblasts, and their interaction,
influence tissue dysfunction and impaired healing with age and exposure to
microgravity. While previous work has assessed the effects of microgravity on
fibroblasts and wound healing, there has been no attempt to evaluate this impact
in the context of developmental age, even though healing effectiveness varies
significantly with age. Two specific research objectives are pursued. First, the
investigators will determine the effects of microgravity on fibroblast phenotype
as a function of tissue type and developmental age. Second, the impacts of
simulated aging via microgravity exposure aboard the ISS on wound healing
response in ontogenetic mimics of tissue stroma will be investigated. A novel
silk-extracellular matrix hydrogel system will be deployed to decouple cellular
and extracellular contributions to this process for the first time. These
studies will elucidate the mechanisms of altered wound healing associated with
microgravity and inform our understanding of how ageing impacts these same
phenomena on Earth. This knowledge could lead to new treatments to promote
better wound healing and restore tissue function throughout the
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.