* 2223318
* Astrocyte Mechanobiology Following Central Nervous System Injury Revealed By Magnetically Active Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Peter Galie, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,234.00

This award will support work to improve our understanding of the mechanisms
underlying scar formation in glial cells. Injury to the central nervous system
often results in life-long disability. Patients with spinal cord injury or
traumatic brain injury may suffer severe loss of function. Like other regions in
the body, the mechanical stiffness of central nervous tissue changes after an
injury. This affects both the neurons that transmit signals as well as
supporting cell types in the brain and spinal cord, which are called glial
cells. One type of glial cell, called an astrocyte, contributes to the formation
of a glial scar. The scar inhibits the regeneration of neurons needed for
functional recovery following an injury. Currently, the effects of the
dynamically changing stiffness of the tissue on the function of the astrocytes
is unknown. The work done with this grant will alter the stiffness of
astrocytes’ surroundings using magnetism to understand how the cells contribute
to glial scar formation. Eventually, these results can lead to new treatments
for restoring function following spinal cord injury. Additionally, the research
will be supplemented with an early childhood education program called “Science
and Movement” that will introduce children to the ways in which scientists and
engineers use magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetically active hydrogels
provide a new means to interrogate time and spatial varying mechanical
properties in three-dimensional microenvironments. The changes are fast and
reversible, and studies indicate that cells respond to the altered mechanical
properties rapidly (within seconds). The experiments will characterize the
dynamic changes to the mechanical properties of the spinal cord following
contusion injury using an ex vivo slice model, and then use magnetically active
hydrogels to mimic these changes in vitro to interrogate astrocyte
mechanobiology. Experiments will focus on the transcriptomic changes of the
astrocytes in order to better understand the mechanisms underlying the formation
of a glial scar. These studies will involve both temporal and spatial gradients
of viscoelastic mechanics, informed by the results of the mechanical testing of
the ex vivo spinal cord injury model. Overall, this work will improve our
understanding of astrocyte mechanobiology and potentially lead to new treatments
to repair spinal cord injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.