* 2223598
* Travel: NSF Student Participation Grant for 2022 IEEE International Conference on Green and Sustainable Computing (IEEE IGSC)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Arman Roohi, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal is for support participation in the live virtual 2022
International Green and Sustainable Computing Conference. IGSC has established
itself as the premier conference in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will make researchers and students aware of the study and practice of
using computing resources efficiently, which in turn can impact a spectrum of
economic, ecological, and social objectives. Plans are to support up to 25 -30
participation grants to students who may otherwise not be able to attend IGSC
and take advantage of the available learning and networking opportunities in the
newly evolving research area of green computing. The grant recipients will be
expected to participate in IGSC PhD Forum and to report their learning
experiences once the conference is over.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The papers in IGCC
deal with power, energy, and temperature related research topics particularly in
parallel and distributed computers. These papers would be of interest to
researchers, graduate students, engineers, and practitioners. The conference
aims to publish only high-quality papers and emerges as a leading academic
conference with significant industrial participation. The rigorous review
process ensures that only quality papers are accepted. The program committee
comprises of leading researchers and leaders from academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.