* 2223456
* I-Corps:  Non-invasive, multimode, hand-held technology for wound assessment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Kouhyar Tavakolian, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a multimodal optical imaging system that quantitatively measures
tissue biomarkers to characterize healing in diabetic wounds. Diabetic wounds in
the US affect more than eight million patients annually with an estimated
economic burden of around $30 billion. There is an unmet need for comprehensive
imaging tools that can non-invasively measure multiple biomarkers, elucidate
underlying tissue changes in diabetic wounds, and provide anatomical and
functional information for individualized therapy. In addition, there is a need
for objective wound assessment tools to furnish clinicians and caregivers with
fast and quantitative methods of determining wound healing/nonhealing status.
The proposed device has the potential to assess the risk of developing ulcers
and to grade the status of an ulcer as well as to quantify several biomarkers to
help guide treatment. Additionally, this technology may be applied to not only
diabetic foot ulcers but also burn wounds, surgical wounds, pressure ulcers, and
even amputation sites. The benefit may impact wound clinics, home health
institutions, and long-term care facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a non-invasive, multimodal, hand-held
technology that combines thermal, reflectance, and fluorescence imaging to
provide in vivo evaluation of tissue metabolic state, tissue oxygenation,
vasculature, and temperature indices. The proposed technology may be used to
provide treatment plans that can be adjusted and documented in a patientâ€™s
electronic medical record to inform decision-making. Monitoring of biomarkers
may give clinicians early indication of complications during wound healing,
leading to clearer and more effective interventions or changes in the wound care
regime. There have been technological advances within the field of wound care.
However, most monitoring technologies focus on a single biomarker. The proposed
technology aims to fill in the gaps by combining the measurements of several
biomarkers to give a more complete assessment of a wound. The combination of
biomarkers plus recent advances in LED and camera technology have allowed for a
multi-modal device to now be possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.