* 2223217
* CAS:  Probing Nucleation and Growth Dynamics of Lithium Dendrites in Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fudong Han, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,470.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-ion batteries power much of our daily
lives from portable electronics, power tools, to medical devices, but their
adoption in more strategically important applications such as transportation
electrification and grid storage is slower due to concerns raised over their
safety, reliability, and energy density. Integrating nonflammable inorganic
solid electrolytes with high-capacity Li metal anodes to make solid-state
lithium metal batteries are considered a promising approach to significantly
improve the safety and energy density of existing batteries. However, metallic
lithium dendrites tend to form in a variety of solid electrolytes during
charging, causing short-circuit risk, by mechanisms that remain elusive. In this
project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the NSFâ€™s
Division of Materials Research, Prof. Fudong Han and his research group at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will study the underlying causes of dendrite
formation in solid electrolytes by probing the nucleation and growth of
dendrites during battery operation. The project not only provides critical
scientific knowledge to develop advanced solid electrolytes for maintaining and
advancing US battery technology leadership, but also supports STEM education and
workforce development in the energy storage field. The research involves the
utilization of advanced neutron scattering techniques at national facilities,
and developments in cell design, real-time measurement, and data analysis for
the technique also enhance national infrastructure development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program of the Division of Materials Research,
this hypothesis-driven research seeks to probe nucleation and growth dynamics of
Li dendrites in inorganic solid electrolytes. Combining state-of-the-art ceramic
synthesis, operando neutron scattering measurement, and advanced data modeling
and analysis, this project aims to reveal the nucleation and growth pathways,
competitions between growth and dissolution, and temperature-dependent shape
evolutions of dendrites formed in solid electrolytes. The research provides
unprecedented insights in understanding how the dendrites observed from the
conventional macroscopic techniques are formed at the very early stage for
development of dendrite-resistant solid electrolytes. The development of in-situ
small-angle neutron scattering to probe the formation of alien species in a
dense ceramic enables further electrochemical materials research where
microstructure variations occur at the macroscopic scale. In addition to
advancing the fundamental materials chemistry, the multi-disciplinary research
also provides ample educational and outreach opportunities for students at
different levels, including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.