* 2223975
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Material Culture as a Reflection of Cultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Genevieve Woodhead, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 26,942.00

When people move to a new area, they form new relationships that are reflected
in the objects they make. These relationships may differ depending on whether
one is a local or newcomer. Understanding how and why people change the way they
do things is important because rapid and largescale migrations are currently
occurring across the globe. Archaeology supports the study of the role of
material things in local-newcomer interactions. This research will shed light on
interaction by looking at material changes in migrant, local, and resultant
multicultural communities. The study asks, “How do local residents and new
arrivals change or maintain their practices in a new living situation?” It is
worthwhile to know how different groups of people react to a move or relocation
because what people do and make defines their identity and affects their
opportunities for new relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
specifically concerns potting communities and the relationships that form among
potters following a move. When potters move with their community, they may work
separately from the potters they encounter in their new residence. They may
adopt certain local design styles. Or they may begin working with local potters,
sharing and merging practices. This archaeological research looks at potters
living and working in such a community. Researchers will identify communities of
potters based on evidence of those potting practices that are most conservative,
most closely tied to the learning environment, and least visible in the finished
ceramic product. While potters can copy a painted design by looking at a pot,
they learn face-to-face how to form a pot, mix a clay recipe, or fire a batch of
vessels. Copying suggests indirect, symbolic interaction, whereas working and
learning together is more intimate. Data collection methods include the study of
painted decorative designs as well as petrography and X-radiography. The
research will use these data to reconstruct production processes and determine
whether newcomers and locals worked separately or together. This research relies
on and will properly credit descendant scholarship, including published works,
artists’ statements, and interviews. The co-PI will hire and train a student
from an underrepresented minority group. The PIs will share the results with
Tribal Historic Preservation Offices and the public. The project will culminate
with a workshop geared toward community members—a productive way to disseminate
results and build bridges across disciplines and with descendant
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.