* 2223581
* I-Corps:  Solar Desalination of Oilfield Produced Water with Nanostructured Gel Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Hadi Nasrabadi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology for the desalination of produced water from the energy
industry. The energy industry is currently facing increasing environmental and
economic pressure with regard to the production of wastewater from its wells.
This produced water has a very high total dissolved solids (TDS) concentration,
reaching salinities up to ten times that of typical sea water. The U.S. oil and
gas industry produces a billion barrels of water annually. The vast majority
(more than 90%) of this water is re-injected in geological formations for
disposal or enhanced oil recovery. While re-injection is the cheapest disposal
method at this time, there are concerns about forming pressure spikes in the
drilled neighboring wells and induced seismic activity. In several parts of the
U.S. (e.g., California, Texas and New Mexico), oil and gas production regions
are located near water-stressed regions. The desalination and use of produced
water as a potential source of potable water may provide additional water to
these regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology to modify solar evaporation ponds, an existing method
for the disposal of produced water for some oil and gas producers. The proposed
technology uses two major modifications to these solar still/evaporation ponds:
1) placing hierarchical nanostructured hydrogel materials on top of the feed
water to increase the rate of evaporation, and 2) adding a superhydrophobic
coating to the glass at the top of the solar still to enhance the rate of
droplet departure on the glass surface and move condensed water out of the way
from incoming radiation. The proposed approach will use fully passive
desalination technology without any moving parts. The low capital and operating
costs associated with this approach make it more reliable and economically
feasible for small-scale plants at oil and gas well sites, which are often
located far away from substantial infrastructure. In addition, the proposed
design may ensure zero liquid discharge to eliminate the problem of treating the
ultra-high saline water that is typically produced at the end of the
desalination process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.