* 2223751
* I-Corps:  Biodegradable trimmings and embellishments for the apparel industry
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jessica Ciarla, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sustainable and customizable trimmings for the apparel industry
that are biodegradable to reduce the negative environmental effects in
landfills. Currently, the creation of trimmings and embellishments such as
buttons and sequins for the fashion industry is done using petroleum-based
plastics. These embellishments are not biodegradable, making up for a sizable
portion of the 14 million tons of waste produced annually by the apparel
industry. The proposed technology uses plant-based plastics and small order
minimums to partner with designers that are looking for customizable and
biodegradable alternatives. Plant-based plastics are expected to degrade
naturally in the environment once placed in the landfill at a minimal
environmental cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of biodegradable and industrially compostable trimmings and
embellishments for the apparel industry. The proposed trimmings will be made
from sustainable plant-based biodegradable polymer with a variety of fashion
features such as brightness, texture, and shape. In addition, using computer
numerical control (CNC) technology such as computer-aided design, laser cutting,
and 3D printing, these products may be created with minimal waste without
sacrificing quality. Also, the proposed technology will make use of natural
pigments such as hemp, coffee, and algae, which may contribute to
sustainability. Unlike trimmings and embellishments made from petroleum-based
plastics, these products are expected to cause little harm to the environment
when eventually discarded. While chemical dyes commonly found in plastic
trimmings and embellishments have been found to be harmful to the environment,
the proposed natural pigments are not expected to cause damage during the
biodegradation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.