* 2223507
* CAREER:A Computational Approach to the Study of Behavior and Social Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Ifeoma Nwogu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2024
* USD 379,901.00

Face-to-face meetings of groups of people with shared interests or beliefs are
still one of the most effective ways to capture the attention of participants,
engage them in conversation, and drive productive collaborations. Such meetings
could include review panels, academic study groups, classrooms, or board
meetings. The ability to understand, manage and react to the social processes
occurring within such a group is a core aspect of social intelligence, which is
important for collaboration in many contexts. This project is aimed at
developing an integrated computational framework useful for analyzing the
behaviors of individuals in a group; evaluating the interactions occurring
within the group; and measuring any collective behaviors that might emerge from
the group. This will be accomplished by exploring novel machine learning
techniques to understand human behavior in face-to-face meetings. Outcomes of
the study will advance understanding of collaboration and interactions in areas
such as personalized health and STEM teaching and learning. The investigator
will involve students and faculty who will be trained in the use of
computational methods for teaching and learning, as well as cross-cultural
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will apply social dynamics
and computational methods to expand understanding of social interactions in
face-to-face engagement using a level of analysis that reveals subtle signaling,
personality, affect, and individual and collective influence. Testbeds will be
developed from video data of students learning in a summer research program and
new data sets will be developed based on faculty learning groups and students
participating in a learning group at a University abroad. The first step will
involve codifying individual behaviors and creating a model to generate data
clusters representing prototypical behaviors in group meetings. Facial action
units will serve as inputs into the model. The next step will explore
interactivity of codified clusters representing individuals. Coupled recurrent
networks will be used to understand interaction and influence by linking chains
of sequenced data and applying recurrent neural networks. This variant of
recurrent neural networks will be validated using artificially generated data
sets. A third step will explore macro-emotions in groups by mapping individual
behavior and personality types to influences on collective group emotion.
Observations and features from an existing data set comprising galvanic skin
response, facial expression, action units and gestures will be used. Methods to
fuse these multimodal inputs will be explored and will consist of early fusion
techniques (clustering) and later fusion techniques (regressors and
classifiers). The testbeds for this research are diverse, including individuals
with sensory disabilities and underrepresented minority groups. Methods emerging
from the research could be used to assess learning and collaboration in
classroom settings, meetings requiring strategic decision making, and study
groups. Students participating in the research will gain important computational
skills and knowledge requiring an integration of psychology and sociology.
Students will also have an opportunity to participate in collaboration
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.