* 2223075
* Collaborative Research: Three decades of foraminiferal assemblages in the Santa Barbara Basin provide a link between present and past
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Claudia Benitez-Nelson, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 280,509.00

Modern day releases of the greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere
are the highest observed over the last 30 million years. This has resulted in
major changes in the ocean. This work focuses on using a group of shell-forming
organisms, planktic foraminifera. The carbonate shells of foraminifera are found
in seafloor sediments. They provide a history of the environment in which they
grew. The goal of this project is to use the shells of foraminifera to better
understand how quickly and why the abundances of different foraminifera species
change in response to climate. A thirty-year record of planktic foraminifera
abundances will be created from stored samples collected from the Santa Barbara
Basin, California. The results will be connected to modern day oceanographic
measurements and the foraminifera found in older seafloor sediments. This will
allow a better understanding of how climate change has impacted the ocean
environment over very long time periods and allow future predictions. This
project will provide hands on research training for students. Classroom
activities will be developed that promote quantitative and data visualization
skills with a real-world dataset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foraminifera have
species-specific environmental preferences that influence their assemblages in
the water column and in marine sediments. Moreover, the geochemistry of
foraminiferal shells has become the foundation for widely used paleoceanographic
proxies. However, interpretation of the fossil foraminiferal record must be
fundamentally grounded in foraminiferal ecology. For example, use of geochemical
proxies relies on the assumption of negligible change in seasonality or habitat
through time, with violations potentially responsible for key errors in the
paleoceanographic record. In addition to assessing rates and drivers of
foraminiferal faunal change, this research would fulfill goals including: 1)
testing how changing seasonality influences interpretations of foraminiferal-
based proxy records, 2) evaluating whether sediment trap faunas are
representative of underlying sediment, and 3) integrating 21st century
foraminiferal faunal change with the geological record. Assemblages from
biweekly sediment traps and near-annually resolved samples from a sediment core
will be generated to accomplish these goals. Santa Barbara Basin was chosen
because it has an archive of sediment trap material, extensive overlapping
observational measurements, a well-preserved fossil record, and experiences
climatic oscillations at timescales from seasonal to anthropogenic and longer.
Quantitative assemblages will be supported by stable isotope and trace elemental
analyses of a subset of shells to test interpretations of geochemical proxy
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.