* 2223844
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Enabling Autonomous, Persistent, and Adaptive Mobile Observational Networks Through Energy-Aware Dynamic Coverage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ruoying He, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2025
* USD 849,178.00

This research will create and validate new approaches for optimally managing
mobile observational networks consisting of a renewably powered “host” agent and
“satellite” agents that are deployed from and recharged by the host. Such
networks can enable autonomous, long-term measurements for meteorological,
climate change, reconnaissance, and surveillance applications, which are of
significant national interest. While the hardware exists for such networks, the
vast majority of existing mission planning and control approaches treat energy
as a finite resource and focus on finite-duration missions. This research will
represent a paradigm shift, wherein the energy resource available to the network
is renewable, but the instantaneously available power is limited. This demands
strategies that continuously trade off energy harvesting and scientific
information gathering. This research will establish a comprehensive framework
for managing the aforementioned tradeoffs, with both simulation-based and
experimental demonstrations. The specific observational framework considered in
this work will involve a fleet of solar-powered autonomous surface vessels,
unoccupied aerial vehicles, and undersea gliders to for characterizing
atmospheric and oceanic interactions between the deep-ocean and near-shore
waters adjacent to North Carolina’s Outer Banks. The research will be
complemented with targeted internship activities, K-12 outreach activities at
The Engineering Place at NC State, and outreach activities with the Detroit Area
Pre-College Engineering Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fusing autonomy,
persistence, and adaptation in observational networks demands a formal
characterization and tradeoff between the cyber quantity of information and
physical quantity of energy. Specifically, with a renewably powered host agent,
energy no longer serves as a hard constraint; instead, there exists a perpetual
tradeoff between the acquisition of information and the use of available on-
board energy in a stochastic environment. To address this, the research team
will create: (i) a scientifically tailored dynamic coverage model for
information characterization, (ii) a statistical energy resource/consumption
model, and (iii) a multi-level predictive controller that adapts the mission
profile based on the information/energy tradeoff. The host controller will
maximize a two-part objective function consisting of a finite-horizon coverage
summation and terminal incentive based on a novel quantity termed the
“information value of energy.” This host controller will be complemented by a
series of satellite energy-aware coverage controllers that maximize coverage
subject to a safe rendezvous requirement in a stochastic resource. The research
will be validated across three platforms of increasing complexity – an
unoccupied aerial vehicle (UAV) network (experimental), a combined solar-powered
autonomous surface vessel (ASV)/UAV network (experimental), and a combined
ASV/USV/undersea glider network (simulation-driven).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.