* 2223700
* Testing the Validity of Muscovite as a Continuous History Thermochronometer
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Bruce Idleman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2025
* USD 173,000.00

Temperature change is important to a rock's chemical evolution. The tectonic
deformation and erosion that shape landscapes cause temperature changes that are
recorded in rocks. Ore deposit formation and the creation of hydrocarbon
accumulations are in part temperature-driven. Over the past 50 years, geologists
have developed ways use radioactive decay products found in minerals to decode
temperature histories. While decay products accumulate at a well-known regular
rate, they can also be lost from minerals at elevated temperatures. Over the
life span of a mineral grain, the net remaining decay product and thus the
measured mineral age represents the outcome of these competing processes of
steady gain and temperature-dependent loss. Studying different minerals with
different responses to temperature can be powerful. Researchers need a broader
range of alteration-resistant minerals to use for as wide a range of
temperatures as possible. This team will determine whether the common white mica
can be used for temperature-history studies. This mineral is easily dated by the
potassium-argon method, is resistant to weathering, and shows promise in being
able to work over the 300 ˚C to 400˚C temperature range, an interval not well
covered by other minerals. In addition to presentations and publications, this
team will develop outreach videos for students and the general public about
mineral dating and how it supports basic research about the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a new means
of determining the temperature histories of crustal rocks across the range 275˚C
to 425˚C. Several published reports suggest that 40Ar/39Ar analyses of the
mineral muscovite can address this range. To test how useful muscovite might be
as not just a dating target but also as a means to measure temperatures during
rock cooling, the researchers will carry out diffusion and dating experiments on
a suite of well characterized muscovite samples that have known temperature
histories that can be compared to predictions from their experiments. They will
also choose samples for reheating experiments designed to examine the response
of muscovite samples to shorter timescale, higher-temperature thermal pulses.
What makes muscovite a particularly appealing target for study are suggestions
that rather than behaving as a simple diffusing system, muscovite grains show
multi-diffusion-domain behavior, such that each grain of muscovite is in effect
a collection of subsamples having partially overlapping retentivities for argon.
If so, an individual sample could record a continuous segment of a thermal
history that extends over some 100˚C or more. Moreover, it has been proposed
that sample-specific information about muscovite diffusion properties can be
obtained as a byproduct of 40Ar/39Ar laboratory step heating analysis, which
would support the recovery of more accurate thermal histories than would be
possible by applying generic kinetic data obtained from a limited number of
published diffusion studies. The research will test both the proposal that
muscovite analyses can reveal a range of thermal-history information and that
these analyses can also yield accurate diffusion-kinetics data. The work
involved will form part of a Ph.D. dissertation as well as an undergraduate
project. To convey their work broadly, the team will develop instructional
materials targeted at the undergraduate level on such geochronology topics as
what sort of diverse people can do this kind of work, why they do it, and how.
These materials will be integrated with a series of videos prepared in
collaboration with animation professionals, and tested in classes before
release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.