* 2223276
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Impact of the Promoting Active Learning and Mentoring (PALM) Network on Vision
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Stephanie Mathews, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 286,355.00

Vision &amp; Change (V&amp;C) in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to
Action proposed a new vision for effective undergraduate life science education.
Vision &amp; Change called on educators to use evidence-based practices to
emphasize experiential learning, authentic research experiences, and active
learning approaches for providing undergraduates with the engagement and passion
necessary to remain in STEM disciplines and pursue careers in STEM fields. The
report has been influential in the undergraduate life science education
community over the last decade, yet few studies have been undertaken to
determine the extent to which V&amp;C concepts and competencies have penetrated
the community of biology educators. This project will leverage the Promoting
Active Learning and Mentoring (PALM) Network (NSF Award #1624200), to study the
penetrance of V&amp;C concepts and competencies across the network and the
professional societies involved in the PALM project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will utilize a mixed methods approach to support combining the
strength of quantitative surveys that reach all PALM participants with
qualitative semi-structured interviews to further probe participants’
motivations, implementation, and dissemination of Vision &amp; Change principles
in more detail. The project aims to: 1) determine to what extent Vision &amp;
Change principles motivated mentors or mentees to join PALM; 2) characterize
perceptions of Vision &amp; Change among instructors and educators involved in
the PALM Network, and determine the impact of this network and mentorship on
perceptions, implementation, and dissemination of Vision &amp; Change principles
within departments; and 3) examine the impact of the PALM Network on its
associated professional societies and assess how Vision &amp; Change has
influenced these societies’ engagement with undergraduate biology education
While this work is instructor-focused, its impact will be multiplied by the
number of undergraduate students taught by these instructors. The project team
will disseminate protocols, surveys, training materials, and results on a
centralized website (QUBES), at scientific conferences, and by open-access
publications. The products created and shared will document the current reach of
V&amp;C and have the potential to extend V&amp;C to an even greater number of
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.