* 2223908
* I-Corps:  High-Throughout Manufacturing of Three-Dimensional Nanostructured Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Chih-Hao Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a scalable process to manufacture three-dimensional
nanostructures with high resolution and throughput. The proposed technology may
create nanostructures that have mechanical, optical, and thermal properties that
are superior to traditional bulk materials. Three-dimensional nanostructured
materials and nanolattices have many applications in industries such as
electronics, photonics, and solar energy due to physical properties not observed
in traditional macroscale materials. Nanostructured materials can have ultralow
density and simultaneously have high stiffness and strength. The high porosity
structures also can have air-like properties, such as low refractive index and
dielectric constant, which can be used for light trapping and enhance the
performance of waveguide and integrated photonics. Nanolattice structures are
expected to have extremely low thermal conductivity and can be used as a
lightweight thermal insulator for aerospace applications. The combination of
mechanical, optical, and thermal properties allows the nanostructured materials
to be used as an insulating layer in integrated circuits, multilayer photonic
devices, and as thin-film coating on arbitrary surfaces. The material also may
be used in multilayer coating as a high efficiency dielectric reflector that has
low thermal conductivity, which may be used as a radiation shield or in cooling
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a lithographic nanomanufacturing process of ultraporous nanolattice
materials. The proposed technology uses colloidal particles that may be
harnessed to create volumetric intensity for three-dimensional (3D) patterning.
Using both “top-down” lithographic and “bottom-up” self-assembly approaches, the
proposed method is enabled using light scattering from self-assembled
nanoparticles for volumetric exposure of a photosensitive polymer. This results
in a process that is highly versatile and solely based on particle-light
interactions that may be designed by controlling the light and particle
parameters. In addition, in contrast to traditional techniques, the proposed
technology may be low-cost and does not require extensive optical, electrical,
or mechanical hardware. The proposed process also is highly scalable, and a
roll-to-roll prototype system based on this technology has demonstrated
continuous printing of 3D nanostructures on flexible substrate with 180 mm/min
throughput. Manufacturing of nanostructures and nanodevices generally is limited
by a tradeoff between pattern resolution and throughput. The proposed technology
overcomes this challenge by using massively parallel colloidal elements for
volumetric patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.