* 2223566
* Multihaptic wearable sensor enabled by biomimetic polymer to stoke engagement in swallowing rehabilitation therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Darren Lipomi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 390,000.00

There are many disabilities in which the patient could benefit from the use of a
wearable device for rehabilitation or prevention. However, the adoption of
wearable sensors by patients is not strong; in this project, it is proposed that
adoption could be increased by designing devices that provided reinforcing
tactile cues to the wearer. This project will use haptic effects for the first
time in an “epidermal” wearable device (that is, a device akin to a temporary
tattoo). The haptic effects will drive engagement in simulated physical therapy.
As a use case, treatment of dysphagia (or difficulty swallowing) will be the
focus of this study. This condition, which afflicts approximately 3% of the US
population and ≥15% of the elderly, can be associated with pain, and in many
cases is devastating to the quality of life of persons with dysphagia. Moreover,
uncoordinated swallowing movements can lead to the entry of food into the lungs
and aspiration pneumonia, which is life-threatening. The engineering of a device
worn on the neck capable of detecting swallows and other movements could augment
the course of physical therapy. Ultimately, it is hoped that the knowledge
created at the interface of device engineering and behavioral science will
enable patients to take charge of their own rehabilitation. This project
leverages the newly opened University of California San Diego (UCSD) Downtown
Center, which will be the site of multiple hands-on demonstrations arising from
the fundamental work on haptics; these demos will be held in conjunction with
recruiting a diverse group of participants from the community for the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the adoption
and engagement of mobile health interventions. Specifically, by endowing
epidermal wearable sensors with haptic capabilities. That is, the ability to
interact with the wearer by touch. The project leverages decades of work on
myriad devices that can measure a large array of physiological quantities with
high accuracy. Nevertheless, the future adoption of these “epidermal” sensors by
patients and consumers cannot be taken for granted. Using prevention and
rehabilitation of dysphagia (loss of swallowing function) as a disease model,
this project proposes a type of epidermal patch for therapy that delivers
affirming tactile stimuli whenever a therapeutic movement is performed
correctly. The key enabling element is a stretchable, biomimetic conductive
polymer that exhibits exceptional conductivity and volumetric capacitance. This
material is used in the device as three components of the device: (1) strain
gauges and (2) electrodes for electromyography and for (3) haptic stimulation,
at lower voltages than is possible with off-the-shelf electrodes. In a closed-
loop design, the device measures a signal and immediately produces a haptic
effect to encourage desired behavior in human subject experiments. The knowledge
created by this work could unleash the potential of the creativity and
innovation surrounding epidermal electronic devices built up over the last 15
years and could have a transformative impact on technologies for at-home
therapy. Moreover, the feasibility testing with 55 participants will be
performed at UCSD’s Downtown Community Center, located in a highly diverse area
in San Diego. The design and engineering of devices will be conducted with the
participation of dysphagic patients and those at risk of dysphagia. Testing will
be held in conjunction with a hands-on exhibit of haptic materials and devices
produced during this project. The impact of this work will be broadened by
stratification of the subject pool by age, dysphagia status, socioeconomic
status, and technological literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.