* 2223872
* I-Corps: Computer Vision-Based Intelligent Service Recommendation System
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Mariofanna Milanova, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a computer vision technology that aims to connect local service
seekers and service providers to facilitate property maintenance work. Home
improvement, maintenance and emergency spending increased by nearly 20% from
last year, with individuals spending an average of $15,880. The proposed
technology is designed to find local service providers faster using computer
vision technology. The current online marketplace is more than $30 billion
dollars annually and is projected to grow. Most of the transactions are offline
even though there are existing online marketplaces. This difference may bring
more service seekers like homeowners to the computer vision-based artificial
intelligence (AI) marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
(ML) solutions to identify and connect local service seekers and service
providers more rapidly. The technology uses an algorithm to recognize and match
the type of service needed from an image or video from a camera in a smart
device and image-based service provider reviews. Using geolocation technology to
find local service professionals, the proposed technology is used for schedule
optimization in real time to keep service seekers informed about the requested
service. Natural language processing-based language translation will be used to
establish a communication channel between service seekers and service providers.
The goal of the proposed technology is to create a highly scalable platform that
may connect local service professionals faster using a computer vision-based
recommendation system to facilitate home repair
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.