* 2223483
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Architecture Innovations for Enabling Simultaneous Translation at the Edge
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lizhong Chen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 458,000.00

Simultaneous translation, which begins translating after just a few words are
spoken, has significant real-world value that may disrupt and benefit a wide
range of domains, such as military personnel deployed in foreign countries,
businesspeople participating in multilingual meetings, medical service
providers, law enforcement, customer support services, diplomats and political
representatives, and countless international tourists. Currently, accurate real-
time simultaneous translation is only possible by expensive, specially trained
human interpreters or by running machine learning-based algorithms on server-
grade graphics processing units (GPUs); both options are impractical for
extensive and ubiquitous deployment of simultaneous translation in edge devices.
Innovative domain-specific architecture needs to be designed that can reduce
computation requirements by orders of magnitude while maintaining translation
accuracy, thus enabling simultaneous translation at the
edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the challenges and
opportunities in designing hardware accelerators for transformer-based
simultaneous translation. The objective is to utilize the unique characteristics
of transformer models and the distinctive behaviors of simultaneous translation
to develop cross-cutting solutions that meet the accuracy, latency, power, and
resource efficiency goals. Among some of the specific lines of research that are
explored include input-centric dataflow and data reuse that take advantage of
extensive input data sharing, compute-proportional architecture that aims to
achieve linearly scalable attention calculation, utility-driven linear
transformation architecture that efficiently reduce dimensionality based on
their actual utility, and customized routerless on-chip interconnects that
provide scalable, flexible and ultra-low cost interconnects for simultaneous
translation accelerators. Beyond specific technical contributions that advance
the fields of computer architecture and natural language processing, this
project also impacts more broadly on research, education, and outreach. Findings
from this research are incorporated into graduate curricula, courses, and
undergraduate research experiences. Various outreach activities have been
planned to broaden inclusion and participation of diverse populations in the
educational and societal impacts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.