* 2223517
* Mcity 2: An Integrated Automated Testbed for Autonomous Transportation Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Henry Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

This NSF Civil Infrastructure Systems project will create the world’s first
fully automated augmented-reality test facility for autonomous transportation
research. Connected and automated vehicle (CAV) technologies have the potential
to significantly improve safety, mobility, and sustainability, but also pose
great challenges in technical and social dimensions including control, sensing,
communication, human-in-the-loop, etc. Although significant research effort has
been dedicated to the research and development of CAV technologies, most
research ideas have been tested using simulation only with limited open
datasets. Access to physical test facilities and large-scale real-world data is
limited, severely hindering the progress of scientific research and technology
development. This project will leverage the University of Michigan’s existing
Mcity Test Facility—the world’s first purpose-built CAV proving ground—by
integrating the physical test track with a software simulation environment to
create an augmented-reality CAV testbed that would be made available to academic
researchers nationwide through cloud-based access. This project will provide the
means for nation-wide collaborative discovery and collective effort to
accelerate the research and workforce development of CAV technologies. The
project will also significantly broaden participation by providing easier access
to top-tier research infrastructure for the research community, especially those
with less resources from under-served communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mcity augmented reality testbed integrates
three components: (1)a physical test facility including infrastructure and CAV
fleet, (2) a mobility data center that collects and shares near-real-time
traffic information from 21 intersections, (3) an augmented naturalistic diving
simulator. This testbed will be automated so researchers can configure and
control the test facility infrastructure (e.g., traffic lights, crosswalk
buttons, rail-crossing arms, etc.) and build test scenarios using a web-based
graphical user interface. The Mobility Data Center will make available sensor
data sharing messages (SDSMs) broadcast by roadside units (RSUs) in the Ann
Arbor Living Laboratory publicly to the research community. Such data will be
used to develop a naturalistic driving environment (NDE) simulator that users
can test their algorithms before deployment at the physical Mcity Test Facility,
with a blend of real and virtual fellow road users. All test data will be
archived in a cloud database to enable secure access and data/method sharing for
research and education purposes. A Technical Advisory Committee, composed of
members of government, academia, and industry, will be established to ensure
equitable and effective usage of this research infrastructure. Education and
outreach activities are planned annually to strengthen academic-industry
partnerships and workforce development for the emerging CAV
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.