* 2223793
* EFRI BRAID: Unsupervised Continual Learning with Hierarchical Timescales and Plasticity Mechanisms
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Donald Adjeroh, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Humans and animals can easily adapt to their environment with limited
information. They sense the world around them and continuously adapt their
behavior to the current situation by changing the “configuration” of their
nervous system, a phenomenon called plasticity. Though this ability seems
natural to humans, it is very difficult to achieve in software or hardware
systems. In addition, current continuous learning methods are trained under
unrealistic conditions and require supervision. This project aims to understand
how to endow autonomous agents, such as robots, with the adaptability and
resiliency of biology. Biological plasticity in weakly electric fish will guide
engineering of new machine learning algorithms. These algorithms will enable
autonomous agents to continuously sense and adapt to their environment without
interrupting operations for manual training. This interdisciplinary project is
integrated with a range of outreach activities involving local high schools and
undergraduate students. Workshops and demonstrations on biology-inspired machine
learning will be organized, aimed at spurring interest of rural students in
coding and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge in artificial
intelligence (AI) is how to achieve unsupervised continual learning in the open
world. Current methods used in AI and machine learning operate with single-
modality data, collected and consumed in controlled conditions, typically in a
supervised manner. However, biological systems achieve lifelong learning by
processing streams of multisensory data that continuously shape their neural
networks (plasticity) while retaining previous knowledge (stability). This
dynamic adaptation operates unsupervised, on a range of timescales and rules.
The project will study those principles observed in the cerebellar feedback
pathways of electric fish, which are responsible for driving plasticity,
enabling adaptation of its function at different timescales and learning and
forgetting at multiple speeds. This will enable the translational development of
novel paradigms in continual learning that will support new levels of resiliency
and lifelong learning in real-time autonomous systems in the open world. To
achieve this goal the project will overcome some key technical hurdles, e.g., in
enabling 1) data efficiency in processing inputs continuously as time-variant,
potentially correlated, data streams in a fully unsupervised manner; 2)
flexibility to learn and forget at different speeds; 3) generation of suitable
internal representations from multiple modalities to improve autonomous
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation Brain-Inspired Dynamics for Engineering
Energy-Efficient Circuits and Artificial Intelligence Program (BRAID) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.