* 2223354
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Investigating the past, present, and future of glaciated alpine landscapes using an integrated data-model approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sarah Crump, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2025
* USD 318,233.00

Today, 80% of all glaciers are smaller than 0.5 km2, and many larger valley
glaciers are in the process of transitioning to small cirque glaciers in
response to modern warming. Despite their small size, cirque glaciers play an
outsized geomorphic and ecological role in alpine landscapes, largely through
regionally variable changes in hydrology and sediment transport. Understanding
how these glaciers responded to past climate changes and how they will respond
to future climate changes is prerequisite for understanding the past evolution
and future fate of alpine catchments in the western U.S. and elsewhere. This
project will address this need by developing detailed glaciological datasets,
both modern and paleo, from an exceptionally well-constrained study site in the
Teton Range, Wyoming, and integrating them with a state-of-the-art model to
accurately represent glaciers as they shrink and disappear. Ultimately, this
work will produce insight into the past, present, and future role of glaciers as
agents of alpine landscape evolution while developing an open-source glacier
model, which will be applicable to glacial settings globally. The project will
also foster new collaborations between four early career PIs, improve STEM
education at two public research institutions and one liberal arts college
through increased participation of underrepresented minorities in the Earth
sciences, and promote climate science literacy and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our fundamental
understanding of deglaciation in alpine landscapes by integrating diverse
datasets into a new glacier model to simulate past and ongoing glacier retreat
in the western U.S. This model represents a transformative advance in that it
includes novel representation of topographically-mediated effects on mass
balanceâ€”processes that are increasingly important as glaciers shrink into shaded
cirques. Importantly, the new open-source glacier model (PyG2D) can be applied
to other settings worldwide to quantify the effects of climate change on
mountain ecosystems, hydrology, and landscapes. By applying and testing this
model in the Teton Range, a site with exceptional geologic constraints on past
glacier fluctuations and a suite of cirque glaciers that are representative of
small glaciers globally, this project will produce the first detailed
simulations of future glacier evolution in the contiguous U.S. We will place
modern and future glacier change in context by constraining and simulating
glacier states from the Last Ice Age to 2100 CE. This work, while focused on a
single natural laboratory, has broad implications for glacierized regions
elsewhere on the planet and offers an important space-for-time substitution to
inform how more heavily glaciated landscapes will evolve in the future. With a
continuous record of glacier extent, thickness, and volume this work will lay
the foundation for future studies, both geomorphic and ecological in scope, that
quantify the impact of glacier change on alpine landscapes facing complete
deglaciation. Anticipated results will serve as key examples of the tangible
impacts of climate change on the cryosphere that can be readily understood by
resource managers, policymakers, and the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.