* 2223907
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Self-Assessment to Establish Equity Among STEM Faculty at a Public Liberal Arts Institution
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Nicole Guajardo, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 01/31/2025
* USD 287,877.00

The ADVANCE Catalyst Award to Christopher Newport University will support a two-
year self-assessment into systemic inequities related to gender, race/ethnicity,
and other aspects of social identity among science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) faculty. The project’s goal is to create a professional
environment that effectively supports the inclusion and success of women with
multiple identities in STEM. The ADVANCE team will take an intersectional
approach to evaluate how individuals’ multiple identities impact their
professional experiences. The project aims to provide significant insight into
workload distribution, resource allocation, professional advancement, concerns
regarding inclusivity on campus, and factors that serve as barriers and
facilitators to professional success. The project will lead to important
understanding of issues related to gender equity and intersectionality for
faculty at primarily undergraduate universities. Further, the ADVANCE team will
aim to begin implementing targeted changes and develop a strategic plan to
address observed inequities and challenges to success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed methods approach, specifically a sequential
explanatory design, the ADVANCE Catalyst project will examine the institutional
context for women in STEM at Christopher Newport University. The project will
assess institutional data and survey faculty about their perspectives and campus
culture. Themes about women’s roles and identities in their professional lives
and productivity identified by analyzing the institutional and survey data will
be used to develop questions for interviews with faculty and university
administrators. The institutional, survey, and interview data will be used to 1)
identify policies and practices that affect satisfaction, promotion, and
retention of women and underrepresented minority (URM) faculty and, 2) develop a
5-year data-driven plan to remedy any identified systemic inequities or barriers
to success. The creation and implementation of the five-year strategic plan from
this grant will support equity among STEM faculty at Christopher Newport
University and is intended to have sustainable effects on the recruitment,
retention, and promotion of women with multiple identities (e.g., parenthood,
sexual orientation/gender identification). The intersectional approach will
generate new knowledge about the experiences of STEM faculty and serve as a
catalyst for change at Christopher Newport University as well as at other
similar institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.