* 2223515
* IMR: MT: Tools for Programming Distributed Data-plane Measurements
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Hyojoon Kim, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Understanding the flow of traffic across key networks---what it is composed of
and how it changes---is critical for improving modern information services.
Traditionally, however, it has been difficult for researchers to develop new
tools for dissecting this traffic and analyzing its characteristics, while
taking care to maintain user privacy. Recently, though, the development of
relatively cheap programmable switches has made it possible to develop
diagnostic tools and place them directly inside the network, on the path through
which traffic flows. In such a position, new tools have the potential to see all
the internet traffic as it flows by, from a university campus to the broader
internet, for instance, or along a corporate wide-area network or data center.
Unfortunately, while it is possible to develop such tools, doing so is currently
an incredibly difficult and error-prone process. To ameliorate this situation,
the research team will develop Lucid, a new programming language and system that
will facilitate the process of developing, debugging, and deploying network
measurement tools in live programmable networks. The research team will deliver
a compiler that translates high-level Lucid programs into lower-level code that
execute in multiple places---directly on programmable switches, or in support,
on servers connected to the network in question. In addition, the team will
deliver a collection of reusable components that network measurement researchers
can plug together to get started on a new idea quickly. To help teach
researchers how to use the new language, the team is developing tutorials for
major conferences in networking. To summarize, this project will impact the
performance, reliability, and security of critical networks by facilitating the
development of new measurement tools that can discover network optimization
opportunities, detect failures, and rapidly recognize attacks that disrupt
online services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional measurement tools and
datasets, while incredibly useful, have significant limitations in scale and
coverage. Measurement researchers should capitalize on the exciting advances in
programmable data planes to analyze Internet traffic and performance as packets
traverse the network. Analyzing traffic directly in the data plane (e.g.,
network switches, routers) enables sophisticated analysis without sacrificing
efficiency or divulging sensitive user information, and enterprise networks,
such as university campuses, provide an excellent opportunity to use these
programmable data planes in practice. However, programming the data plane is not
easy. Existing languages, such as P4, are very low-level, have an extremely
steep learning curve, and are notoriously difficult to work with (with seemingly
legitimate programs often failing to compile). This project addresses these pain
points by delivering new programming support in the form of Lucid, a high-level
language designed to support cooperative measurement across multiple locations
and device types. More specifically, the research team is developing compilers
that will target both Intel Tofino programmable switches (via P4) and software
servers (via eBPF). Using both kinds of devices, researchers will be able to
develop and deploy a range of different kinds of distributed measurement tools.
The research team will also develop an interpreter for the language so that
interesting new research ideas may be developed and debugged prior to
deployment. The infrastructure developed by the research team will also include
a suite of libraries that implement key data structures and utilities useful in
network measurement and in support of data privacy. To teach the community how
to use our language, libraries, tools, and infrastructure, the team will develop
documentation and tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.