* 2223834
* EAGER: A New Multiphoton Luminescence Imaging Approach to Interrogate the Fate of Metallic Nanoparticles in a Living System
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Cristina Zavaleta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2025
* USD 305,998.00

Over the last 20 years, metallic nanoparticles have been utilized across a wide
range of fields from cosmetics to renewable energy to electronics to biomedical
applications. Their size gives them unique properties, and the use of metallic
nanoparticles has revolutionized several technological and industrial sectors.
As a result, inadvertent human exposure rates to engineered metallic
nanoparticles are increasing, generating the need to better understand their
short- and long-term effects to ensure the public’s safety. This project will
focus on utilizing a new imaging strategy that can offer important insights on
how metallic nanoparticles behave in living systems. The imaging strategy is
different than conventional imaging techniques in that it does not require an
exogenous label to track metallic nanoparticles. Instead, the imaging strategy
can detect and follow the metallic nanoparticles in a label-free manner by
exploiting a luminescent signal that is generated from the metals that comprise
the nanoparticles themselves. The imaging technique can offer real-time tracking
of metallic nanoparticles to observe their physiological interactions while in
circulation. The images generated will also be able to reveal where they
ultimately reside in the body and determine if any toxic effects or
morphological changes are resulting. Gaining an improved fundamental
understanding of these biological interactions could 1) better discern the
safety of metallic nanomaterials in living subjects, 2) lead to informing new
environmental policies, 3) generate new disease targeting strategies with
therapeutic metallic nanoparticles to improve patient outcome. Additionally,
further development and assessment of this transformative imaging strategy could
open new avenues of investigation throughout the nano-community to further
exploit this unique imaging technique. Local Los Angeles high school students
will be introduced to the physical concepts and imaging approaches utilized here
and the various nanoparticle types encountered as environmental pollutants. The
goals for the educational plan are to 1) generate enthusiasm and spark
creativity among students from under-represented groups in the Los Angeles area
by showing different ways that nanoparticles are used to solve problems and 2)
introduce new imaging concepts to students that can allow them to watch where
nanoparticles are located in the body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this project is to explore a new multiphoton luminescence imaging
strategy and its ability to develop a deeper understanding of how metallic
nanoparticles behave in living systems. Researchers have previously reported on
specific endpoints of nanoparticle interactions studied in cell culture on a
macroscopic scale, e.g., cellular stress, inflammatory or mutagenic responses,
or biodistribution profiles observed in preclinical models. However, this does
not give a complete or biologically accurate depiction of how nanomaterials
behave in a dynamic living system. Metallic nanoparticle biodistribution has
been previously studied, but their real-time dynamics in circulation and
ultimate fate are poorly understood on the microscopic level. This research
project addresses this critical need by using a new and innovative multiphoton
luminescence microscopy imaging approach. Intravital microscopy (IVM) has
emerged as a profound imaging modality for gaining insight into dynamic
processes on the cellular and sub-cellular level and is particularly suitable
for visualizing nanoparticles in real time. IVM has enabled observation of
several fundamental nanoparticle processes such as extravasation, tumor
accumulation, and blood elimination in real time within a living organism. A
current problem is that most nanoparticles must be exogenously labeled with
fluorophores for visualization with conventional single-photon IVM. As the
fluorophore may dissociate from the nanoparticle, it is challenging to determine
the true behavior of nanoparticles within the blood stream using this approach.
This project will use a new label-free multiphoton luminescence imaging approach
that was recently uncovered in the principal investigator’s (PI’s) lab to study
the native behavior of metallic nanoparticles in mouse models. Intrinsic broad-
band luminescence has previously been observed in noble metals under multiphoton
excitation conditions but has yet to be applied successfully in vivo to track
nanoparticles flowing within the vasculature in real time. Luminescent
properties associated with metals have yet to be applied successfully in vivo to
track nanoparticles flowing within the vasculature in real time. This
underutilized intrinsic luminescence will be used to 1) track metallic
nanoparticles flowing in the vasculature to assess their rates of clearance from
blood, and 2) determine their toxicities on major organs where they ultimately
reside by analyses of harvested tissues. This is an immensely powerful tool, as
the intrinsic luminescence of metallic nanoparticles could finally give the
research community the ability to follow native flow in the blood while
providing dynamic physiological information and ultimately localizing their
accumulation within tissues on a microscopic scale. Consumers may be
inadvertently exposed to various metallic nanoparticles. The results generated
from this project are meant to enable a better understanding of the cellular
interactions taking place within the body and where these nanoparticles
ultimately reside. This information will be important in determining how to
better regulate these nanomaterials as new nano-enabled products are engineered.
A multi-year outreach and educational training plan will be pursued that is
closely integrated with the proposed research, emphasizing how people use and
encounter nanomaterials day to day. High school students from underrepresented
groups across the Los Angeles area will be introduced to nanoparticles and the
imaging techniques utilized to study their interactions in the body. The PI will
connect with a Hispanic serving institution in her hometown, University of Texas
Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV). UTRGV currently lacks Ph.D. curricula in STEM and
this research opportunity will enable the participation of these students in
this research lab, providing interaction with Ph.D. students. This will promote
higher education paths for students who otherwise would not get exposed to these
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.