* 2223808
* CFS (Track III): High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 851,045.00

This award will continue NSF support of the University of Texas High-Resolution
X-ray Computed Tomography Facility (UTCT) as a community facility supporting
geoscience research. Computed tomography (CT) is ideally suited for many
geoscience applications, as it nondestructively creates 3D image data of the
interiors of rocks, fossils, meteorites and other materials. Successful
application of this technique requires both advanced instrumentation and
experienced operators to optimize data acquisition and processing, and the
ability to design and implement rigorous and well-targeted 3D data analysis
strategies. UTCT serves both as a source of high-quality data for investigators
without access to CT instrumentation, and as a repository of experience and
expertise in all aspects of CT data acquisition and analysis, both through
individual consultation and collaboration and by teaching short courses.
Advances in CT data acquisition, processing, and analysis developed at UTCT have
also been used in many other fields. UTCT also provides leadership in management
and curation of CT data sets, through a long-term investment in the DIGIMORPH
digital library at UTCT, and community activity through the Tomography for
Scientific Advancement, North America (ToScANA) symposium series. Individual and
collective efforts by UTCT staff support BAJEDI goals, including aiding
recruitment of and mentoring research by members of historically under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support roughly 25%
of UTCT operating expenses for the next three years, including staff, equipment
maintenance, and computing infrastructure, and replacing a no-longer-repairable
microfocal X-ray source. Over the previous four years of facility support, UTCT
research advanced a wide range of fronts while continuing to provide high-
quality service, all while adjusting to the many difficulties imposed by the
COVID-19 pandemic. The lab has upgraded much of the instrumentation, and
created, improved, and demonstrated several new 3D measurement methodologies.
From 2018 through February 2022 UTCT data supported 330 peer-reviewed
publications and 43 theses and dissertations. UTCT served 196 principal
investigators over this period, most of them earth scientists, with 58% from
outside the University of Texas. The facility expanded its short courses in
HRXCT data acquisition, visualization, and quantification, and adapted them to
on-line delivery to compensate for COVID-19. In 2019 and 2021 the facility
hosted two more instances of the ToScANA symposium, the second on-line due to
the pandemic, with approximately 100 attendees each time representing a wide
range of disciplines, and the facility will host the 2023 symposium in Austin.
These symposia have also served as a rallying point for North American
tomography community efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.