* 2223984
* EAGER:CAS-Climate: Novel Non-Precious Metal Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Anindya Ghosh, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,289.00

With the support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Daoyuan Wang of the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff and Anindya
Ghosh of the University of Arkansas at Little Rock are developing new catalysts
based on earth-abundant metals for fuel cell applications. Most commercially
available hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells consist of expensive platinum (Pt) anodes
and cathodes. Thus, a significant motivation for preparing suitable replacements
for the Pt-based electrodes exists. The Wang and Ghosh collaborative team will
synthesize non-precious metal complexes supported on multi-walled carbon
nanotube and graphene materials, and evaluate them as catalysts for the oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). This
research is anticipated to impact renewable energy and fuel cell technology,
with important implications for sustainability. Underrepresented minority
students in science and engineering will actively participate in the research.
The educational program will include outreach activities to surrounding schools
and educational centers in Arkansas to promote green chemistry and sustainable
energy to teachers, students, and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop new non-precious metal catalysts for the ORR reaction,
with the catalysts derived from metal complexes containing tunable amide
ligands. The collaborative research teams of Wang and Ghosh will design ligands
that will provide tunable coordination environments for the stabilization of the
metal centers in unusual oxidation states and favoring oxygen reduction. The
amide-based complexes will be designed to be either square planar or to contain
weakly bound ligands in different geometries, to allow for oxygen coordination
to the metal center for its facile reduction while enhancing higher current
density and lower overvoltage. The metal complexes will be supported on
carbonaceous nanomaterials. These supported systems will then be coated with
inexpensive and bioinspired polymers such as polydopamine and its derivatives,
and evaluated for their potential to provide enhanced oxidative and hydrolytic
stability to the metal complexes over a wide pH range and to significantly
improve ORR activity. Varying the ratios and/or types of the individual
components of this three-component system (metal complex, carbonaceous support,
polymer coating) will be performed and the results evaluated experimentally and
electrochemically. An emphasis will be placed on understanding the structure of
the active sites of the catalysts and the mechanisms of the ORR enabled by these
new systems. The research activities and their relationship to environmental
sustainability will be incorporated into the planned outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.