* 2224350
* ISS: Active Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation in Microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Liquid-liquid phase separation is a pervasive phenomenon that plays a central
role throughout physics, material science, engineering, biology, and everyday
life. Two liquid phases are separated by soft interfaces that are greatly
affected by gravitational forces and are easily deformed either by thermal
fluctuation or by external flows. Everyday experience demonstrates how gentle
shaking induces waves of a soft interface, while more rigorous shaking
reinitializes the phase separation dynamics. Active matter provides an
alternative method of generating fluid flows through the collective motion of
microscopic energy-consuming constituents. It remains an open question of how
active matter-based internally-generated flows couple to the soft interfaces and
the associated liquid-liquid phase separation. Ground-based research indicates
intriguing behaviors, but gravitational forces suppress large-scale deformation
and full exploration of the possible behaviors. This project is focused on
developing a quantitative understanding of the active interfaces. From a broader
perspective, this project will train undergraduate students in interdisciplinary
research, and provide support for developing a curriculum-enriching Saturday
course for high school students that is centered around the topic of soft
materials, liquid-liquid phase separation, and microgravity
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project are divided
into three complementary aims, which will greatly increase understanding of
active liquid-liquid phase separation and associated active interfaces. In the
first aim, millimeter-sized soft interfaces will be created that separate a bulk
active fluid from a passive polymer suspension. The research will determine how
gravity influences active fluctuations and associated traveling waves, which are
visible by the naked eye. The project will also study how a macroscopic
interface disintegrates to generate an active emulsion, a transition that is
suppressed by gravity but should be observable in a microgravity environment. In
the second aim, the project will start with a uniform initial state and study
the dynamics of coarsening active droplets. Microgravity will render our samples
truly two-dimensional. Finally, in the third aim, gravity affects will be
studied to determine how the active wetting transition that occurs when active
fluid climbs along a boundary. The acquired data will rigorously test
theoretical models of how active stresses couple to soft deformable surfaces.
Such models are essential for building synthetic mechanical protocells and might
have relevance to our understanding of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.