* 2224372
* Abnormal grain growth in ultrafine grained metals under high cycle loading
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Ting Zhu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 10/31/2025
* USD 536,195.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most technologically important metals
are polycrystalline, and are made of many small clusters called grains. The size
of these grains is a key parameter, as grain size has a strong influence on a
materialâ€™s strength. The same metal is much stronger if its grains are smaller.
For this reason, ultrafine grained metals, with grain sizes less than one
micrometer, are a very important class of structural materials due to their
particularly high strength, with critical applications in the aerospace and
nuclear industry, among others. Another significant advantage of small grained
metals is that they tend to have better fatigue properties and are less likely
to form detrimental cracks under cyclic loading. It is therefore crucial to keep
small grain sizes throughout the lifetime of an ultrafine grained structural
metal; otherwise its mechanical properties can degrade catastrophically. In this
project, the PIs are developing new understanding of the mechanics of grain
growth, so that grain size can be properly controlled. The PIs focus
specifically on abnormal grain growth, where a small fraction of grains grow
drastically large and fast compared to other grains and as a result consume
other grains. While this phenomenon is well understood at high temperatures and
high strains, little is known about abnormal grain growth in the rarely explored
range of high cycle loading (applying a large number of cycles with low strain
at room temperature). The outreach activities in this project include a summer
enrichment program in material science and engineering, targeting high school
students from underrepresented groups in the STEM fields, and involving high
school teachers, graduate and undergraduate students to develop the curriculum
and implement the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to achieve
a fundamental understanding of the origins of abnormal grain growth in ultrafine
grained metals under high-cycle loading at room temperature. The central
hypothesis of this proposal is that the elastic anisotropy effect dominates the
driving force for grain growth in the high-cycle loading regime at room
temperature, resulting in abnormal grain growth behavior. The PIs test this
hypothesis through high-throughput characterization of cyclic-load-induced grain
growth in ultrafine grained metals inside a scanning electron microscope
equipped with electron back scattered diffraction. Fabrication and testing of
six different metallic films with varying degrees of elastic anisotropy, with
face-centered cubic or body-centered cubic structures are the focus of the work.
These experiments can characterize the evolution of grain size distribution and
orientation as a function of applied cycles, for various strain amplitudes (up
to 1%). The PIs use micromechanics and phase field modeling to determine the
thermodynamic driving forces in terms of strain energy densities and the grain
boundary mobilities for abnormal grain growth. The integrated experiments and
modeling are being used to identify the predominant factors and loading ranges
controlling abnormal grain growth, including its kinetics, in face-centered
cubic and body-centered cubic metals at room
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.