* 2224920
* Implementing Place-based Pedagogies to Transform STEM Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yoshimi Rii, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 495,376.00

Marine biology graduate students across the nation undertake research on coastal
and marine resources and processes. However, the communities that care for and
utilize natural resources are often not involved in shaping the research. In
Hawaiʻi, these resources are integral to the livelihoods and cultural practices
of Native Hawaiians. The Marine Biology Graduate Program at the University of
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa (UHM) trains emerging leaders in marine biology research,
conservation, and education. Graduate students have typically received strong
training in the natural sciences but lack guidance on the social and cultural
aspects of how knowledge is created. This NSF Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) award to UHM seeks to transform marine biology from a “field-based
science” that positions researchers as separate from the ecosystems they study
to a “community-embedded science” that recognizes the fundamental connections
between marine life and human communities and cultures. This innovative project
will train early career scientists in establishing and maintaining reciprocal
relationships with local communities throughout their professional careers.
Additionally, improving communication between the scientific workforce and the
public increases trust around science-related policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using place-based methodologies in Hawaiʻi, students will
be immersed in a community-based research partnership at the Heʻeia National
Estuarine Research Reserve (NERR). An intensive two-week period immediately
prior to the students’ first fall semester incorporates several interrelated
components. First are stewardship, relationship building, and service learning
opportunities with Heʻeia NERR partner organizations. Second are readings,
lectures, and class discussions of case studies where scientific values and
community values can often misalign. Third are opportunities for self-directed
learning and reflections, with a fourth activity of cohort-building and
establishing of peer-to-peer mentorship structures. Students are introduced to
Native Hawaiian kilo (observation and inquiry) and kuleana (responsibility and
interdependence) as fundamental practices connecting people to the land. Through
hands-on experiences establishing connections with local Indigenous stewardship
organizations, the course emphasizes the positionality and responsibility of
researchers to the places and communities in which their work is embedded.
During the fall semester, students engage in iterative reflection and knowledge
integration. A highly interdisciplinary instruction and evaluation team has
designed course readings, guest lectures, and discussions to explore case
studies at the intersection of technology, culture, and scientific practice,
including data stewardship and governance, with an emphasis on Indigenous
knowledge and data sovereignty. Grounding the curriculum in an ethical framework
promotes reciprocal engagement and knowledge co-production with communities
wherever these emerging researchers work, transforming the graduate education
culture at an Indigenous place of learning. Formative evaluation using an
embedded assessment approach will inform iterative program improvements.
Research findings from a summative evaluation, including analysis of participant
student and department surveys, research activities reports, and document
analyses of faculty syllabi/assignments, will be shared broadly to inform place-
based approaches to STEM graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.