* 2224065
* Chalcogenide-based nonlinear optical gyroscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wounjhang Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 425,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is an ultrasensitive, high performance, chip-
scale optical gyroscope, which takes advantage of material nonlinearities and
photosensitivity to enhance performance. Measuring rotation of spinning objects
is an important scientific objective. Additionally, it has a broad range of
applications in consumer electronics, aircraft, inertial navigation, and
astronomy, spanning multiple length scales from the macroscale (automotive, oil
drilling, air travel, space exploration, submarine navigation) to the nanoscale
(lab-on-a-chip and biological applications). The popular micro-electro-
mechanical system (MEMS) gyroscopes, which exploits Coriolis force for rotation
sensing, are small, light, and well-suited for consumer electronics, automotive
needs, and medical instruments. However, for more demanding automotive,
robotics, aerospace and defense applications, MEMS solutions are not suitable as
they contain moving parts. Optical gyroscopes such as the ring laser gyroscope
and the fiber optical gyroscope offer an alternative but suffer from poor
signal-to-noise ratio, limiting their applicability, especially in environments
where global positioning systems (GPS) are ineffective. Additionally, these
conventional optical gyroscopes do not lend themselves to miniaturization. In
this proposal, we offer a novel solution . The potential impact on electrical,
mechanical and aerospace engineering, as well as astronomy and physics, will be
enormous. The technical goals naturally integrate with the education and
outreach plans. Interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students as well as researchers will blend research with education both
in the laboratory and the classroom. The online Master’s degree in Electrical
Engineering that University of Colorado Boulder is launching featured courses on
both semiconductors, lasers, and detectors taught by both of the PIs. Outreach
activities include a summer camp on electromagnetism for under-represented
students, demonstration for several Engineering Days for under-represented
students, advising of the Women in Electrical Engineering student group and a
newly awarded Graduate Assistance in Areas of National Need (GAANN) program that
is tied to several women’s groups include the Women in Science and Engineering
and the Society for Women in Engineering at the University of Colorado Boulder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative concept proposed in this project will
enable a new level of performance on a chip-scale platform that will be critical
for navigation in GPS-denied environments. It is particularly suited for space,
drone, and other aerospace applications, where size, weight and power are
critical factors. The conventional optical gyroscopes such as ring laser
gyroscope and the fiber optical gyroscope rely on the Sagnac effect, in which a
phase shift between optical beams, travelling in opposite directions, is induced
under angular rotation. While these devices are effective, they are limited by
the weakness of Sagnac effect and noise from nonlinearities, thermal
fluctuations, and backscattering. This constrains the ability to perform at the
necessary level for inertial navigation systems, especially in environments
where global positioning systems (GPS) are ineffective. Additionally, the Sagnac
effect is directly proportional to path area, creating significant hurdles for
miniature devices. We propose a novel solution based on the Sagnac effect. The
combination of a photosensitive, nonlinear chalcogenide material and a chip-
scale platform is a game changer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.