* 2224946
* Using Child-Centered Qualitative and Multi-Method Approaches to Investigate Childrens Understanding of Racial Diversity Cues in STEM-focused Educational Television
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fashina Alade, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,259.00

Advancing participation in STEM is significant for meeting NSF’s goals and
benefits the nation. Michigan State University aims to improve understanding of
the impacts of STEM-focused children’s media programming by identifying
children’s understanding of racial diversity cures in educational television
shows. The professional development plan will build research capacity by
exploring children's attention to and interpretations of diversity cues and then
building a multi-method study that explores the relationship between viewing
diverse STEM portrayals and the perceptions of who belongs in STEM. Through
advancing knowledge of how to create STEM media that authentically represents
children from historically marginalized communities, the project aims to
positively impact interest and engagement in STEM, while building the PI’s
capacity to conduct education research using child-centered, equitable
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational media can serve as a powerful tool
for early STEM learning. This project seeks to understand how children receive
the messages of diversity in STEM programming. Using cultivation theory and
social cognitive theory as foundational structures, the project incorporates
theory of reasoned action to achieve the societal goal of increasing
participation in STEM. The project aims to use qualitative methods with parents
and children to explore children’s perspectives of STEM-focused media.
Quantitative content analysis and interviews will then be used to examine
perspectives of STEM, STEM identity development, and sense of belonging in STEM.
Research capacity will be built through methodological training institutes,
qualitative research workshops, and mentor training. The project will be
evaluated through formative and summative assessments. The project is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:
BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out
high-quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.