* 2224857
* Engaging Science: Transforming Graduate Education through Public Engagement with Science
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nathan Morehouse, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,999.00

Improved public engagement with science is needed to promote scientific literacy
and support science-informed policies and practices to address society's
critical issues. Further, scientists are increasingly called upon to engage in
public outreach about their research. Many people with graduate degrees in
science are employed in roles involving public outreach. For these reasons,
education on conducting public engagement with science should be meaningfully
integrated into STEM graduate education. This NSF Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) award to the University of Cincinnati will investigate the value
of systematic instruction in public engagement with science for meaningful
public engagement, interdisciplinary collaboration, and diversity and inclusion
in STEM. The researchers will develop a 3-part educational sequence called the
"Engaging Science" curriculum. The curriculum is innovative in its use of
interdisciplinary collaboration, community partnership, and perspectives from
the philosophy of science to provide graduate students with the background and
skills needed to lead effective public engagement with science. This research
project will rigorously examine the transformative impact of public engagement
with science instruction, with the potential to advance the public reach of STEM
disciplines and diversity and inclusion in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will run three annual cycles of the Engaging
Science curriculum with thirty graduate students in each cycle. The three part
curriculum begins with an intensive workshop providing hands-on experience in a
museum setting. A semester-long course then follows which culminates in outreach
projects conducted by multidisciplinary teams. Third, and finally an internship
with a community partner organization leads to an individual outreach project. A
mixed-methods convergent parallel research design will be used to combine
surveys, interviews, focus groups, and archival data. The study will examine the
curriculum's potential to equip graduate students to engage public audiences
more meaningfully. The research plan combines quantitative and qualitative
methods to examine the unique and additive impact of each level of training on
short- and long-term outcomes. This approach will facilitate the adaptation of
the curriculum for implementation in diverse contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.