* 2224438
* ISS: Transient Behavior of Flow Condensation and Its Impacts on Condensation Rate
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

Condensers, which are used to reject heat and return/collect liquid to the
evaporators/boilers, are essential parts of any liquid-vapor two-phase systems
such as heat pipes and vapor chambers, water recovery and harvest, vapor
compression systems, and Rankine cycle power systems. However, due to the
dominant filmwise condensation mode, where vapors are condensed in the form of a
film that covers the surface, in industry practice, condensation heat transfer
rate is typically several folds lower than that of boiling or evaporation,
leading to oversized- and overweighted-condensers. Highly efficient flow
condensation is greatly desirable. Two-phase flow instabilities or oscillations
in flow boiling and condensation can have detrimental effects on the system.
Although extensive efforts have been taken to understand and manage the two-
phase oscillation in flow boiling, only a few studies have been conducted in
understanding two-phase condensing flow instabilities. This project would
provide valuable knowledge and lead to novel control strategies in achieving the
desirable flow pattern. If successful, this research project would improve not
only the stability of condenser operations, but also the efficiency if two-phase
oscillations can be properly utilized to enhance flow condensation. This project
also offers a unique opportunity to promote interdisciplinary collaborations
among thermal science, space technology, and machine learning. These types of
collaborations would greatly benefit the communities of thermal science, machine
learning, space industry, terrestrial water-energy industries, stakeholders, and
science and technology education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives
are to understand transient behaviors of flow condensation and their impacts on
flow condensation rate in both ground and microgravity environments. New
knowledge obtained in this study would advance understandings of operation
parameters that govern flow condensation oscillations. The research objectives
can be realized in five tasks: (a) systematically characterizing transient
behaviors of flow condensation, (b) understanding the dependence of different
two-phase flow patterns on the vapor flow changing rate and/or cooling rate, (c)
identifying the range of operation conditions that generate intensive two-phase
oscillations; (d) characterizing the influence of oscillation modes on flow
condensation rate with an emphasis on enhancing flow condensation; and (e)
developing machine-learning-based models to accurately predict transient
behaviors of flow condensation, flow condensation rate and pressure drop, which
are more accessible than the traditional two-phase experiments to research
communities, industries, students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.