* 2224467
* IMR: RI-P: Safe And Flexible Experimental Dataset Access and Sharing-Planning (SAFED-ASP)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2023
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,149.00

The SAFED-ASP Project (full title: IMR: RI-P: Safe And Flexible Experimental
Dataset Access and Sharing--Planning) is an NSF cyberinfrastructure planning
grant to work towards new methods to support federated data sharing while
managing privacy. This work will be critical to inform new research in protocol
design, cybersecurity, and privacy with real-world data. However, privacy
requirements make network data difficult to share for several reasons: (1) Data
should be anonymized, but to retain research value, that anonymization may
require customization; (2) Data may require explicit agreements between
researchers and data providers, agreements can augment anonymization and make
expectations explicit; (3) Data providers and sponsors need to track data use to
demonstrate and understand data utility and support data expiration. This
project will conduct outreach to understand community requirements in these
areas, and will prototype methods and software to manage the lifecycle of
dataset request approval, distribution, and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to develop a roadmap for
open-source software that will support the lifecycle of dataset distribution.
This lifecycle includes metadata management, efficient handling of datasets
request and approvals, and flexible dataset fulfillment. The vision is to
develop open-source software to support these activities, and a federated
community of dataset providers that either self-host or use a shared
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is to pave the
way to new approaches that will will reduce friction in data sharing and improve
data handling responsibility and transparency. Broader dataset availability is
key to applying machine learning and big-data techniques to networking and
security problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website is
https://ant.isi.edu/safed/. The platform and software will become available as
it is developed and as it matures through a full proposal. Tools developed is
expected to be hosted at this site and is also suitable for self-
hosting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.