* 2224861
* TRTech-PGR: Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of the plastid genome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pal Maliga, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,462,775.00

High-frequency plastid transformation in Arabidopsis was achieved by using
plants hyper-sensitive to spectinomycin, the selective agent used in chloroplast
transformation. The current bottleneck of plastid transformation in Arabidopsis
is the difficulty of obtaining fertile plants from transplastomic tissue culture
cells. This tissue culture limitation will be overcome by using Agrobacterium to
directly transform plastids in the oocytes and identification of transgenic
events by germinating seed on selective medium. To achieve this goal,
Agrobacterium will be re-engineered to enable T-DNA delivery to the plastids of
maternal germline cells. This process will avoid tissue culture and tissue-
culture induced genetic variation, thereby greatly simplifying the process of
obtaining transplastomic plants. Side-stepping the tissue culture process
eliminates the need for specialized expertise to practice plastid transformation
in Arabidopsis. Therefore, research proposed here will lead to widespread
applications of Arabidopsis plastid genome engineering which, combined with the
available extensive genomic resources, will have a major impact on basic science
and applications in biotechnology. The new protocol for plastid transformation
will be applicable in any crop in which the floral dip protocol yields nuclear
transgenic plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to directly
transform plastids in the female gametocyte in Arabidopsis flowers by re-
engineering Agrobacterium for T-DNA delivery to chloroplasts. During
Agrobacterium infection, VirD2 nicks the T-DNA border sequences and covalently
links to the 5’ end of the T-strand via its Tyr29. The T-strand is then guided
through the Type IV secretion system (T4SS) to the plant cell, where it
integrates in the plant nucleus. With support from the NSF EAGER Grant, VirD2
was reengineered by removing its nuclear localization signals (NLSs) and fusing
its N-terminus with a chloroplast-targeting transit peptide (TP). The
reengineered plastid-VirD2 (Pt-VirD2) was shown to localize to chloroplasts in a
split GFP assay, in which VirD2 fused with 16 amino-acids of GFP (GFP11)
complemented a large GFP (GFP1-10) already in chloroplasts. Agrobacterium-
mediated chloroplast transformation will be obtained by constructing vectors
which encode both T-DNA and Pt-VirD2 function. Pt-VirD2 will direct T-DNA
containing an antibiotic resistance marker to the plastid genome. To develop the
method, transplastomic events will be identified by cocultivation of
Agrobacterium with tobacco leaves and selecting for antibiotic resistance
encoded in the vector. Arabidopsis flowers will then be dipped in an
Agrobacterium culture carrying the plastid transformation vector and
transplastomic Arabidopsis plants will be identified by germinating seed on a
selective medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.