* 2224084
* Engineering probiotic yeast to release intracellular molecules into the mammalian gut
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Nathan Crook, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Manufacturing desired molecules in the body offers a way to directly deliver
therapies for challenging to treat conditions. The goal of this project is to
harness an individual’s own microbiome to manufacture therapeutic molecules in
the gut. The collaborative team of researchers, spanning expertise in genetic
engineering and human cell biology, will investigate how to engineer probiotic
yeast to react to the gut environment and use this information to design yeast
strains that sense they are in the gut and produce vitamin A. The findings from
this work can inform other "just-in-time" biomanufacturing approaches in a
variety of microbes. This project will include undergraduate researchers and
bring in students from under-represented backgrounds in STEM via the TRIO Upward
Bound and Scientist for a Day programs at North Carolina State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research team aims to develop
strategies that enable high-titer production of biomolecules in Saccharomyces
boulardii (Sb), a non-pathogenic probiotic yeast, in response to gut conditions.
Combinations of gene knockouts that enhance protein secretion under gut-like
conditions by probiotic yeast will be identified. Multiple strategies will be
pursued and tested to enhance biomolecule delivery through expression of
dedicated export proteins and programmed self-lysis. The release of two model
compounds, β-carotene and antimicrobial peptides, will be evaluated using
quantitative proteomics and metagenome sequencing, respectively. This work
expands the frontiers of biomanufacturing by establishing innovative strategies
enabling general biomolecule release into the mammalian gut. Furthermore, this
will be the first effort to engineer small molecule secretion in the gut and the
first effort to engineer self-lysis in yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly funded by the ENG-CBET-Cellular and Biochemical Engineering program and
BIO-MCB-Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.