* 2224182
* I-Corps: A portable, self-administered ophthalmic imaging device for remote diagnosis of vision threatening disease
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Sumit Chopra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of eye care delivery technology empowering patients and shifting
aspects of diagnosis and management to the home. Currently, there are no remote,
self-use eye imaging options available to patients. Age-related macular
degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR), and glaucoma represent leading
causes of irreversible vision loss in the US. Early detection, consistent
follow-up, and timely treatment are essential in preventing blindness. Remote
monitoring removes the patient barriers associated with in-person visits such as
time off from work and child care and travel costs and presents an opportunity
to improve the quality of care. Studies have demonstrated that home-based
testing with increased frequency can detect glaucoma progression over 1.5 years
sooner than traditional testing. Early studies in home-based AMD monitoring have
also demonstrated higher detection rates for neovascular disease and lower rates
of vision loss. In the US, access to ophthalmologic care remains limited; Fewer
than half of the 12 million Americans with diabetes undergo screening for
retinopathy, and an estimated 2.4 million Americans have undetected glaucoma.
Rates of AMD, glaucoma and DR continue to rise precipitously, and addressing the
widening gaps in health equity in ophthalmologic care requires new
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a portable, self-administered anterior segment and retinal fundus-imaging
device to facilitate evaluation of vision threatening diseases such as diabetic
retinopathy (DR), age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and glaucoma using
telemedicine. The proposed device includes instrumentation and software that
automates the eye exam, allowing patients to self-image. From the patientâ€™s
home, the patient receives remote screening and monitoring of potentially
blinding conditions. Alongside this device, the team plans to build a data
platform to enable collection, use and sharing of data for tele-ophthalmology
services to facilitate remote evaluation with providers. A core aspect of the
device is the unique gaze tracking technology which allows automated acquisition
of images and improved accuracy/precision by remaining centered on the eye while
also allowing assess to other key aspects of ocular
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.