* 2224555
* Collaborative Research: Costs and Trade-offs of Phenotypically Flexible Responses to Winter Temperature Variability in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Ana Jimenez, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2026
* USD 160,604.00

Global climate change is producing winter warming but also more variable winter
temperatures. This variability includes more frequent cold snaps. This increase
in temperature fluctuation may create challenges for birds and other animals.
Birds can adjust their physiology to respond to fluctuating temperatures. It is
uncertain, however, if birds can respond fast enough to match these
fluctuations. This uncertainty makes conservation planning for winter birds
difficult. This project will study how birds respond to fluctuations in winter
temperatures. The study will also identify costs of adjusting physiology that
might limit how well birds can respond to fluctuating temperatures. Both natural
and laboratory studies will be used to answer questions about how birds are able
to adjust to temperature fluctuations. These studies will also determine what
levels (tissues, cells, sub-cellular) are involved in these adjustments. The
project will provide a broad view of the ability of birds to respond to
temperature fluctuations expected under future climate change. The project will
involve early-career and established faculty and students at various stages in
their careers. The studies will also engage Indigenous and African-American
college students. Another goal of the project is to involve a diversity of
people to help improve scientific literacy. The project targets activities for
elementary and high school students and the general public for this purpose.
Data from the project are also expected to assist development of modeling
approaches to predict bird responses to climate change to better assess
conservation impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mean winter temperatures are
increasing rapidly in the north-central U.S. but superimposed on this trend is
more temperature variability, including more frequent cold snaps. Such
punctuated cold periods will require flexible adjustments of thermoregulatory
physiology of birds to match environmental conditions and could lead to
physiology-environment mismatches. Flexible physiological responses allow birds
to better match metabolic phenotypes to variable climates and can produce
fitness benefits. The costs of such flexibility, however, are poorly known, are
recommended targets of future research, and are critical elements to understand
the capacities of organisms to respond to increasing climatic variability
projected by climate change models. This project examines avian metabolic
flexibility in response to fluctuating temperatures at organismal, cellular and
molecular levels, including studies examining responses to natural seasonal and
within-season temperature variation and experimental temperature acclimation
studies with warm, cold, and fluctuating cold temperatures. These integrative
studies will provide an unprecedented view of the mechanisms, costs, trade-offs,
and fitness consequences of flexible metabolic responses of birds to increasing
temperature variability expected under future climate change scenarios. The
collaborative project will involve senior and junior-level faculty, a
postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate students. The project will also
engage Indigenous and African-American undergraduate students and will involve
K-12 students and the general public in scientific activities related to project
goals to help improve scientific literacy. Data from the project are also
expected to benefit next-generation models of bird responses to climate change
by facilitating incorporation of physiological flexibility and temperature
variability into such models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.