* 2224854
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Biodiversity and stability on a changing planet: plant traits and interactions that stabilize or destabilize ecosystems and populations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Julie Etterson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2027
* USD 283,627.00

Extreme climate events and biodiversity loss are destabilizing ecosystems.
Increases in the variability of plant productivity from one year to the next
could threaten the reliable supply of ecosystem services that depend on plant
productivity, which include food production and climate regulation. Furthermore,
extreme climate events and some other global environmental changes (e.g.,
nitrogen deposition and rising atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations) could
destabilize populations of individual species, potentially threatening their
persistence. Species traits can determine responses to global change and
influence stability. It remains unclear, however, how global changes are
shifting plant species’ traits and interactions, through ecological and
evolutionary responses, in ways that could stabilize or destabilize ecosystems
and populations. Furthermore, it is not yet possible to predict long-term
invariability from short-term estimates of resistance and resilience or to
forecast the resistance of ecosystems and populations to perturbations, such as
droughts, prior to their occurrence. Through theoretical modeling and ecological
and evolutionary experiments this work will evaluate the effects of species
traits on community resistance and resilience the face of environmental change.
In addition, the project will (1) engage K-12 students and teachers from urban
and rural communities on field trips to the field research site; (2) develop
science kits and lessons for use in K-12 classrooms; and (3) provide research
training and mentoring for undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing and
testing an integrated and predictive framework for considering how global
changes are driving ecological and evolutionary shifts in plant traits in ways
that can stabilize or destabilize populations or ecosystems. The proposed
projects will: (1) test new theoretical predictions regarding how invariability
depends on its resistance and resilience components; (2) determine how
invariability, resistance, and resilience depend on plant species traits and
species interactions; (3) conduct new greenhouse and field experiments, using
seeds collected from ongoing long-term experiments, to determine how evolution
has altered species’ traits, resistance, resilience, and invariability; and (4)
scale out to other grasslands and forests and up to larger spatial scales to
test theoretical predictions regarding dependence of invariability on its
resistance and resilience components, and how invariability, resistance, and
resilience depend on plant species traits through a synthesis working group.
Much of this work uses data and seeds from BioDIV and BioCON, the world’s
longest-running biodiversity experiments. These experiments fully cross
biodiversity treatments with several global change treatments (warming, drought,
elevated CO2, and/or enriched N), allowing tests of eco-evolutionary responses
to global changes in the presence or absence of plant species
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.