* 2224973
* Track I Center Catalyst: Collaborative Center for Landslides and Ground Failure Geohazards
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Rafael Bras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,132.00

Landslides are a common hazard in mountainous terrain worldwide, and they occur
throughout all US states and territories. In the US alone, annual landslide-
related losses have been estimated to be more than $2B with the loss of 25 to 50
lives. Worldwide landslides claimed more than 18,000 lives between 1998 and
2017. This Track I proposal will use Puerto Rico as a living laboratory to study
landslides, related ground failure hazards, and their community impact. This
proposal will develop a primary hub for a national center proposal in Track 2 as
a collaboration between the Georgia Institute of Technology (GT), the University
of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez (UPRM), and the University of Colorado Boulder (CUB).
This primary hub will serve as a model for integrating research aims with
community engagement, student education, and workforce development. Goals
include the inclusion of historically underrepresented groups in cutting-edge
scientific research, communicating landslide science to communities vulnerable
to mass wasting, and preparing a new generation of subject matter experts and
leaders. A “Landslide Ready” program for emergency managers and community
leaders will underpin efforts to communicate landslide preparedness and hazard
response best practices in a meaningful way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Puerto
Rico hub, and ultimately a Collaborative Center for Landslides and Ground
Failure Geohazards, will focus research on the fundamental causes and triggering
mechanisms of landslides as well as developing an understanding of hazards
cascading from ground failure. The hub will provide a platform for fieldwork and
modeling tools tailored specifically for landslide science. Scientific questions
to be addressed by the national center include: Can we predict landslide
triggering in complicated terrain? What are the interactions between rainfall,
topography, and vegetation and landslide risk? Do landslides promote the release
or capture of carbon? Can we forecast the post-event riverine flux of coarse
sediment and its impacts on future flood hazards? Track I science objectives
include developing the cyber-infrastructure for integrating data and models and
formulating a landslide geohazard forecasting system for Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.