* 2224644
* Conference: Student and Junior Faculty Support for the International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST) 2022
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Lu Liu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 18,000.00

2224644 (Lu). The International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology
(ISSST) conference will engage participants from multiple disciplines to focus
on sustainability and engineering challenges. This conference, to be held June
21-23, 2022 in Pittsburgh, PA, will address a spectrum of issues for assessing
and managing products and services across their life cycle, as well as the
design, management, and policy implications of sustainably engineered systems
and technologies. ISSST 2022 will highlight five themes: (1) Integrated human-
physical systems – how to integrate human dimensions into sustainability design
and implementations; (2) Infrastructure sustainability and resiliency –
quantitative assessment of the sustainability and resiliency of the built
environment; (3) Advances in sustainability assessment methods – the development
of new sustainability assessment methods, including data science and analytics,
machine learning, multi-objective analyses, and other methods for emerging
systems and technologies; (4) Sustainability education – pedagogical approaches
to teaching sustainability at different levels and lessons learned in designing
sustainability curriculum; and (5) Other creative sustainability-related topics
– new methods and ideas that demonstrate unique partnerships, big ideas,
perspectives from non-STEM (science, technology, engineering, math) disciplines.
The conference will also host special sessions to bring participants together in
educational sessions, workshops, communications, and professional skills
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is designed for significant
participation from students and young faculty members, as this is critical for
developing the next generation of sustainable solutions. This grant will help to
expand the participation of students, underrepresented groups, and junior
faculty from across the United States in ISSST 2022. Social equity, differential
access and impacts, and environmental justice will be prominent across all of
the five themes of the 2022 conference. Several sessions are also expected to
address the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on production and consumption,
pollution, and critical infrastructure systems. A diverse group of members will
share their work in sustainability science and engineering through paper and
poster presentations, as well as formal and informal discussions. The conference
will also feature a variety of plenary/keynote speakers, including Dr. Aurora
Sharrad, Director of Sustainability, from University of Pittsburgh and Dr.
Ranran Wang from Leiden University, Netherlands. All of this will provide
participants a venue for discussing visions, educational approaches, challenges,
as well as provide educators and students opportunities to gain insight on
research on sustainability in a holistic manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.