* 2224874
* Mechanisms of Transport Through Plasmodesmata
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 835,320.00

Most plants and animals are multicellular- composed of millions or billions of
cells with specialized functions. Communication between these cells is
essential, as it helps coordinate growth, development and physiology. Plants
have a special mode of communication whereby they transport biological signals
composed of proteins and nucleic acids between cells. These signals pass though
nanochannels called plasmodesmata. Despite the fact that plasmodesmata are
essential for plant survival, very little is known about how they control and
transport different signals. A clearer understanding of this process has the
potential to enhance crop productivity, and to control the spread of plant
diseases. Hence, this proposal will advance knowledge in a fundamental area of
plant biology, and has the potential to improve agricultural crops. The project
will also train young scientists at various levels, from high school to post-
doctoral, in cutting edge biological research. The PI serves as Director of the
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Partners For the Future program, which immerses
local high school students in active research labs. The project team will also
develop an educational alliance with Genspace, a Citizen Science organization in
Brooklyn, New York. This alliance will engage with a minority serving High
School in Brooklyn, New York and will host college and career preparedness
sessions, and teach labs and lead discussions in plant genetics research. These
activities are aimed at sharing the excitement and applications of plant
genetics research to students who otherwise have little exposure to the
scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most plant cells are connected to their
neighbors by specialized nanochannels called plasmodesmata (PDs). PDs control
the transport of signaling molecules, including proteins and mRNAs, as well as
metabolites, allowing organismal coordination of physiology and development.
This project will study the PD transport of mRNAs that encode homeodomain
transcription factors, important for plant growth and stem cell fate. An RNA
binding protein is required for trafficking of these mRNAs, providing a
mechanism for how this signaling process may be controlled. The project will
study protein-RNA interactions to ask how the RNA binding protein transports
specific RNAs, and will ask which additional mRNAs it interacts with. The
project will also develop chimeric plants and use single cell sequencing to
screen for additional mobile mRNA signals. Trafficking of regulatory mRNAs
provides a system to understand how plasmodesmata coordinate stem cell function
during plant development. Application of this research in fine tuning of mRNA
localization could allow engineering of crop plants to optimize their growth and
responses to the environment, leading to increased
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.