* 2224032
* EAGER: Test of Concept for Induced Fuel-Coolant Interaction Experiments with Bubbly Melt
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Greg Valentine, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 88,160.00

This Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) addresses a newly
observed phenomenon that occurred during the January 15, 2022 eruption of the
Hunga Tonga volcano. Although phreatomagmatic eruptions tend to be
unpredictable, the very high eruption column of Hunga Tonga created a pressure
pulse in the atmosphere that was measured around the globe, leading scientists
to estimate that the energy released was equivalent to several 10 megatons of
TNT. Initial findings show that some properties of the magma may have played a
critical role in making this volcano so explosive. The investigators will
attempt to conduct laboratory experiments in larger scales than before to test
the hypothesis that the presence of vesicle networks, bubbles, enhanced the rate
of heat transfer from magma to water during induced fuel coolant interaction,
caused the highly explosive system expansion observed. In terms of broader
impacts, successful results would help our understanding of how interactions
between magma and water can lead to explosive events and constrain the effects
of scaling on our models for this phenomenon. Support will also help enhance
infrastructure for research and education, while providing training for a
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to study the possible
influence of bubble networks on the explosivity of magma-water interaction, by
conducting induced fuel coolant interaction experiments on a meter-scale, which
involves about 30 Liters of melt. This will be the first realization of this
mechanism type on a larger than lab scale, which allows for more material
complexities and helps to scale laboratory findings to field scale. It is
suggested that that in the Hunga Tonga volcanic eruption of January 2022, the
presence of vesicle networks, bubbles, enhanced the rate of heat transfer from
magma to water during induced fuel coolant interaction that caused the highly
explosive system expansion. The investigators will adapt their current
experimental setup that have proven to work in previous magma-water interaction
tests to provide means to scale lab- and meter-scale observations to natural
scale scenarios. If successful, they hope to answer whether bubbles can serve as
a booster to interaction intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.