* 2224712
* LTER: KBS - Ecological and Social Mechanisms of Resilience in Agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2028
* Nicholas Haddad, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 11/30/2028
* USD 1,275,000.00

Since 1989, scientists at the Kellogg Biological Station Long-Term Ecological
Research program have been studying the ecology of agricultural systems. This
research would extend that research to 40 years while adding to our knowledge of
how plants, insects, microbes, soils, and climate interact to shape agricultural
landscapes. Importantly, in the US Midwest where corn and soy row crops
predominate, farmers increasingly must deal with warmer temperatures and more
frequent droughts. This project will study how different farming and
conservation practices affect agriculture’s ability to recover from these
events. The past three decades of research has shown that some practices help
crops recover from extreme weather better than others. For example, no-till
farming and the planting of cover crops builds soil health, leading to more
stable crop yields through drought. This long term research will determine if
improving soil health and biodiversity in agricultural landscapes can help
farmers deal with a more unpredictable future. Experimental results will provide
broader impacts through the dissemination of knowledge about carbon
sequestration to stakeholders and policymakers. The use of prairie and other
conservation areas to enhance ecosystem services will also provide broader
impacts and the research will reduce barriers for underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Resilience will be determined across a gradient of land use
intensities, ranging from conventional agriculture, to perennial bioenergy
cropping systems, to prairie and other natural areas. Long-term measurements
spanning diverse organisms, biophysical resources, biogeochemical processes, and
climatic factors will reveal linkages among ecosystem components that may be key
to enhancing system-level resilience. Three classes of mechanisms are identified
that underlie agroecosystem resilience – resources, diversity, and adaptation.
The overarching hypothesis in this proposal is that knowledge of these
mechanisms enables the resilience of key ecosystem processes to be predicted at
field, landscape, and regional scales. Specific hypotheses focus on: soil
resources effects on water availability, carbon storage, and greenhouse gas
emissions; on biodiversity effects of microbial and arthropod communities at
plant and landscape scales; on evolutionary adaptation; and on farmer adaptation
influenced by beliefs and values. These hypotheses will be addressed with
strategically designed experiments, including a large-scale rainfall
manipulation, the introduction of perennial prairie strips within agricultural
fields, and a farmer survey that will reach thousands of farmers across the US
Midwest. Finally, scientists will introduce new tools to address how resilience
scales across landscapes that will allow us to extrapolate site-specific
measurements to the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.