* 2224139
* Enabling Principles for Manufacturing van der Waals Heterostructures with Clean Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Davood Shahrjerdi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2025
* USD 376,022.00

A new class of artificial materials can be obtained through the layered assembly
of multiple two-dimensional (2D) materials, known as van der Waals
heterostructures. These heterostructures are promising for the development of
new electronics. In recent years, considerable scientific and technological
progress has occurred toward producing different 2D materials with large in-
plane dimensions. However, the layered assembly of those materials into
similarly sized heterostructures with clean interfaces remains challenging.
Specifically, electronics made from those heterostructures require an extremely
clean interface between the layers in order to function as desired. This project
will establish new strategies for fabricating van der Waals heterostructures
with clean interfaces and large dimensions. This award supports the creation of
new educational and research opportunities at New York University by fostering
the interdisciplinary area of quantum materials and devices and aligns with the
NSF Big Idea of Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution by developing
material systems and devices that have the potential to enable new quantum
technologies. The project will educate graduate and undergraduate students and
prepare them for industrial or academic careers, while aiming to broaden the
participation of students with different backgrounds, emphasizing those who are
underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many exciting physical properties
of 2D materials manifest when these materials are built into heterostructures
with clean interfaces. However, a primary barrier to manufacturing these
heterostructures is the inability to remove polymeric residues from the
interfaces that arise when assembling the 2D materials. This research will help
fill the knowledge gap on mechanisms for the interface cleaning of polymer-
contaminated heterostructures by studying this problem from an energy viewpoint.
To this end, the project will examine three major principles: 1) interactions of
polymer residues with 2D materials, 2) mobilization of polymer residues at the
interfaces, and 3) mechanical actuation of the mobilized residues through
engineering an elastomeric stamp. This research will use heterostructures based
on graphene and molybdenum disulfide as test vehicles and employ polyvinyl
alcohol and paraffin as examples for the polymeric contaminations. The research
team will establish the mechanisms of interface cleaning in polymer-contaminated
heterostructures and create clean heterostructures with macroscopic
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.