* 2224262
* Regulation Of Plasma Membrane Properties in Excitable Cells by Wnt Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Andres Barria, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Excitable cells produce, amplify, and propagate electrical signals. In the
nervous system, these cells carry the information that allows multicellular
organisms to coordinate a range of sensory and motor functions, from producing
simple escape responses to orchestrating sophisticated learning and cognitive
behaviors. This project investigates fundamental molecular and cellular
properties of neurons regulated by Wnt signaling, a highly conserved cellular
signaling pathway that regulates animal embryonic development but is also
present in the mature central nervous system (where its function is still poorly
understood). Preliminary data suggests that Wnt signaling in adults enables
nerve cells to better synchronize their activity, a necessary step for proper
information processing, memory formation, and cognition. Using a novel and
systematic approach combining fluorescence imaging, electrophysiology,
biochemistry, and molecular biology, this project will elucidate exactly how Wnt
signaling regulates adult neuronal properties. This knowledge will further
scientific understanding about how anatomically static neural circuits can
adjust the responses of their cellular components to adaptively respond to
changes in incoming stimuli. In addition, this project will offer training
opportunities for students from underrepresented and disadvantaged communities
in modern neuroscience techniques, and to participate in career development and
networking events that will bolster their abilities to pursue careers in science
and technology. The principal investigator will also carry out a number of
activities that will contribute to generating a more diverse, equitable, and
inclusive environment at the sponsoring institution, and in his own field of
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Wnt signaling is a highly conserved signal
transduction pathway that regulates embryonic development of metazoans and is
also present in the mature central nervous system of mammals, where its function
is poorly understood. We have described a novel non-canonical Wnt signaling
cascade that regulates trafficking of NMDA-type glutamate receptors (NMDARs)
affecting synaptic plasticity, a cellular and molecular model of memory
formation. Our most recent studies show that Wnt signaling in addition alters
two key intrinsic properties of neurons: the resting membrane potential and the
preferred resonant frequency that gives rise to coordinated oscillatory
behaviors in cellular circuits. In a logical extension of our previous work,
this project examines Wnt regulation of key plasma membrane ionic channels that
shape cellular resonance and the metabolism of membrane lipids involved in such
regulation. We hypothesize that Wnt signaling modulates intrinsic properties of
cell membranes via modulation of the metabolism of plasma membrane lipids and
key ion channels that underlie cellular resonance. We will: 1) identify the ion
channels regulated by Wnt signaling that are involved in modulating intrinsic
properties of neurons, and 2) establish whether Wnt signaling regulates
distribution and availability of plasma membrane phospholipids that determine
biophysical properties of membrane ion channel activities. The new information
produced by this project is expected to lead to a greater understanding of how
neural circuits adaptively regulate the properties of their constituent cells to
help organisms cope with the constantly changing world around
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.