* 2224229
* Investigating Mantle Dynamics in the Pacific Northwest Using 3D Anisotropic Velocity Models from Surface Wave Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Aibing Li, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 167,774.00

The Pacific Northwest (PNW) is in a unique geological setting, where the oceanic
Juan De Fuca (JDF) plate is subducting under the North American plate. It is
believed that the JDF slab has interacted with the Yellowstone hotspot since at
least 20 million years ago, generating pervasive volcanism in the northwestern
United States. The plate subduction and the slab-hotspot interaction are the
driving forces for the surface geology in the PNW, including volcanoes and
earthquakes. The alignment of age-progressive volcanos (hotspot track) in the
Snake River Plain (SRP) is SW-NE, agreeing with the plate motion of the North
American plate, suggesting the Yellowstone hotspot is probably a plume that
originates from the deep mantle, like the Hawaii hotspot. However, the volcanos
in the High Lava Plains (HLP) form a hotspot track in the NW direction, against
the plume hypothesis. The mechanisms for the bimodal hotspot tracks and the
voluminous magmatism in the PNW are still under debate. Previous seismic
velocity models beneath the northwestern United States have improved the
understanding of the complex geology in the area. The velocity of a seismic wave
also depends on its propagation direction, called seismic anisotropy, which is
associated with lithospheric deformation and mantle flow. Therefore, imaging
seismic anisotropy is critical to understanding the dynamic mantle process of
the earth. The investigator will produce a high-resolution, 3D seismic
anisotropy model in the Pacific Northwest to address the slab-hotspot
interaction and its contribution to the extensive volcanism. The model is also
helpful in understanding and monitoring seismicity and volcano eruptions in the
area. The project will train one graduate and one undergraduate student in
seismic data processing and tomography methods. The research results will be
shared with the scientific community through conferences, journals, and websites
and with students in the investigatorâ€™s undergraduate and graduate courses at
the University of Houston, a minority serving institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic plate subduction, back-arc volcanism, and hotspot
activity have shaped the geological history of the Pacific Northwest. Many high-
resolution seismic models have been developed using data from the USArray
Transportable Array (TA), improving our understanding of tectonics and
geodynamics in the region. However, whether the source of the widespread
magmatism along the SRP and HLP is from a mantle plume or intruding hot oceanic
asthenosphere is not resolved. Many local velocity anomalies imply complex
small-scale mantle convection in the region, which has not been verified in
current anisotropic models with limited lateral or vertical resolution. The
investigator will construct a high-resolution anisotropic model using Rayleigh
and Love wave data from earthquakes recorded at the TA and other coexisting
stations in the northwestern United States. The resolution for radial and
azimuthal anisotropy in these models is similar to that for isotropic velocity,
helping reveal detailed mantle dynamic processes and test possible mechanisms
for geophysical observations in the Pacific Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.