* 2224840
* SBIR Phase I:  Separations of Critical Materials in Lithium-ion Battery Black Mass
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Aaron Palumbo, REQYRD, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to establish domestic recyclability
(circularity) for critical energy materials that have majority or total import
reliance. Such elements include including cobalt, lithium, manganese, carbon
(graphite), and nickel. Establishing circularity of critical materials can
decease dependence on foreign sources while increasing domestic manufacturing of
lithium-ion batteries, magnets, catalysts, and superalloys. As the world
electrifies light- and heavy-duty vehicles and renewable energy resources
increase, the need for battery materials is expected to quadruple over the next
decade. Hydrometallurgical processes are highly nuanced and well-established;
The configurations are nearly endless, especially when multiple recycle streams
are incorporated. Additionally, customers require tight specifications. As
battery chemistries evolve, a process technology that can be shown to be
adaptable to variable compositional profiles can help proliferate domestic
production to anchor advanced industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project proposes to fill knowledge gaps in separation chemistries using
sulfites. Through exploitation of solubilities, effective and efficient
separations of constituents in end-of-life lithium-ion batteries can reduce
reagent consumption, decrease equipment sizing, and lead to the formation of
battery-grade chemical feedstocks for demonstrated supply chain circularity. Key
to the success of the project is the separation of manganese without resorting
to expensive solvent-based techniques. The project will explore of the
solubilities of Ni/Co/Mn/Li sulfites as a function of temperature and pH,
characterize the form of the precipitates, and investigate the oxidation of
these sulfite precipitates to a high purity sulfate. The objectives include
determining missing data on empirical solubility from the general material
property literature, demonstrating lab-scale selectivity and overall efficacy,
and optimizing operational parameters for techno-economic and life-cycle
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.