* 2224312
* Accomplished Based Renewal: A Glacial Age Synthesis of Western North Atlantic Hydrography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 177,799.00

In the present day, warm and salty near surface waters of Gulf Stream origin are
transported to high latitudes where they give up their heat and warm northeast
Europe. At the same time the surface waters become denser and exit the Nordic
(Greenland, Iceland, and Norwegian) Seas and over about 1000 years spread to
other parts of the ocean. This process was interrupted during glacial times
because the Nordic Seas were freshened by water from nearby ice sheets, and
climate in Europe was more like Greenland today. As a result, it is often
thought that deep ocean circulation was “off” during glaciation, and “on” during
interglacial climate. Considering the size and climate impact of deep ocean
circulation, the deep ocean is poorly sampled. For example, only recently it was
found that at depths greater than 5000 m there was a dense, salty water that
must have been produced in the Nordic or Labrador Seas during glacial times. So
now it can be stated that the glacial circulation was probably never “off.” This
project will increase the existing database of glacial-age sediment properties
from the western subtropical North Atlantic by about 30 percent, and that in
turn will lead to a first three-dimensional picture of the “state” of the
glacial ocean where the export of heat, salt, nutrients, and carbon dioxide can
be modeled and quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accurately reconstruct past
changes in deep water circulation requires a wide distribution of stable isotope
(d18O and d13C) measurements and radiocarbon dates on microscopic fossil shells
from deep sea sediment cores at various locations and depths. These cores were
collected by the Principal Investigator on research cruises from 1994, 1998,
2004, 2010, 2017, 2019, and 2021 and new data will be developed for a dozen of
them. The stable isotopes are proxies for deep ocean temperature, salinity and
CO2 content, and radiocarbon data from plankton will be used to identify the
last glacial maximum (about 20,000 years ago) as well as act as a tracer for the
age of the deep water in shells of bottom dwelling microfossils. In addition,
the glacial maximum data compilation will include cores from the upper 2 km of
the western North Atlantic, where there are few data, but very strong gradients
in paleo properties are indicative of salinity, temperature, nutrients, and
transport in Glacial North Atlantic Intermediate Water. The synthesis data will
be useful for studying the ocean’s capacity to store and transport heat, salt,
and nutrients and will be used to validate climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.