* 2224986
* Revisiting the Stormtime Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling: Enhancement of the Dawnside Auroral Electrojet
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Shinichi Ohtani, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2027
* USD 643,143.00

The geomagnetic storm is the most intense class of disturbances in geospace, and
the critical target of space weather. Space weather is a relatively new area of
space science, which aims at understanding and predicting space-oriented events
that impact societal infrastructures such as satellite operations in general,
GPS system, and power grids, and sometimes they even risk human health (e.g.,
radiation exposure for aircraft and space crews). This study investigates the
stormtime ionospheric current and its source in the magnetosphere. During
geomagnetic storms, the ionospheric current intensifies especially in high
latitudes, partly because the energy input from the solar wind to the
magnetosphere increases, and partly because intense auroral precipitation
enhances the ionospheric conductance. Moreover, during some severe storms, the
ionospheric current moves equatorward down to the northern part of the
continental US, and farther south during historically intense storms. Such
events are widely known as a threat to US power networks. This study seeks to
observationally characterize and understand a stormtime current system in the
dawn local time sector, where ground magnetic disturbances very often become the
largest in magnitude. It is expected that the successful achievement of this
project brings new insights into stormtime electrodynamics in geospace and
contributes to building models to predict hazardous
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target of this research project, the
enhancement of the dawnside auroral electrojet (AEJ), which was recently
identified as a plausible cause of the dawn-dusk asymmetry of stormtime ground
magnetic depression, a characteristic feature of the storm main phase. The
confinement of this current system in the dawn sector suggests that this AEJ
enhancement is an ionospheric segment of a 3D current system, the dawnside wedge
current (DWC) system. However, its generation process is largely unknown. One
hypothesis is that (A) the DWC system is an intense substorm current wedge
skewed dawnward, and an alternative idea is that (B) it forms because the
dawnside ionospheric conductance enhances in the presence of intense global
convection. This project seeks to observationally examine the characteristics of
the DCW development from five viewpoints: (1) internal and external conditions
for its occurrence; (2) spatial and temporal scales; (3) time sequence of its
development and preconditioning; (4) dipolarization and particle injection; (5)
plasma sheet convection. The team will systematically select events with
SuperMAG indices, and will address (1) with the probability density functions of
various internal and external parameters, (2) and (3) with polar distributions
of magnetic disturbances and aurora, (4) with magnetic field and energetic
particle flux measurements in the near-Earth magnetosphere, and (5) with
convection measurements in the plasma sheet. We critically evaluate the results
in terms of the aforementioned two hypotheses, (A) and (B). By revealing the
process responsible for the formation of the DWC system, the present project
will advance our understanding of storm dynamics to a new
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.