* 2224841
* Planning: Developing Collaborative Research Partnerships with Nunavut Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Eranga Galappaththi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award supports conceptualization, planning, and collaboration activities
with two Canadian Inuit communities experiencing the effects of rapid climate
change. The project will explore how known climate impacts intersect with non-
climate variables (such as access to health care, paid work, and education) in
two Arctic communities with mixed food systems (i.e., reliant upon both
subsistence resources and participation in the market economy). Working in
partnership with Elders and community leaders, the PI will conduct a series of
virtual and in-person meetings to co-identify research questions, methods, and
evaluation activities aligned with the communities’ food security goals. Ethical
considerations will be explicitly addressed during the process. This
collaborative work will lay the foundation for a standard research proposal that
the PI will iterate with community members. Translations will be provided and
community members will have the opportunity to comment using culturally
appropriate modes of communication. Finally, the PI and communities will jointly
develop evaluation milestones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-produced
with two Inuit communities, who will partner with the PI to identify research
questions and appropriate data collection methods. Initial meetings with
community leaders and Elders will be informal and virtual, followed by in-person
presentations and discussion with council members. Focus groups at each site
will identify both food security concerns and community strengths, assisted by
local research assistants and Inuktitut translators. Joint proposal design will
be an iterative process, using multiple forms of outreach to engage community
members. All stages of project planning will prioritize collaboration and
partnership-building. Deliverables include a research proposal developed using
these participatory methods and a peer-reviewed article describing the process.
Broader impacts include graduate student training in Arctic research, capacity
building, and the development of new research
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Arctic
Research Opportunities Program and Ethical and Responsible Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.