* 2224778
* Reviewer Zero: Changing the Culture of Peer Review to Increase Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mariam Aly, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 107,709.00

Science advances because scientists collect data, develop methods, and generate
theories that become part of a shared scientific record. To be part of this
shared record, scientific works go through peer review by other scientists.
Although peer review is intended to promote rigorous standards, it also has
consequences for the scientific workforce - for who wants to stay and who is
able to stay, in research-focused careers. Despite peer review’s place as a core
scientific practice, learning how to engage with peer review is not explicitly
taught. Few people receive training or oversight to ensure that reviewers
provide feedback that is helpful, professional, and culturally sensitive (i.e.,
delivered in a way that does not marginalize underrepresented minority
scholars). Graduate students’ experiences with peer review can influence whether
they decide to stay in the STEM pathway. This project examines peer review with
an eye to equity (are outcomes and processes equitable across groups), inclusion
(does peer review offer experiences of fit and belonging across groups), and
diversity (does peer review contribute to increasing the range of identities and
experiences constituting the field). This NSF Innovations of Graduate Education
(IGE) award to Indiana University, Columbia University, and California State San
Bernardino seeks to foster diversity, equity, and inclusion within science by
improving peer review culture and graduate students’ ability to navigate peer
review.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project supports the innovative structure and
goals of Reviewer Zero, a coalition of faculty and graduate students in
psychology and neuroscience working to understand and intervene to increase
equity in peer review processes. Reviewer Zero envisions a “reset” of peer
review culture in which reviews serve a formative rather than gatekeeping
function. This project will develop strategic programming with two audiences:
the historically underrepresented graduate students most directly affected by
inequitable systems of peer review, and the reviewers/editors who occupy
positions of power in making peer review decisions. The project will design,
deliver, and assess interventions that build awareness, knowledge, and support
for each audience. Specifically, the project asks how targeting different
aspects of the culture cycle can best shift peer review culture toward greater
equity. By re-imagining ideas about what peer review is, the evidence-based
training will engage individuals with new tools and supports, whether they are
trainees or reviewers. A new paper development system (Formative And Interactive
Review) will provide a novel institutional structure for fundamentally different
interactions between reviewers and trainees. Outreach and partnerships with
existing institutions (journals, societies) will lead to the dissemination of
new views of the goals and processes of peer review. Towards these goals, this
project will implement a comprehensive strategy to increase diversity, equity,
and inclusion in the peer review process by (a) working with reviewers/editors
to shift culture and (b) providing direct support and training to graduate
students navigating peer review. By studying how engaging with program
activities affects trainee or reviewer/editor knowledge, skills, and abilities,
the project will contribute to understanding how shifts in culture cycles
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program
is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot,
test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate
the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.