* 2224662
* LTER: CAP V: Investigating how relationships between urban ecological infrastructure and human-environment interactions shape the structure and function of urban ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2029
* Daniel Childers, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/28/2029
* USD 1,274,998.00

Humankind is increasingly an urban species and urban ecosystems are therefore
profoundly important. Cities are concentrated consumers of energy and resources
and producers of various wastes, but they are also centers of social networks,
innovation, efficiency, and solutions. The Central Arizona–Phoenix Long Term
Ecological Research program (CAP V) is a research project that includes
scientists from a variety of disciplines focused on understanding cities as
hybrid ecosystems including both environmental and human components, and their
interactions. Understanding urban ecosystems remains the central focus of CAP V
after 25 years of innovative research. The interconnectedness of human
motivation, behavior, actions, and outcomes with urban ecosystem structure and
function leads to a fundamental question addressed by this project. How have/are
human-environment interactions mediated by urban ecological infrastructure to
shape past, present, and future ecosystem functions? This project will further
indicate how we can use knowledge of these relationships to inform more just,
transformative, and sustainable futures. Broader societal impacts are
intentionally integrated in CAP V research, with many activities involving
explicit partnerships with practitioners and communities that historically have
had little voice in the future of their city and environment. This work forms a
translational link among social-ecological research outcomes, city institutions,
and communities with the goal of ultimately making Phoenix, and cities in
general, better and more sustainable places to live. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAP
research will extend its focus on the theory of Urban Ecological Infrastructure
(UEI) as a critical bridge between the system’s biophysical and human/social
domains. CAP researchers will continue to explore interdisciplinary urban
ecology in residential landscapes, urban waterbodies, desert parks and
preserves, while examining the plants, animals, climate, urban design and
governance across the metropolitan Phoenix region. New research initiatives will
include a focus on environmental justice and equity, as well as urban air
quality. The research will develop both knowledge and solutions in underserved
and historically neglected communities, including local Indigenous communities.
CAP V research is organized around five interdisciplinary areas: 1) ecosystem
structure and function and biogeochemical cycling; 2) adaptation and eco-
evolutionary dynamics; 3) urban climate, and air quality; 4) urban nature and
human perceptions, decisions, and wellbeing; and 5) environmental justice,
governance, and transformative futures. Investigating these questions, in the
context of the previous 25 years of CAP research, will guide the CAP research
endeavor towards more sustainable and resilient futures for U.S. cities and for
our increasingly urban society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
funded by the Division of Environmental Biology and the Division of Behavioral
and Cognitive Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.