* 2224960
* IUCRC Phase I  Purdue University: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sabre Kais, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 270,502.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University (Bloomington and Indiana University Purdue
University - Indianapolis Campuses), and the University of Notre Dame. The
mission of the CQT is to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders
to identify compelling needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then
develop novel solutions to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are
governed by the physics of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing,
sensing, imaging, metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their
wide-ranging applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be
transformative, with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing,
medicine, and navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but
it is still in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires
significant fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership
with industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the participating universities to
engage and support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching vision of the CQT is to bring together
multidisciplinary experts in academia, industry, and government in a self-
sustaining, collaborative venture facilitating the transition of fundamental
research discoveries in quantum science and engineering to novel, commercial-
ready technologies. Specifically, it will focus on three significant industrial
and government interests: quantum computing (including simulation and algorithm
development), quantum sensing, and quantum communications. Purdue will tackle
these areas using its expertise in quantum algorithm development and machine
learning, quantum devices and materials, quantum nanophotonics, condensed-matter
physics, and quantum chemistry. The technologies developed in the CQT could help
save energy, speed up computation, enhance national security and defense, and
innovate health care. Indeed, potential applications range from improving
traffic flow to securing banking to speeding and optimizing material and drug
designs to improve military capabilities. A variety of world-class facilities
are available on the Purdue campus to support the CQT. These include the Birck
Nanotechnology Center, which houses a 25,000 sq. ft. clean room and has a
multitude of experimental capabilities including nanofabrication, materials and
surface characterization and microscopy, quantum design physical property
measurement system, and optical characterization laboratories. The Physics
Department also houses a crystal growth facility, various portable radioactive
sources to test for radiation fidelity, machine and electronic shops, and a
helium re-capture and re-liquification system, which significantly reduces costs
of running cryogenic equipment. Purdue will also leverage several existing
mechanisms for incorporating students traditionally underrepresented in STEM
disciplines into the CQTâ€™s research, including the Minority Engineering Program,
the Science Diversity Office, and the Summer Research Opportunities Program, a
diversity recruitment opportunity aimed at preparing high-achieving
undergraduates for graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.