* 2224318
* Collaborative Research: Integrating modern and paleo perspectives to disentangle grazer and climate controls on fire activity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* John Faith, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 74,683.00

Fire is an Earth system process with both vegetation and atmospheric feedbacks.
Grass-fueled fires in savannas currently dominate global burned area, but
grazers potentially eat enough grass to suppress fires at the landscape scale.
How these processes affect global biogeochemical cycles is not quantitatively
understood. This project combines present-day experiments and observations with
paleoecological observations on the timescale of thousands of years. The project
tests predictions about the dynamics of fire activity in response to climate and
herbivory. The overall hypothesis is that grazer controls on fire activity are
substantial but depend on environmental context. Exhibits at the Yale Peabody
Museum of Natural History and the Natural History Museum of Utah are being
developed to teach about fire in the Earth system. Particularly, museumgoers are
learning about the role and dynamics of fire in the Earth system through time.
Early career scientists, such as undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates are being mentored through this project, contributing to
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a combination of
present-day and paleoecological datasets across Africa: (i) nine present-day
herbivore exclusion experiments, (ii) spatially extensive, present-day
observational records from a combination of remote sensing and on-the-ground
monitoring, and (iii) five paleoecological archives in eastern Africa, spanning
the last 20,000 years. Paleoecological records are being compiled from Lakes
Chala and Tanganyika. Existing records at Lukenya Hill, Kenya and Lakes Victoria
and Turkana are being strengthened with new proxy reconstructions of fire
history and herbivory. The proposed work advances our understanding of a
neglected fire driver in the Earth system and generates new paleorecords that
are useful to researchers from numerous disciplines, including archaeology,
paleontology, paleoecology, and paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.