* 2224565
* SaTC: CORE: Small: When and from Whom Reminder-based Corrections of Everyday Misinformation Improve Memory and Belief Accuracy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Chris Wahlheim, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 458,000.00

Misinformation shared via news and social media platforms has negative
consequences. For example, misinformation about safe and effective COVID
vaccines has reduced intent to receive them. Websites have been designed to
counteract misinformation by indicating contradictory information. But this
approach may not always be effective because reminding people of misinformation
can make it more believable. The project team is evaluating a reminding
technique that recently improved memory and belief accuracy in internet news
headlines in college students who were immediately tested. The project advances
areas of social and behavioral sciences by revealing the mental processes that
improve memory and belief accuracy for everyday news. This could benefit public
health and national defense by establishing whether this implementable method
counteracts health-based and other misinformation that can be propagated by
foreign sources. This project supports the education of a diverse student body
by being conducted at a university that emphasizes student research training and
attracts students from many backgrounds. Both undergraduate and graduate
students are training in theoretical and practical approaches to research and
analysis that will prepare them for STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project is examining whether benefits of misinformation reminders
generalize to various situation in representative US samples. Specifically, the
project is testing if the benefits extend from: presentation and test delays of
minutes to days, news headlines with text and images to podcasts and news
videos, and partisan-neutral to partisan-specific information sources varying in
perceived credibility. Participants are first being exposed to real and fake
internet news story headlines and then learning real news corrections that
sometimes appear after participants are reminded of fake news. Participantsâ€™
recall accuracy and beliefs in recalled details are then being tested. The
findings will illuminate when, how, and from whom reminders of everyday
internet-based misinformation effectively promote accurate memory and
beliefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.