* 2224902
* Collaborative Research: The interaction of surfaces structured at the nanometer scale with the cells in the physiological environment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Aladin Boriek, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2025
* USD 297,642.00

This is a collaborative project between the University of Texas at El Paso and
Baylor College of Medicine. The objective of the collaborative research project
is to understand how nanomaterials impact cellular activities in comparison to
larger materials. In this regard, the PIs will investigate the influence of
physical and chemical factors of nanomaterials in terms of adhesion and spread
of cells and synthesis of proteins. The research team proposes that the
nanomaterial surface has high surface energy, which is responsible for greater
attachment and growth of cells and enhanced formation of different proteins. The
understanding of physical and chemical interactions between nanomaterials and
cells will promote nanotechnology in the field of medical implants. An
educational development plan in nanoscience will be developed by the research
team to promote training, education and learning opportunities for students at
the University of Texas at El Paso and Baylor College of Medicine with a focus
on underrepresented students. In addition, high school students and teachers
working together with graduates and undergraduates will acquire knowledge of
nanoscience and its application to medical implants from the viewpoint of
improvements in the quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the research project is to acquire a mechanistic understanding of
the favorable modulation of cellular activity on a nanograined (NG) surface in
relation to coarse-grained (CG) counterpart. The PIs will test the central
hypothesis that “the relative influence of physical and chemical attributes of
nanoscale surface compared to the microscale counterpart favorably alters the
mechanosensitivity of the cytoskeleton. To test this hypothesis, the PIs are
planning three specific aims. In the first aim the PIs are planning to uncover
the mechanisms that will explain how grain boundary energy and surface energy
induced by the nanoscale surface modulate cell adhesion and biological
functionality. In the second aim, the PIs plan to test the hypothesis that
altered electronic properties of the nanoscale high grain boundary energy
induced nano-grained surface is the causal mechanism responsible for mediating
high cell adhesion. In the third aim, the PIs will test the hypothesis that
mechanosensing of the cytoskeleton is a key mechanism that modulates the
relationship between the adhesive (attractive) force of nanoscale nano-grained
surface to the adhesion strength of attached cells. The research project will
have the following outcomes: (i) uncover the mechanism that will explain how
nanoscale structure induces changes in surface chemistry, surface energy and
electron work functions, impacting cellular functionality; (ii) elucidate the
mechanism that includes measurable changes in the grain boundary state/energy
induced by the nanoscale structure in relation to the microcrystalline surface
and how such mechanism would modulate cell adhesion and biological
functionality; (iii) unravel the mechanism that links the relationship between
high density of grain boundaries with high grain boundary energy to the
electronic properties at the nanoscale surface; (iv) uncover the relationship
between the adhesive (attractive) force of the nanoscale surface to the
electronic properties of the surface and provide fundamental understanding of
how such mechanisms would regulate the adhesion of cells. The broader impact of
the research project lies in the potential to elucidate mechanisms underlying
cell-substrate interactions which could potentially enable design of engineered
surfaces with desired physical and chemical attributes leading to desired
biological responses. Other key aspects of broader impact of this research
include advancing the understanding of cell-nanoscale surface interactions. This
could potentially facilitate the fabrication of nanoscale patterning of
substrates and the development of innovative nanotechnology devices for
applications in fields such as biological micro-electromechanical devices and
microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.