* 2224974
* I-Corps: Rapid, Low Cost Point-of-Care Microfluidic Cancer Screening Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Max Roman, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a biopsy screening method that enables early detection of cancer.
Cancer cells can often grow and form tumors for nearly ten years before they are
initially detected. This project focuses on producing a minimally invasive and
cost-effective, point of care device for early cancer screening. This device is
intended to help detect specific cancers earlier, thereby improving patient
outcomes globally. If successful, the product is expected to have major economic
impacts as a result of reducing healthcare expenditures for cancer treatment and
improving the health of the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a point of care blood biopsy device for early
screening and detection of cancer. The technology consists of two primary
components: (1) a disposable microfluidics platform, and (2) an electronics and
hardware enclosure. The microfluidic platform fractionates a tiny whole blood
sample drawn from the patient and processes a targeted, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. The assay produces a chemiluminescent signal in response to
the presence of circulating tumor cells that have epithelial cell adhesion
molecule expression of &gt;80% (i.e. breast, prostate, bladder, or pancreatic
cancer). The disposable microfluidic platform is loaded into a table-top sized
enclosure that houses the electronics and hardware used to autonomously control
fluid handling (sorting, mixing, flushing, sensing) of the blood sample in a
preprogrammed sequence. A photosensor contained in the enclosure detects the
chemiluminescent signal produced by the assay. By reducing the time and skill
typically required by medical personnel, patient outcomes can be improved and
the cost of screening can be significantly reduced The size, cost, and ease of
use of the device is well suited for point-of-care diagnostics in a clinical
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.