* 2224679
* Collaborative Research: Circum-Antarctic Processes from Archived Marine Sediment Cores (ANTS)
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2027
* Lauren Miller, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 01/31/2027
* USD 776,963.00

Sediments that collect on the seafloor provide a wealth of information about
past and present environmental change. Around Antarctica, these seafloor
sediments are influenced by an ice sheet that grinds and transports sediments
from the continentâ€™s interior into the surrounding ocean. Since the Last Glacial
Maximum (about 20,000 years ago) when the ice sheet extended hundreds to
thousands of kilometers seaward, ice has retreated inland to the configuration
we observe today and left behind signatures of its growth and decline, as well
as indicators of ocean change, in the seafloor sediments. Ongoing glacial and
ocean processes are reflected in the characteristics of contemporary sediments,
whereas older sediments beneath the seafloor offer a longer temporal perspective
of changes to the ice sheet and surrounding ocean. Using data generated from
archived sediment cores that are predominantly housed in the Antarctic Core
Collection at Oregon State University, we aim to confirm if recent sediments
clearly reflect the specific instrumental and historical field-based
observations of ocean and glacial change seen in different regions of
Antarctica. These modern changes will be placed into context with those recorded
by sediments deposited on the seafloor hundreds to thousands of years
ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore interlinked physical,
biological, and geochemical properties of seafloor sediments to address the
influence of glacial and oceanographic processes on ice-proximal marine
sedimentation during the 20th and 21st centuries and since the Last Glacial
Maximum, with a focus on sediment fluxes, meltwater drainage, ice-rafted debris
deposition, and radiocarbon chronologies. We will integrate multi-proxy analyses
to interrogate the seafloor sediment record around Antarctica, targeting regions
offshore of relatively fast-flowing and fast-changing glacial systems today and
regions offshore of slower flowing, more stable (i.e., unchanging or relatively
minimally changing) parts of the ice sheet. This work will leverage the
application of new techniques and knowledge to legacy sediment cores that NSF
has invested greatly in collecting and archiving. This project is led by three
early-career women project investigators who seek to foster collaborative and
open research practices and professional growth of the project team which will
include three graduate students, numerous undergraduate students, and a
postdoctoral research associate. The project team will co-produce educational
materials with Math4Science, an organization that connects STEM professionals
with public secondary education students and their math and science teachers
through curricula; and develop and implement best practices in working with
marine sediment core data through a collaboration with the Oregon State
University Marine and Geology Repository and the United States Antarctic Program
- Data Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.