* 2224698
* RAPID: Recolonization dynamics following mass mortality in the ecologically important sunflower star (Pycnopodia helianthoides)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 158,728.00

Many marine species are known for their large population sizes and high
dispersal potential due to the time their larval offspring spend in the open
ocean before settling into the adult habitat. Despite these characteristics,
that often buffer against decimation, the sunflower sea star (Pycnopodia
helianthoides) suffered major declines between 2013 and 2020 due to a disease
outbreak and warming events, which led to listing by the IUCN as Critically
Endangered. The sunflower star helps maintain ecological balance in kelp forest
ecosystems; its absence across large swaths of its range has led to concerns for
the future of the ecosystem. This loss has highlighted the need to better
understand dispersal and recovery dynamics in this ecologically important
species in a time when global change stressors are intensifying. The widespread
loss of Pycnopodia — combined with recent sightings of new juveniles in the
range where it’s been lost — created an opportunity to answer questions about
the genetic relatedness among new colonists, source populations of colonists,
patterns of gene expression, and associations with environmental factors, and
their implications for the future of the species. The investigators are
collaborating with a diverse team of partners already surveying the coast, to
collect genetic information from new colonists. The research proposed here has
direct and consequential impacts on conservation actions for Pycnopodia through
ongoing collaborations with the Nature Conservancy and fills an important gap
for future conservation decisions aimed at restoring this important member of
the kelp forest ecosystem to its historical range. As more species come under
threat from rapidly intensifying global change, understanding recovery dynamics
is an important and necessary step in instigating conservation actions. The
investigator is developing a teaching lesson for a nearby community college and
an undergraduate student will be trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive
demographic declines associated with anthropogenically-induced stressors have
increased in recent years, raising questions about species’ ability to recover.
The ecologically important sunflower sea star (Pycnopodia helianthoides) has
suffered a precipitous (88–100%) decline since 2013 due to sea star wasting
(SSW) disease and warming. The widespread loss of Pycnopodia provides a backdrop
against which recent sightings of new juveniles in the extirpated range offer an
opportunity to examine the contributions of four processes — (1) sweepstakes
reproductive success, (2) cohesive dispersal, (3) larval cloning, and (4) allele
surfing — to the evolutionary trajectory of populations following mass
mortality. Additionally, identifying propagules’ source populations, evaluating
gene expression profiles, and analyzing genotype–environment associations of
colonists can help elucidate potential colonization pathways that favor recovery
or signal ongoing threats. The investigators are soliciting new opportunistic
collections of Pycnopodia from many partners and are responding to any
observation in California and Oregon to acquire the samples and generate the
whole genome resequencing data needed to test hypotheses segregating the
aforementioned processes. As more species come under threat from rapidly
intensifying global change, understanding recovery dynamics is critical to
understanding population dynamics in the marine benthic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.