* 2224354
* LTER: MCR IV: Long-Term Dynamics of a Coral Reef Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2028
* Robert Carpenter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,627,318.00

Coral reefs provide important benefits to society, from food to exceptional
biodiversity to shoreline protection and recreation, but they are threatened by
natural perturbations and human activities, including those causing global-scale
changes. These pressures increasingly are causing coral reefs to undergo large,
often abrupt, ecological changes where corals are being replaced by seaweeds or
other undesirable organisms. Historically, the major agent of disturbance to
coral reefs has been powerful storms, but in recent decades, episodes of mass
coral bleaching from marine heat waves have become more frequent and severe as
the temperature of ocean surface waters continues to rise. Coral reefs are
further stressed by local human activities that cause nutrient pollution and
deplete herbivorous fishes that control growth of seaweeds. Studying how coral
reefs respond to these two types of disturbance under different levels of
nutrient pollution and fishing provides essential information on what affects
the ability of coral reefs to buffer environmental change and disturbances
without collapsing to a persistent, degraded condition. The fundamental goals of
the Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research program (MCR LTER) are to
understand how and why coral reefs change over time, to assess the consequences
of these changes, and to contribute scientific knowledge needed to sustain coral
reef ecosystems and the important societal services they provide. This research
improves understanding and management of coral reefs, which benefits all groups
concerned with the welfare of this ecologically, economically and culturally
important ecosystem. In addition to academic communities, scientific findings
are communicated to interested individuals, non-governmental organizations,
indigenous communities and governmental entities. These findings also are
integrated into K-12, undergraduate, graduate and public education activities
through a multi-pronged program that includes inquiry-based curricula,
interactive and media-based public education programs, and internet-based
resources. MCR’s research, training, education and outreach efforts all
emphasize broadening participation in STEM fields and strengthening STEM
literacy, particularly from marginalized groups in marine science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New research activities build on MCR LTER’s powerful
foundation of long-term observations and broad ecological understanding of
oceanic coral reefs to address the following core issues: How is the changing
disturbance regime (recurrent heat waves in addition to cyclonic storms)
altering the resilience of coral reefs, and what are the ecological consequences
of altered resilience? Research activities are organized around a unifying
framework that explicitly addresses how reef communities are affected by the
nature and history of coral-killing disturbances, and how those responses to
disturbance are influenced by the pattern of local human stressors. New studies
answer three focal questions: (1) How do different disturbance types, which
either remove (storms) or retain (heat waves) dead coral skeletons, affect
community dynamics, abrupt changes in ecological state, and resilience? (2) How
do local stressors interact with new disturbance regimes to create spatial
heterogeneity in community dynamics, ecosystem processes, and spatial
resilience? And (3) What attributes of coral and coral reef communities
influence their capacity to remain resilient under current and future
environmental conditions? These questions provide an unparalleled opportunity to
test hypotheses and advance theory regarding ecological resilience and the
causes and consequences of abrupt ecological change, which is broadly relevant
across aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.