* 2224248
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Equity in Early Mathematics Education for Latinx Children in Head Start Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2027
* Gigliana Melzi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 04/30/2027
* USD 510,464.00

Mathematics learning in early childhood lays a foundation for ongoing engagement
with math and STEM, supports development across a variety of other domains like
reading, and is an important predictor of long-term academic achievement. Given
the importance of early math, researchers and educators have created a variety
of classroom-focused resources to support mathematical learning, thinking, and
skill development. However, many of these resources do not take into account the
important roles that parents, and the home learning environment play in
supporting math learning and engagement. Current efforts also do not go far
enough in countering deficit perspectives on families and moving beyond
engagement strategies and activity structures based primarily on cultural models
of learning from White, monolingual, middle- and upper-class communities. To
achieve a new vision of equitable math learning in early childhood, it is
important to disrupt power hierarchies between minoritized families and schools
and reposition parents as central to children’s mathematics learning. Educators
and researchers must also reconceptualize traditional ideas about math that are
rooted in histories of marginalization and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance approaches for addressing these
systemic barriers, the project, Viviendo Matematicas, will conduct an equity-
informed design-based implementation research (DBIR) study with the goal of
developing a potentially transformative model for collaborating with Latinx
families and early childhood educators to shape a more equitable vision of
mathematics education in the preschool years. Partnering with Head Start
educators in Portland, OR, and New York, NY and Latinx parents with preschool-
age children (3–5 years) who are Head Start eligible based on the household's
lower income, the project will extend prior equity work by using dialogic and
asset-based approaches to amplify existing math knowledge and practices within
families, broaden our collective understanding and appreciation of mathematics
inside and outside the classroom, and identify design principles for parent
educator collaborations that can be shared with other communities. Through the
iterative, community-based design process, the project will deliver: (a) a
strength-based framework describing Latinx early childhood math practices, (b) a
program model and associated resources for supporting parent-educator math
dialogue groups, and (c) design principles and theoretical frameworks underlying
the dialogue program and how it supports a more equitable vision of math
learning. By reorganizing traditional relationships between parents and school,
the project seeks to empower Latinx parents and families as equal partners and
advocates for their children’s education, as well as support the creation of
sustainable resources for Head Start programs in our communities that align with
families’ goals and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is
funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity).
The program supports research and practice projects that investigate how
considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded
projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the
individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by systemic inequities
within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with NSF’s core value of
supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from across the
Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of organizations.
Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition
of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and development
thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.