* 2224417
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Revealing interfacial stability, thermal transport and transient effects in film evaporation in microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* James Hermanson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 332,781.00

Evaporation at the surface of a liquid film is critical to many industrial
processes including coatings, semiconductor crystal growth, surface texturing in
magnetic storage devices, surface finish during paper production, polymer
processing, and electrode manufacturing for fuel cells. These applications
depend on volatility-induced evaporation (no applied heat). Many other
evaporation applications involve heating a solid substrate such as cooling,
drying, fuel vaporization, food processing, chemical manufacturing and
pharmaceuticals. Evaporation is also used for self-assembly of particles and
morphological control of porous structures. Many space-based thermal management
systems also depend on evaporation. Despite this ubiquity, the current
understanding of film-evaporation processes is incomplete. The unsteady motion
at the film surface and the motion of the liquid within the films drastically
affect evaporation rates and heat transfer, particularly during transient, or
unsteady, evaporation. The overarching goal of this research is to probe the
fundamental mechanisms of these complex phenomena by conducting detailed
experiments and numerical analysis of evaporating films in both normal- and
microgravity conditions. The improved understanding of evaporation processes
resulting from this effort may have broad impact in numerous practical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the unique
capabilities of the ISS for long-duration microgravity testing to develop a more
complete understanding of the behavior of evaporating films by revealing
physical mechanisms normally masked under terrestrial conditions. Specific
scientific objectives include determining: (i) the transitions between long-wave
and short-wave surface instabilities in evaporating films, (ii) the evolution of
the convective structures from the onset of evaporation to steady-state, and
(iii) the corresponding impacts on thermal transport. Evaporation rates will be
controlled using a combination of external heat addition and impulsively
changing the system pressure. Diagnostic techniques include ultrasonic film
thickness measurements, optical imaging, and thermal and pressure measurements.
The stability of evaporating films will be examined by linear stability analysis
and Recurrence Quantification Analysis. The latter is a relatively new
diagnostic technique that provides metrics such as the rates and trapping-times
that measure the recurrence of interfacial film states and their duration. The
extraction of these quantitative signatures of film events can serve as triggers
for “early warning systems” to predict and control emergent film behavior. The
new, detailed information resulting from this investigation will be
transformative in that it will lead to fundamental understanding of the origins
and nature of the complex mechanisms that impact the liquid film behavior and
the rate of heat transfer in evaporating films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.