* 2224111
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Fareena Saqib, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2023
* USD 18,000.00

Trusted hardware is the foundation of cybersecurity. The International Symposium
on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST), being held in Washington, D.C on
June 27-30, 2022, is a leading forum for hardware security researchers. This
travel grant enables approximately 60 student researchers, especially those from
underrepresented groups in computing to attend the symposium in-person. The
project's broader significance and importance include professional development
for undergraduate and graduate students as well as continued growth of the
symposium. Studentsâ€™ attendance enables them to learn about the latest tools,
design methods, architectures, circuits, and novel applications of secure
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical contributions from previous symposia
have covered topics such as: (1) counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side
channel analysis and fault analysis, (3) hardware architectures for
cryptography, and (4) physically unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants
encourage more students to consider a technical submission, participation in
growing hardware demonstration space to a large diverse audience, or even to
attend as a means to prepare for a technical submission in future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.