* 2224776
* LTER: Changing Disturbances, Ecological Legacies, and the Future of the Alaskan Boreal Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2029
* Jeremy Jones, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2029
* USD 1,279,338.00

Over the past century, Alaska has been warming twice as quickly as the global
average, with large increases occurring in its interior boreal forests. This
warmer, drier climate has triggered important changes to regional wildfire,
pests and pathogen outbreaks, and permafrost thaw. The Bonanza Creek Long-Term
Ecological Research (BNZ LTER) program will advance understanding of the impacts
of changing climate and disturbance regimes on the Alaskan boreal forest and
explore associated regional consequences on feedbacks to the climate system. In
collaboration with Alaska Native communities, as well as state and federal land
management agencies, the BNZ LTER program will identify vulnerabilities and
explore adaptation opportunities to environmental change. The program will
increase understanding of ecological theory and the role of the boreal biome and
permafrost soils in the Earth System. The BNZ LTER will share results with a
broader community via outreach to students and educators through their
schoolyard LTER and fostering science programs for undergraduate students,
first-generation college students, and the general public. A new Alaska Native
Advisory Council, which will bring a dynamic and inclusive Alaska Native
perspective into the BNZ program will be introduced with this
renewal.&lt;br/&gt;This research program will focus on ecological legacies of
past ecosystems transmitted through carryover of information and materials that
support ecosystem recovery and stabilization. Changes in climate or disturbance
regimes can modify key legacies and trigger rapid ecosystem reorganization into
new recovery trajectories. These include shifts to new states that are unlikely
to recover to the pre-disturbance ecosystem. Such shifts in the frequency and
longevity of ecosystem states can restructure processes at the landscape scale.
They can influence soil thermal states, hydrology, species composition and
biotic interactions, biogeochemical cycles, ecosystem services, and dynamics of
social-ecological systems. The BNZ LTER program addresses the following
questions: 1) how do legacies constrain the response of the Alaskan boreal
forest to climate change, 2) how will these legacies affect future ecosystem
trajectories, and 3) what are the local, regional, and global impacts of these
emergent ecosystem trajectories now and in the future? Multiple mechanistic
hypotheses about the role of legacies in ecosystem resilience and change will be
tested using data from the site. Collection of long-term data will be continued
and combined with data from new sites, experiments, and surveys. This will
expand research to investigate new types of disturbance impacts. Statistical and
process-based simulation models will be combined to predict current and future
ecological dynamics and feedbacks at the landscape scale. It will identify
social-ecological vulnerabilities and explore adaptation opportunities with
Alaska Natives and Alaskan communities. &lt;br/&gt;This Long Term Ecological
Research site is supported by The Division of Environmental Biology and the
Office of Polar Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.