* 2224839
* Advancing our understanding of autonomous leaf-specific iron deficiency responses.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ron Mittler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,255,705.00

Iron is an essential nutrient for all organisms and plants serve as the main
dietary source of iron for humans and livestock. Iron deficiency, or anemia,
affects nearly 30% of the world’s population (~2 billion people). Thus,
understanding the mechanisms that plants use to regulate Fe uptake and
accumulation in edible tissues, such as leaves and seeds, will support the
development of biofortified crops for improved nutritional value. Iron is also
extremely reactive and therefore plants need to sense their internal levels to
determine the demand for iron and adjust uptake to prevent a potentially toxic
iron overload situation. Over the last decade, there have been significant
advances in the molecular mechanisms that regulate iron uptake at the root
level. Iron sensing, however, remains an active area of research with several
hypotheses that need to be tested experimentally. This project will test a
recently proposed model where leaves integrate the iron status of the entire
plant and communicate such information to roots to properly regulate iron uptake
and allocation within the plant. Training aspects focus on the Bioinformatics in
Plant Sciences (BIPS) program developed by the principal investigator that pairs
undergraduate students in computer science and engineering with plant biology
students to undertake interdisciplinary research projects of interest to
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent spatiotemporal gene expression analyses
revealed that leaves respond faster to iron deficiency than roots. Moreover,
under certain conditions, leaves and roots display opposite iron-related
transcriptional programs suggesting that leaves have autonomous mechanisms to
sense iron. This project will integrate leaf-specific time-series gene
expression analyses together with targeted high-throughput DNA-protein and
protein-protein interaction screens to identify transcriptional complexes
necessary to regulate iron homoeostasis in leaves. In addition, tissue-specific
gene editing approaches will be used to assess whether chloroplast-to-nucleus
communication is essential for proper iron sensing in leaves, particularly in
mature photosynthetic leaves. Experiments will be complemented with modeling
approaches to explore the predictive power of constraint-based simulations when
the stability of protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions, determined
experimentally, are sequentially incorporated into kinetic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.