* 2224671
* Developing and Sharing Research on Low-Income Community College Student Decision-Making and Pathways in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* David Brown, Foundation for California Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2027
* USD 120,538.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. This project will conduct research on decision-making processes of low-
income students related to staying on and succeeding in STEM pathways and the
importance of community colleges experiences in this process. This project will
create a broad network of community college STEM faculty members and
administrators who can inform and be informed by the research. It will also seek
to build capacity among community college STEM faculty members and
administrators to perform research. The significance of the project is in
serving as a national resource to help understand how low-income students make
decisions and how colleges can better support them. The intellectual merit of
the project is its contribution to understanding low-income STEM student
pathways through the lens of decision making. Among the broader impacts is the
immediate applicability of the research to improve community college STEM
programs to promote the academic and professional success of low-income
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The research will investigate pathways and
decision-making processes relative to STEM persistence, attainment, transfer,
and careers of low-income community college students. The primary contribution
of the project is to the knowledge base regarding decisions of low-income
students to remain and succeed on STEM pathways and how community college S-STEM
programs, strategies, and supports may contribute to this process. Understanding
the pivotal decision points on student pathways and the complex array of
influences on them is essential to making STEM education more equitable.
Recognizing the importance of the broader social context in understanding the
experiences of low-income individuals, the research will draw on sociological
perspectives to examine the following questions: How do elements of the S-STEM
program (i.e., recruitment and selection processes, the S-STEM scholarship, and
S-STEM curricular and co-curricular supports) influence student decision-making
to continue or leave a STEM pathway? How do institutional contexts, including
and beyond S-STEM (i.e., policies, practices, resources, and opportunities),
influence students’ decisions to remain on or depart from a STEM pathway? How do
student attributes (i.e., engagement and use of economic, social, and cultural
resources) influence decisions to persist on or leave a STEM pathway? The
project is composed of three sets of interconnected activities. First, the
project will engage and build a network for identifying research needs and
sharing research within and beyond the S-STEM community through leadership
groups, network building, proposal-preparation workshops, research-to-practice
clinics, and broad dissemination. Second, the project will generate evidence and
tools through structured research on community college S-STEM programs,
including a grantee survey, case studies, a systematic review, and a student
survey. Third, the project will expand research and build research capacity
within the S-STEM community and among community colleges in general through
research partnerships and research fellowships. All project activities will
promote a collaborative approach to research that is grounded in community
college practice and intended to inform the S-STEM community and community
colleges more broadly. Guidance for the project will be provided by leadership
groups of community college practitioners and community college STEM students,
as well as by an external evaluation. The findings from the project will be
disseminated widely through the project’s network, as well as an array of
related disciplinary and community college membership associations. The project
will also yield publications including working papers, issue briefs, academic
publications, strategy briefs, and toolkits. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.