* 2224195
* RUI: Mechanisms and physiological functions of bacterial sphingolipids
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Grace Brannigan, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2025
* USD 756,559.00

All cells are surrounded by a membrane which serves as a barrier between the
contents of the cell and the outside world. In addition to their barrier
function, membranes contribute to the mechanical stability of the cell. A major
component of these membranes are lipids; these lipids have water-soluble heads
that are oriented towards the outside of the membrane and oil-soluble tails
facing the inside. There are numerous types of lipids that vary in their
headgroups and tails, and the focus of this research is on sphingolipids.
Sphingolipids are found throughout plants, fungi, and animals and were recently
shown to be widespread in bacteria as well. Since the pathway for producing
sphingolipids in bacteria was only recently discovered, there are many questions
remaining about their synthesis and function. The goals of this project are to
1) determine the localization of the sphingolipid synthetic enzymes within
bacteria, 2) identify the genes required for transporting the sphingolipids
within the cell, and 3) use computational and genetic tools to understand how
sphingolipids impact the structure and function of the bacterial outer membrane.
The Broader Impacts of this project are to provide students with computational
and quantitative skills necessary for modern biological research as well as
stimulate excitement in pursuing STEM careers. Students at the LEAP Academy High
School in Camden, NJ will have summer research internships in which they will
learn bacterial genetics. Undergraduates from underrepresented minority groups
will be recruited to the biology honorâ€™s thesis program and graduate students in
Computational and Integrative Biology will receive cross-disciplinary training
in experimental and computational approaches for studying bacterial
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sphingolipid are found ubiquitously in
eukaryotes from fungi, to plants, to animals. By contrast, these lipids have
been reported in only a small number of bacterial taxa. Despite the limited
number of sphingolipid-producing bacteria, there is a wide range of
physiological roles for sphingolipids including modulation of host-microbe
interactions, protection from bacteriophage, bacterial life cycle and
sporulation, and microbial predation. The recent identification of the complete
pathway required for bacterial sphingolipid biosynthesis showed that
sphingolipid synthesis is, in fact, far more widespread among bacteria than
previously thought. The objectives of this project are to characterize the
spatial organization of sphingolipid production and the mechanism of their
transport to the outer membrane and computationally investigate how ceramides
affect outer membrane functionality and biophysical properties. Specifically, a
series of biochemical and genetic analyses will determine whether these enzymes
are soluble or membrane-anchored, as well as whether their activity is in the
cytoplasm versus the periplasm. The role of LptF/G and LptC homologues will be
investigated for their role in sphingolipid transport. Lastly, Molecular
Dynamics simulations (MD) will be used to assess lipid orientation, lipid
clustering, and interactions between sphingolipids and membrane proteins and
antibiotics. The predicted interactions identified by MD will be experimentally
validated in C. crescentus. The expected findings will provide a vertical
advance in the field of bacterial cell biology by contributing to critical basic
research questions related to bacterial membrane synthesis and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.