* 2224159
* I-Corps: A Novel Multi Wavelength Spectroscopy Technique for Assessing Tissue Health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Amir Tofighi Zavareh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the diagnosis of diseases such as pressure ulcers that affect vascular health
within the tissue. The goal of this technology is to prevent pressure injuries
through early detection, which saves at-risk patients from pain, infection, and
decreased quality of life. Hospitals that adopt this technology may be able to
decrease their hospital-acquired pressure injury rates, a key quality metric for
hospitals, save thousands of dollars in costs per pressure injury averted, and
utilize resources effectively. Because the proposed technology may identify non-
visible pressure injuries upon admission, it may ensure those ulcers formed
prior to hospital stay are treated more promptly. Through tissue health
evaluation, pressure injuries may be identified and treated as early as possible
to hinder progression to later, more difficult-to-heal stages. Finally, current
subjective visual assessments require multiple nurses to examine patients upon
admission to the hospital. By monitoring tissue health beneath the skin’s
surface, only one nurse (or nurse assistant) is necessary to make the
assessment, allowing hospitals to utilize limited personnel resources more
efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a portable, multi-wavelength spectrum analyzer that is designed
to assess tissue health. The proposed technology works by projecting different
wavelengths of light on the surface of the tissue and analyzing the properties
of the light that are reflected back. The proposed device is designed to measure
tissue health metrics such as tissue oxygenation (StO2) and blood perfusion
among others. Compared to current assessment methods, the proposed device
eliminates the subjectivity associated with visual assessment methods, provides
the ability to detect potentially non-visible pressure injuries, and increases
accessibility. The StO2 measurement is also applicable to a wide range of use
cases involving tissue health. The proposed device may be utilized for
additional applications including peripheral artery disease (PAD) testing, burn
assessments, and the evaluation of tissue viability after reconstructive
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.