* 2224871
* Track 1 -  Center Catalyst: Center for Land Surface Hazards (CLaSH)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* A  Joshua West, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,247.00

Landslides and river floods are common examples of land-surface hazards that
have enormous impact on society because they occur frequently and in widespread
environments around the world. The consequences of such hazards are magnified by
climate change, modification of the land surface due to human activity, and
increased exposure associated with population growth and urban development. Yet
an integrated scientific approach to geohazards research lags to their growing
effects. In response to the threats posed by geohazards, our funded Center
Catalyst will develop a shared vision within the scientific community around
contributions to hazards research and education, which will include
strengthening ties between academic, government, non-profit groups, and local
communities. This vision will be the basis of a proposed Center for Land-Surface
Hazards (CLaSH). This Center, the detailed shape of which will be sculpted via
Catalyst activities, would provide a trial for frontier work involving the
impact of different types of land-surface hazards on society. Pilot activities
of the Catalyst will include scientific community planning meetings, engaging
existing NSF facilities and centers on education and outreach projects, and
strengthening government agency partnerships. Center Catalyst activities will
inform the strategic plan for a fully-fledged Center that enables innovative
research on interconnected land-surface hazards, increases the diversity of
geoscientists, and better prepares the public for disaster
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular emphasis of the Center Catalyst will
be on how one incident of a hazardous event triggers more events creating a
cascading hazard, such as storms that follow wildfire causing debris flows and
floods. This focus is motivated by the major research challenge that individual
land-surface hazards often receive attention in isolation. While they certainly
merit study on their own, we fundamentally lack transdisciplinary science that
addresses how geomorphic processes work together as a part of an interconnected
system to generate cascading hazards. This gap represents an important link
between hazards and fundamental science. Research on cascading hazards is a
frontier poised for major advancement, fueled by maturing basic science
frameworks (e.g., critical zone science, tectonic/climate coupling, impacts of
the Anthropocene), increased computational modeling capabilities, and
technological developments in imaging and sensing that promise a wholly new
opportunity for integrated efforts. Another major gap in geohazard science is
defined by the social, economic, and racial communities disproportionately
affected by land surface hazards. These communities are the least represented in
geoscience research and national agencies that support hazard planning and
response. With these gaps in mind, the Center Catalyst will consider: (1)
potential ways to address the lack of underrepresented groups in geoscience by
developing workforce recruitment and retention programs around themes of social
and environmental altruism and equity in hazard science, (2) related approaches
to identify opportunities for advancing fundamental knowledge that readily
translates to application in the hazards research space, and (3) the scope for
developing research directions on how society itself increases hazard exposure
through modification of the land surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.