* 2224985
* IUCRC Phase I  University of Notre Dame: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Peter Kogge, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 105,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University (Bloomington and Indiana University Purdue
University - Indianapolis Campuses), and the University of Notre Dame. The
mission of the CQT is to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders
to identify compelling needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then
develop novel solutions to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are
governed by the physics of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing,
sensing, imaging, metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their
wide-ranging applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be
transformative, with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing,
medicine, and navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but
it is still in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires
significant fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership
with industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the Center sites, the University of Notre Dame
will leverage its existing Centers and industrial relationships to drive quantum
research in the areas of advanced materials and devices, quantum simulations of
physical phenomena such as spin chemistry, quantum algorithms for data sciences
and machine learning, and high-performance computing systems architectures. For
example, the ASCENT Center is a consortium of 13 universities led by Notre Dame,
with a goal to provide breakthrough advances in integrated nanoelectronics, with
devices based on quantum effects. The QCLab (Quantum Computing Laboratory) has
the mission to serve as an internationally-recognized, multidisciplinary quantum
computing hub, based upon accelerating discovery through effective and novel
applications of quantum computing algorithms, software tools, and devices. Also,
the CNDS (Center for Network and Data Science) was founded to generate
fundamental and transformative advances in AI, Network, and Data Science, and
can serve as both motivating cases for quantum applications and sources of data
for driving quantum codes. In addition, multi-year research by multiple faculty
have gained internationally recognized expertise in the relationship between
very high-performance computing architectures, emerging technologies, emerging
applications areas (such as machine learning), and tools to support efficient
execution of highly parallel algorithms. Notre Dame also supports a broad effort
in Workforce Development. The Center for STEM Education is part of a long-
running Notre Dame effort to advance the teaching and learning of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. The Center for Civic Innovation has as
a vision to create a virtuous cycle wherein faculty and students analyze
challenging problems and develop co-creation of knowledge among a broad network
of partners. Finally, iNDustry Labs is the Notre Dame component of the LIFT
(Labs for Industry Futures and Transformation) network that was launched with a
$42M grant from the Lilly Endowment, with a charter to enhance skill attainment,
research, commercialization, and innovation across the South Bend - Elkhart
Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.