* 2224441
* EAGER: Measuring the Impact and Diffusion of Open Source Software Innovation on Contributor and Project Networks
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Gizem Korkmaz, COLERIDGE INITIATIVE INC
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 298,416.00

Open-Source Software (OSS) is developed, maintained, and extended through the
contribution of independent developers as well as individuals and groups from
universities, government research institutions, businesses, and nonprofits. Many
OSS projects are developed in free repositories, and the information embedded in
these repositories - including the code, contributors, and development activity
- is publicly available. However, the extent and impacts of OSS on the economy
and innovation are currently unknown, and the creation and use of OSS highlight
an aspect of technology diffusion and flow not captured in science and
technology indicators. The goals of this project are to discover, collect, and
use publicly available non-survey data sources on OSS and to test the
feasibility of developing methods to measure the impact and diffusion of OSS
innovation. The project will evaluate OSS through development of rigorous,
repeatable, and scalable methods and metrics. The outputs of this effort —
unique data sets, code, and the resulting analyses of the interactions among
contributors and projects — advance our nascent knowledge about OSS, including
the patterns and dynamics of collaborations, influential actors, prevailing
topics, and diffusion. Developed measures will complement existing indicators on
peer-reviewed publications and patents. Our framework could apply to other
aspects of open science, such as shared data available in public
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address our core questions, we propose (i)
to characterize the OSS ecosystem by analyzing available information on OSS
projects (creation and use), and developers (institutions, sectors, and
countries); (ii) to represent the interactions using networks of contributors
(through collaborations between developers) and networks of OSS projects
(through reuses across projects and shared contributors) and to analyze their
structural features; (iii) to develop methods to measure the impact of projects
and developers using network-based and OSS-based measures (e.g., downloads);
(iv) to study the diffusion of OSS innovation within and across institutions,
sectors and countries; and (v) to bring forward a unique and novel data product
combining various data sources on OSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.