* 2224742
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Energy transitions and desirable futures in extraction-based economies of North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Megan Egler, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2024
* USD 24,125.00

This dissertation project investigates how powerful actors, narrative and
regional identities come together to support or hinder just energy transitions.
The research focuses on hybrid energy initiatives, defined as initiatives that
use former fossil fuel infrastructure and landscapes to house clean technologies
or create green jobs. Examples of hybrid energy initiatives include projects and
programs that clean-up inactive oil and gas wells, repurpose fossil fuel
brownfields for renewable energy production, or recover critical minerals from
fossil fuel waste. By analyzing the policies, narratives, and power dynamics
associated with hybrid energy transitions this project informs programs and
policies toward stronger and more resilient energy
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on political ecology and
science and technology studies in a cross-national comparative study that
employs qualitative and computational methods. The research asks two main
questions: (1) what are the origins, power structures and policies enabling
energy transitions in the two regions and are they meeting equity and justice
goals? (2) how are perceptions of energy production and use in the future
influenced by powerful actors, regional identities, and material conditions? A
final analysis uncovers competing visions of the future, how they are formed,
and how they gain strength. Energy transitions have potential to address
environmental challenges related to fossil fuel production and consumption. They
also present windows of opportunity to address issues related to equality and
justice. A comparison of the two regions draws normative and policy relevant
conclusions toward the achievement of more resilient and just energy
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.