* 2224104
* I-Corps: Automated As-is Facade Modeling of High-rise Buildings Using Drones and Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Yong Bai, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high-rise building façade inspection technology. The new
techology is based on the development of an automated, high-rise building façade
modeling technology that uses drones and artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms. The application has financial promise because it addresses the
deterioration of building infrastructure. The proposed project may improve
building inspection, maintenance, renovation, and repair while also educating
and training the next generation of skilled workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of an automated, as-is, high-rise
building façade modeling technology using drones and artificial intelligence
(AI) algorithms. To begin, a drone with a spiral path is employed to capture
building exterior images and photogrammetry is used to conduct 3D
reconstructions and create mesh models for the scanned building façades. High-
resolution façade orthoimages are generated from mesh models and pixelwise
segmented by an AI model. A combined data augmentation strategy, including
random flipping, rotation, resizing, perspective transformation and color
adjustment, is utilized for model training with few labels. The developed
technology may transform the way that high-rise building façades will be
inspected. Missing façade drawings may be reproduced for maintenance,
renovation, and repair operations. This technology may improve communication
among building owners, design firms, contractors, material suppliers, and
financial institutions while speeding up the design, approval, finance,
construction and inspection processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.