* 2224740
* Enabling new microactuation materials through understanding the influence of shear-dependent viscosities on acoustic field-driven assembly of particles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jinhye Bae, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2025
* USD 398,903.00

Polymer composites may consist of mixture of a polymer (think of a liquid
plastic) and very small rigid particles. The addition of such particles can
enhance polymer properties and could change their functionality. For example,
such composites can become electrically conductive, or change their shape (e.g.,
bend) in response to external stimuli such as light or heat. This could provide
a powerful approach to achieve three-dimensional shapes from one or two-
dimensional structures. To achieve such functionalities, an accurate design of
the location of such particles in the polymer is required. This project will
focus on using sound waves (i.e., pressure vibrations) to program the location
and time-dependent behavior of small particles to tune the physical response of
composite polymeric systems. This project will create new opportunities leading
to the advancement of next-generation materials that can respond to changes in
the environment. These materials can be used in designing small-scale soft
robots for biomedical applications. This award will engage and train graduate
and undergraduate students in subjects related to fluid mechanics, mass
transfer, and inorganic and organic materials. Elements of this research will be
used to create hands-on activities for K-12 students and to educate the public
in collaboration with the Fleet Science Center. Existing summer research
programs at the University of California San Diego will be leveraged to engage
women and underrepresented minorities to promote diversity and inclusion in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manipulating the spatial distribution and assembled
structure of functional nanoparticles at the micro- or nanoscale is recognized
as a critical barrier to the fabrication and design of miniaturized stimuli-
responsive polymer-based actuators and shape reconfigurable matter. To overcome
such challenges, this project will explore the fundamental mechanism of surface
acoustic wave-driven spatiotemporal distributions of nanoparticles in shear-
thinning polymer solutions capable of three-dimensional shape transformation
after crosslinking by understanding associated principles in physics, mechanics,
and dynamics. This project will test the hypothesis that shear-thinning
behaviors of polymeric fluids affect the degree of localization, the spatial
distribution, and assembled structures of nanoparticles within stimuli-
responsive polymer matrices under surface acoustic waves. It will further assess
the time-dependent disassembly of nanoparticles after removal of surface
acoustic waves by quantifying the effective viscosity of polymeric solutions in
terms of polymer concentrations and surface acoustic wave-induced shear rates.
This fundamental understanding will allow precise particle manipulation in more
complex patterns, thereby enabling the formation of unconventional assembled
features like helical structures. These outcomes will contribute to
understanding the fundamental mechanism of surface acoustic wave-driven
spatiotemporal assembly of nanoparticles in stimuli-responsive polymer matrices,
enabling programmable shape reconfiguration and motion at the sub-mm
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.