* 2224610
* Plasmon-enhanced Lateral Flow Assay for Multiplexed Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA and Antigens in Point-of-Care Settings
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Brian Cunningham, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 10/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

Lateral flow assays (LFAs) are amongst the simplest, fastest, and cheapest
point-of-care (POC) and at-home biodiagnostic platforms and offer a broad
potential for individualized and population-level screening for infectious
diseases. Conventional LFAs rely on gold nanoparticles as labels to produce
visually detectable color in the presence of the target biomarker. However, the
sensitivity of LFAs relying on gold nanoparticles as labels is often
insufficient to detect low concentrations of biomarkers, resulting in false
negatives at the early stage of disease progression. This project seeks to
explore the use of an ultrabright fluorescent label for improving the
sensitivity of the LFA by more than 100-fold. The project also aims to design
and build a personal handheld fluorimeter that will communicate wirelessly with
a linked mobile device to measure the fluorescence signal from an LFA test
strip. Harnessing the ultrabright nanolabel and the personal handheld
fluorimeter, a novel diagnostic platform that simultaneously detects SARS-CoV-2
(the virus causing COVID-19) RNA and antigen is envisioned. Simultaneous
detection of viral RNA and antigen can potentially improve diagnostic accuracy
and accurately indicate the stage of illness. The project also involves the
development of a new Nano-Biosensors Summer School activity intended to
introduce middle school students to nanotechnology and biosensors, with the goal
of stimulating interest in science/engineering while instilling confidence in
pursuing these topics among under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is a pressing need for a new generation of biosensor technologies that encompass
the combined characteristics of low-cost instrumentation, simple assay methods,
high sensitivity, accurate quantitation, and rigorous validity. The ultimate
goal of the project is to design and realize a multiplexed plasmon-enhanced
fluorescence-based lateral flow assay (p-LFA) for the detection and
quantification of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
antigen and RNA in resource-limited settings. Specific objectives include: (i)
Design, realize and validate an ultrasensitive multiplexed p-LFA for
simultaneous detection and quantification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA and antigen; (ii)
Devise efficient sample processing methods for simultaneous detection of RNA and
antigens in nasopharyngeal swabs and saliva from coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) patients; and (iii) Build and test a smart phone-interfaced portable
p-LFA reader for deploying the proposed biosensing technology in point-of-care
(POC) and resource-limited settings. The project represents a transformative
advance in that it seeks to establish a novel biodiagnostic platform with
sensitivity exceeding that of the standard laboratory tests, a simple assay
workflow compatible with self-testing at the POC and patient home, rapid sample-
to-answer, and an inexpensive/portable instrument. If successful, the proposed
amplification-free assay enables spatially-multiplexed detection and
quantification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA and antigens on the same LFA strip, which
shortens the sample-to-answer time and potentially differentiates individuals in
the infectious stage of the illness from those who have passed it. Beyond COVID,
simultaneous detection of RNA and antigen is broadly applicable for highly
specific and sensitive diagnosis of various infectious diseases, including
Ebola, Influenza, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.