* 2224727
* GLOW: Loss of volatiles from the Hadean Earth and the redox evolution of the early atmosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2025
* USD 298,718.00

Some researchers think rocky planets like Earth must have formed by giant
impacts, and that the last of such impacts to Earth resulted in the formation of
the Moon. After this impact, the early Earth likely experienced continued
bombardment of leftover planetesimals. These bombardments are called late
accretion impacts, some of which could be as large as the Moon. Both giant
impacts and late accretion impacts are very energetic. Each of them can melt a
large fraction of Earth’s mantle, and the surface can be as hot as 5,000-15,000
K. Such a hot surface would help the atmosphere escape to space, which is
important for the surface environments of the early Earth. The lightest element
- hydrogen - is most easily removed by this process, so in the presence of
surface water the impact-driven atmospheric loss could result in the oxidation
of Earth. The notion of such catastrophic evaporation is generally accepted in
the exoplanet field, but it has not gained traction in the Earth sciences. This
research will incorporate novel ideas developed in the exoplanet atmospheric
literature to the study of the Hadean Earth (the first 500 million years of
Earth history). The redox state of the atmosphere is also important for the
emergence of life on Earth. Thus, our modeling of Earth evolution in the
aftermath of high-energy impacts could provide a timely reference frame for
those currently exploring exoplanets for signs of life. This project will
support a postdoctoral researcher and contribute more broadly through mentoring
New Haven Science Fair high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research
on the removal of volatiles from Earth’s early atmosphere focuses on a narrow
temperature range of 1500–2500 K when mass loss is inefficient and limited by
diffusion above the turbopause. The extreme thermal conditions right after high-
energy impacts would quickly dissipate in a few hundred years, but even in this
short period, the atmospheric loss can be on the order of several Earth oceans.
The proposed research aims to quantify this extreme period of the early Earth,
by conducting a fluid dynamical simulation of Earth’s post-impact atmosphere
that incorporates the interior heat and the incoming X-ray and ultraviolet
irradiation from our Sun. Because Earth’s early atmosphere would chemically
interact with the magma ocean below, the evolution of the atmosphere will
influence the redox evolution of the mantle. The relevant parameter space will
be explored to assess how the different evolutionary pathways of the Hadean
Earth comply with available geological data, and with other theoretical
possibilities suggested in the literature. This will provide an unprecedented
insight into the properties of the Hadean Earth and, in doing so, reveal how the
loss of volatiles may be the missing nexus that explains why Earth is unique
among the planets in our solar system. This proposal was submitted to CH in
response to DCL 22-032: Dear Colleague Letter: Geoscience Lessons for and from
Other Worlds (GLOW).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.