* 2224729
* Role and activity of PRC2 and SWI/SNF in plant adaptability to changing environments
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Drought or heat cause dramatic crop losses each year. Plants can adjust to
adverse conditions by activating different regulatory programs. This requires
changes to the epigenome. The research proposed will elucidate how the epigenome
is altered when drought or heat stress is sensed by the plant. Insight gained
will enable optimization of plant growth and reduction of the detrimental
effects of stress. In addition, the proposal will train undergraduate students
in course-based laboratory research to conduct original research that
contributes to addressing the goals of this proposal, to enhance plant
productivity via epigenome change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate the
contribution of PRC2 repression and SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling to plant
adaptability to environmental challenges, this proposal will rapidly deplete
either epigenetic regulator, followed by assessing immediate early effects on
the chromatin state and gene expression, as well as phenotypic response to
environmental challenge. This will generate novel insight into direct biological
contribution roles of SWI/SNF and PRC2 to plant adaptability to changing
environments. In parallel, the contribution of individual chromatin regulators
to overcoming the existing chromatin state will be assessed. In doing so, the
project will generate novel tools for the plant community to dissect direct
roles and activities of key regulators. The broader impacts of this proposal
include insight into how plant resilience to changing environments is
facilitated via epigenome reprogramming. In addition, three one-semester course-
based undergraduate research experience (CURE) laboratory classes will be
conducted. The undergraduate researchers will define the contact domains between
SWI/SNF or PRC2 and transcription factors to shed light on the types contact
‘surfaces’ that enable chromatin reprogramming. Finally, lectures on research
conducted in this proposal will be given to high school students during the
yearly summer research academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.