* 2224949
* Collaborative Research: Developing metal-organic molecular beam epitaxy (MOMBE) for chalcogenide semiconductor thin film synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Luke Davis, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 113,352.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many known semiconducting
materials, and their different properties are what enable different
technologies, from cameras, to solar cells, to computers, to high-speed
telecommunications, and so on. A new class of semiconductors called chalcogenide
perovskites has been recently shown to feature a unique combination of
properties that make these materials promising for solar cell applications. To-
date, making these materials has required high temperatures and slow rates of
crystal growth. Future technology development and commercially viable
manufacturing will require a method to make these materials faster and at lower
temperatures. This collaborative project between researchers at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Tufts University, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Ceramic Programs in NSF’s Division of
Materials Research, will develop a new chemical approach for making chalcogenide
perovskites faster and at lower temperatures than hitherto possible, without
sacrificing material quality. Insights from this fundamental science will also
inform research and development of other families of semiconductors, with
potential impact in computing technologies. This project develops the future
workforce by training graduate students in semiconductor chemistry and materials
research. This project also expands workforce training opportunities for
community college students by supporting an internship program – the Guided
Academic Industry Network (GAIN) – that provides students from Boston-area
community colleges experiences in materials research and development in academia
and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project between researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Tufts University, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry and Ceramic Programs in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, focuses
on fundamental studies of chalcogenide thin film growth, developing processes to
make high-quality, epitaxial thin films of chalcogenide compound semiconductors
by metal-organic molecular beam epitaxy (MOMBE). Chalcogenide compound
semiconductors containing refractory metals (such as Zr) are of widespread
current interest. High-quality thin film processing at moderate temperatures is
necessary to propel basic research, and to enable future manufacturing
(including heterogeneous integration), but there remain significant scientific
hurdles stemming from the combination of very-low vapor pressure metals with
very-high vapor pressure chalcogens. Three high-level objectives of this work
are: (1) studying the synthesis of Zr-based chalcogenide compound semiconductors
using metal-organic (MO) precursors; (2) developing a variation on molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE) that allows new access to crystalline films of chalcogenide
compound semiconductors; and (3) expanding workforce training opportunities for
community college students. The collaborative approach of this project begins
with evaluation and down-selection of MO precursors through evaporation
measurements and metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) screening at
Tufts. MOMBE experiments at MIT can then focus within a high-value parameter
space for epitaxial thin film growth. The combination of chemical analysis and
film characterization capabilities available across the collaboration allows
detailed study of the film-forming reactions at the solid-vapor interface. In
addition to providing training opportunities for graduate students, this project
expands workforce training opportunities for community college students through
the Guided Academic Industry Network (GAIN). In this program, students at local
community colleges acquire experience in materials research and development
through two summer internships, one in academia and a second one in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.