* 2224769
* Training Scientists to Tackle Grand Challenge Societal Problems through Convergent Action in Transdisciplinary Teams
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Elizabeth Newton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,734.00

Some problems facing humanity are so daunting that they seem nearly impossible
to solve. These grand challenges include global climate change, food insecurity,
widening socio-economic inequality, overcoming systemic racial inequities, and
emerging infectious diseases. Scholars have come to label these "wicked
problems" because they are highly complex and marked by fundamental disagreement
among stakeholders regarding their cause and possible solution. Nevertheless, it
is precisely these problems that society most needs to address. This NSF
Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to the Ohio State University will
pilot, test, and validate an innovative project that trains graduate students to
become "wicked" scientists—researchers who can work effectively in
transdisciplinary teams to tackle the complexities, uncertainties, and
conflictive nature of such problems. To do so effectively, graduate students
need to be experts in their respective fields. However, they also need to
develop transdisciplinary skills to collaborate successfully with fellow
researchers and other stakeholders. This project uses a comprehensive and
integrated conceptual framework of "wicked science" to pilot, test, and validate
such training. The program of study will take the form of an interdisciplinary
graduate minor that consists of three courses and an e-portfolio. This approach
includes the development of a community of practice consisting of students,
alumni, faculty, and other stakeholders that fosters long-term professional
learning. Lessons from the training program will be organized and disseminated
so that they can be readily adopted by other institutions of higher education in
the United States and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a
mixed-methods approach that integrates validated psychometric assessments and
ethnographic methods to examine whether and how the project succeeds in training
"wicked scientists" and creating an institutional culture of convergence. The
program assessment consists of four parts. First is the assessment of courses
and course components and their effectiveness in training different core
competencies. Second is an overall assessment of students’ core competencies
after completion of the graduate interdisciplinary specialization. Third is a
controlled comparison of core competencies of students enrolled in the program
and those who are not. The final part is a study of the larger institutional
context and how it affects student training and the program more broadly. The
overarching hypothesis is that students who complete all the program components
and participate in the community of practice will show improved competency
development and higher scores across all program measures. These measures will
include the four validated psychometric instruments compared to students who
partially complete the training program or do not participate at
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.