* 2224309
* Mechanistic Understanding of Multi-scale Sintering Behavior Influenced by Anisotropic Particle and Pore Distributions in Extrusion-based Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Fuda Ning, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2025
* USD 495,963.00

Without melting materials, metal additive manufacturing can also be achieved by
first extruding filaments (in a 3D printing fashion) that contain densely filled
metallic particles and polymetric binders, to form the so-called green parts,
and then undergoing debinding and sintering to produce finished metal
components. This relatively new metal additive manufacturing process nonetheless
has technical challenges too including element segregations occurred in
sintering and printing-induced anisotropic particle distributions that
complicate the prediction of resultant micro- and macro-structures. This award
supports fundamental research to understand the multi-scale underlying
mechanisms occurred in sintering 3D filament-printed stainless steel parts using
a combination of multi-physics simulations, analytical modeling, and
experimental characterization and testing. The approach of extrusion-printing,
debinding and sintering features ease of part handling and reduction of
production costs, especially for large-sized metal component fabrications. The
knowhow of this metal additive manufacturing technology will heighten
manufacturing competitiveness in key industries such as aerospace, energy,
automotive, and defense. The project will promote the participation of
underrepresented groups such as African American and female students through
summer research immersion programs. The research findings will be spread to
local K-12 students through onsite interactive demonstrations and virtual micro-
learning videos, also to the industry and community through an additive
manufacturing symposium at Binghamton University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this research is to establish a fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms that govern anisotropic sintering behaviors at atomistic,
microscopic, and macroscopic scales during extrusion-printing, debinding and
sintering of stainless steel parts. The interactions between atomic diffusion
and multi-element redistribution will first be discovered by molecular dynamics
simulations to examine the dominant mechanism that affects the grain boundary
migration at the atomic scale. The team will then uncover the microscale pore
distribution and grain evolution with sintering temperatures and times using
approaches like discrete element method, in which temperature-dependent
diffusion parameters determined from molecular dynamics will be incorporated to
derive particle contact evolution and grain growths during sintering. A
constitutive model will be developed to calculate the macro-scale anisotropic
shrinkage and distortions during sintering. The prediction of element
segregation, grain-boundary defects, pore distribution, grain size, and
anisotropic deformation of sintered specimens will be experimentally validated
by material characterizations, including x-ray computed tomography, complemented
by measuring the resultant mechanical properties of sintered specimens. The
project will also establish a semi-empirical process-structure-property
relationship to guide the fabrication of stainless steel parts with desired
properties. This findings are expected to advance the design, fabrication, and
application of alloys with predictable microstructures and macroscopic
characteristics as well as tailorable mechanical
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.