* 2224067
* Fungi in the pine barrens ecosystem - biodiversity, systematics and function
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ning Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2026
* USD 323,896.00

Despite two centuries of study, most fungal biodiversity on Earth remains
unknown. Prior research indicates that plant roots in the understudied pine
barrens ecosystem of the Eastern United States harbors unique and highly diverse
fungal species, many of which are new to science. The goal of this project is to
obtain a complete understanding of fungi associated with plant roots in the
acidic, nutrient-poor, dry and fire-prone pine barrens ecosystem by studying
their biodiversity, systematics and functions. The project will focus on fungi
associated with pine, switchgrass and blueberry, which are the predominant and
stress-tolerant plants in the pine barrens ecosystem. The project will provide
research experience and training for undergraduate students, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral associate from diverse backgrounds and will provide
information for policy formulation by federal and state agencies (e.g., the New
Jersey Pinelands Commission and the Department of Environmental Protection)
regarding land use and natural resource protection. This project also will
provide resources for studies on increasing stress tolerance of forests, as well
as bioenergy and food crops, to meet the challenges of climate change, such as
drought, wildfire, soil acidification and nutrient limitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of this project are: 1) to collect
plant root-associated fungi from the pine barrens ecosystem along a latitudinal
transect from Maine to Florida, and to comprehensively name and describe novel
fungal lineages; 2) to catalogue and compare the root fungal communities among
these different climate and geographic locations using both culture-based and
culture-independent next-generation DNA metabarcoding to understand and predict
the impact of climate on the mycobiome; 3) to perform plant-fungal interaction
experiments and study the functions of these root associated fungi; and 4) to
train students and postdoc to conduct research across the entire spectrum of
these activities. This study will combine the fields of phylogenetics,
evolution, taxonomy, biodiversity, organismal biology, and next-generation DNA
metabarcoding. The project will uncover novel fungi and elucidate the functions
of these root-colonizing fungi, which is important for both natural and crop-
associated applications. This project also will provide data to improve the
accuracy of fungal diversity estimates through linking cultures with taxa that
are, thus far, only known from DNA sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.