* 2224066
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Effective Design and Recommendation for Privacy-Preserving Data Visualizations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Christopher Bryan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

This project will develop novel techniques and software tools to support the
creation of visualizations that preserve the privacy of sensitive information in
the underlying dataset. Visualization is an important technique for
communicating information in our society. Unfortunately, visualization can stand
at odds with the concept of data privacy, where items in a dataset cannot be
fully made public due to the existence of sensitive information that they might
contain. Even when the underlying raw data is not published, public-facing
visualizations must be carefully designed so that they do not allow the
disclosure or inference of sensitive information in the data records. The goal
of this project is to make it easy for people to create well-designed, public-
facing, privacy-preserving visualizations from datasets that contain sensitive
data. The project team will develop mechanisms and software that optimize the
design of visualizations (based on established theory and principles) while also
considering the privacy risks that might exist in the data. New techniques and
tools will be released for public use, as standalone open source projects and/or
integrated into popular toolkits and libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish this goal, the project team will develop a visualization grammar, a
mechanism for specifying visualization designs without requiring low-level
programming or data pre-processing, that supports privacy constraints and
sanitization actions. The grammar will be used to establish theories and
guidelines for effective visualization design in the context of privacy risks,
via conducting large-scale, crowdsourced experiments that assess how different
design choices, privacy rules, and sanitization techniques actions affect
utility and privacy of the resulting visualizations. The impact of the developed
theory and guidelines will then be translated into tools that both recommend
visualizations that preserve privacy and support the authoring and refining of
privacy-aware visualizations. Further, the team will develop educational
materials at both the college and high school level that leverage the findings
and tools created in the project to raise awareness of privacy in
visualization,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.