* 2224128
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Unifying Pfam protein sequence and ECOD structural classifications with structure models
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Nick Grishin, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2025
* USD 376,528.00

Proteins are complex organic molecules essential for all functions of life. A
study of a protein begins from learning about its evolutionary relatives.
Proteins tend to retain their function as they evolve. Therefore, a more closely
studied relative can inform researchers about the properties of a less
understood relative, suggesting hypotheses to be tested. A protein’s relatives
are cataloged in public, freely available, classification databases. Although
amino-acid sequences are known for most proteins, spatial structures have only
been experimentally determined for a small fraction. Protein classification can
be based on either protein sequences (including those with yet unknown 3D
structure), or protein spatial structures (augmented with sequences). Structure-
based classifications are more accurate but include fewer proteins, necessarily
missing those whose structures are unknown. Recently developed revolutionary
structure prediction methods that can produce accurate 3D models for any protein
sequence bridge these sequence-only and structure/sequence classifications. Now
is the time to bring the two classification types together through a synergistic
collaboration. The teams in the United States (ECOD: Evolutionary Classification
of protein Domains database, mostly structure-based) and the United Kingdom
(Pfam: Protein families database, mostly sequence-based) will work together to
make their two databases consistent with each other and more accurate for the
benefit of scientists and the broader community. The results of these protein
classifications are readily incorporated into many other resources, such as
Wikipedia pages, and thus are widely used by an audience in science and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ECOD and Pfam teams will collaboratively
classify more than 1 million protein structure models generated by AlphaFold and
RoseTTAfold into protein families of close evolutionary relatives. Existing
families will be expanded with additional proteins. New families will be defined
by sequence profile similarity aided by structure analysis in a manner
consistent with the Pfam classification standards. The project requires
upgrading the software infrastructure to process millions of models and to
synchronize the two classifications in terms of domain identifiers and family
names. Synchronization of the ECOD and Pfam classifications will be achieved in
four ways: 1) By defining new families in Pfam for domains currently present
only in ECOD; 2) By rectifying the ECOD classification such that all domains are
classified into a Pfam family (defining new ones where necessary); 3) By
splitting Pfam domain families containing multiple ECOD domains into multiple
families containing single domains. 4) By making consistent collaborative
decisions about domain boundaries and family classification using proteins with
3D models in both databases. These consistent domain definitions and
classifications will facilitate broad generation of functional inference and
detection of evolutionary insights in the scientific community and the public at
large. Lastly, the internet architecture will be upgraded to serve these domain
data to the broader scientific community through web portals. The results of
this project can be found incorporated into both ECOD
&lt;http://prodata.swmed.edu/ecod&gt; and Pfam
&lt;http://pfam.xfam.org&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.