* 2224295
* Transfer Advocacy Groups: Transforming Culture to Support Community College Transfer Students of Color in Undergraduate Physics
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Vashti Sawtelle, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 04/30/2028
* USD 656,544.00

Over the past decade nearly half of all post-secondary students of color have
attended community colleges. This project is a collaboration of two
institutions, San Jose State University and Michigan State University. The
project aims to address the urgent need to support community college transfer
students of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields by transforming the receiving baccalaureate granting institutions.
Changing this racialized transfer function requires understanding and
transforming the institutional culture around transfer in STEM at both the
sending and receiving institutions. By partnering with transfer students of
color as design partners, the goal of this project is to craft support for new-
to-campus transfer students of color in STEM by engaging in university
institutional change efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
Transfer Advocacy Groups (TAGs) which are collaborations of faculty, students,
and advisors working to implement interventions to support transfer students of
color in STEM and promote a transfer receptive culture. The project focuses on
transfer students of color majoring in physics as well as students of color
taking introductory physics classes at both institutions. The scope of the
project includes documenting the experiences of transfer students of color, a
population that is largely absent from the literature on racialized experiences
in undergraduate STEM. The data collected will allow the lived experience and
perspectives of transfer students of color to be centered in the work of the
TAGs and provides an understanding of the extent to which institutional change
addresses their needs and realities. Analyses of research conducted in
collaboration with transfer students of color as well as research with respect
to institutional policies and practices will inform the work of the TAGs at each
institution. TAGS will collaborate with key stakeholders to implement changes in
the universities. Through these activities, the project aims to transform
culture at both departmental and college levels so it is more transfer-receptive
and supportive others partnering with transfer students of color on
institutional change efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial
Equity). The program supports research and practice projects that investigate
how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded
projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the
individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by systemic inequities
within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with NSF’s core value of
supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from across the
Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of organizations.
Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition
of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and development
thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project is co-funded through the Division of Physics. The Division
of Physics (PHY) supports physics research and the preparation of future
scientists in the nation’s colleges and universities across a broad range of
physics disciplines that span scales of space and time from the largest to the
smallest and the oldest to the youngest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.