* 2224331
* Workshop: Merging Statistical Theory and Analyses at the Interface of Microbial and Macrobial Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Mathew Leibold, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,906.00

Recent progress has made it possible to make predictions about the complex
effects of species interactions and to analyze complex data from nature. The
problem is that the connections between the predictions and the results of
complex data analysis are not always clear. This workshop will bring together
statisticians with theoreticians and empirical scientists who use process-to-
pattern links in their research approaches. The goal is to improve the
integration of these areas of research to better understand how they might
affect both microbial and ‘macrobial’ organisms. The broader impacts of the
project are to train early career scientists such as graduate students, post-
docs, and assistant professors and to provide tools that can help develop better
management of natural resources in a changing world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first workshop will identify promising approaches to link theory, statistical,
and empirical analysis. During this workshop participants will also discuss how
to best address possible challenges. A second virtual workshop, open to the
broader science community, will further expand and enrich the initial findings.
In the short term, the project is aimed at producing a review of current
findings and promising future directions. In the longer term the project
envisions to solidify and enhance the methodologies that can drive future
research in community ecology and eco-evolutionary
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.