* 2224412
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Microgravity enabled studies of particle adsorption dynamics at fluid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Joelle Frechette, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

Particle-laden droplets have received attention for their applications in
emulsions, catalysis, sensing, optical materials, as well as environmental
remediation. An important step in creating particle-laden fluid interfaces is
the transport and attachment (adsorption) of the particles to a fluid droplet.
Unfortunately, it is challenging to study directly the attachment process on
Earth with the competing effects of sedimentation (gravitational settling) of
the particles dispersed in the bulk of the fluid. In other words, there is
competition between particles attaching to a fluid interface and settling
because of gravity. To alleviate the effect of gravity, this award aims to study
adsorption of particles to fluid interfaces under microgravity in the
international space station. The project will elucidate the critical steps of
how particles attach to droplets in the absence of sedimentation. Findings from
this award will lead to engineering strategies to optimize the design of
materials that rely on particle-laden interfaces. From a technological
standpoint, the knowledge gained will be directly applicable to emerging
technologies in additive manufacturing and optical materials to impact life on
Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of particle-stabilized emulsions
strongly depends on the particle coverage at the interface. Kinetic limitations
during particle adsorption limit Pickering emulsions from reaching their full
technological potential. This award aims to advance our understanding of
particle adsorption at interfaces by developing: 1) fundamental knowledge in
structure-property (surface pressure-area fraction) relationships at fluid
interfaces, 2) an understanding of the transition from fluid to glassy
(sluggish) dynamics at fluid interfaces, and 3) a validated model describing
diffusion-limited adsorption. This award aims at understanding the mechanisms
limiting the adsorption of particles to fluid interface by conducting
experiments in microgravity. Microgravity experiments are necessary and allow to
investigate adsorption dynamic in the absence of sedimentation. The time scale
for gradient diffusion to a fluid interface can be of order of hours, making
parabolic flights not a realistic option to avoid gravitational effects. While
key experiments will be conducted under microgravity, the scientific and
technological impacts of the work will benefit life on Earth. Findings will
benefit any processes involving particles adsorption to fluid interfaces
including in manufacturing, consumer products, flotation, oil recovery, and
environmental remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.