* 2224205
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Genome-wide quest for non-host resistance mechanisms in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Hemayet Ullah, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2026
* USD 230,000.00

Globally, ~15% of crop losses are caused by various aggressive pathogens
especially fungi, highlighting the importance of crop protection against
pathogens. In nature, most plants are resistant to most potential pathogens
because of a phenomenon, namely nonhost resistance (NHR). A prime example of NHR
is rice’s immunity to rust and powdery mildew diseases that cause serious
damages to many other cereal crops including wheat and barley. Hence, NHR
provides a major safety barrier for all plants. Unfortunately, due to its
genetic complexity, the molecular basis of NHR in most cases remains elusive,
which severely limits the exploitation of the immunity mechanisms underlying NHR
for improving crop resistance against aggressive pathogens. This multi-
institutional collaborative research project aims to dissect genetic and
molecular mechanisms of NHR against potential fungal pathogens in two model
plants using innovative and combinatorial forward and reverse genetics
approaches. Identification and functional characterization of plant immunity
genes required for NHR will not only reveal the molecular basis of NHR (which is
among the top 10 unanswered questions concerning plant-microbe interactions) but
also inspire novel strategies to engineer broader and more robust resistance in
crop plants against various pathogens. This project will also generate valuable
research materials and tools for the scientific community to study plant
immunity mechanisms. Finally, this project will integrate research with
education and outreach activities. For example, a “CRISPR Technology and
Application” summer workshop in each year will be run by the project team to
enhance participation of under-represented minority undergraduate students in
plant science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonhost resistance (NHR) refers to immunity
of most tested genotypes of a plant species to most tested variants of a
pathogen species that can cause diseases on other plant species. Unlike host
resistance, which is mounted against adapted pathogens and has been well
characterized at the molecular level, the genetic basis of NHR remains largely
unknown. The long-term goal of this project is to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms of NHR for improving crop resistance against aggressive pathogens. It
is hypothesized that NHR in most cases is multi-layered and genetically
intractable by conventional means but dissectible by stepwise forward genetics
and/or CRISPR-enabled reverse genetics approaches. There are four specific
objectives for this collaborative project. Aim 1 is to identify novel genes
contributing to NHR in Arabidopsis (as a model dicot) against non-adapted
powdery mildew and rust fungi using stepwise forward genetic screens. Aim 2 is
to identify genes essential for NHR against powdery mildew and rust fungi, and
other pathogens in rice (as a model monocot) using multiplexed CRISPR
mutagenesis of up to 50 various rice immunity genes followed by geared infection
screens. Aim 3 is to elucidate novel immune mechanisms controlling NHR via
various molecular methods including comparative transcriptomics, proteomics and
metabolomics. Aim 4 is to facilitate community research and promote education of
next-generation plant scientists with a focus on training underrepresented
minority students. New knowledge from the proposed research may help establish
mechanistic frameworks for NHR in connection with the well-established PAMP
(pathogen-associated molecular pattern)-triggered immunity and/or effector-
triggered immunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.