* 2224192
* Conference: Enhancing Arctic Science and Engineering (EASE) Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Craig Tweedie, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,103.00

The causes and consequences of Arctic change are so complex that it takes a
community-focused effort to understand the current pressures on Arctic social-
ecological systems. This award supports a multi-disciplinary, inter-
generational, cross-cultural, and forward-looking conference that brings
together participants to focus on enhancing arctic science and engineering
(EASE) in conjunction with the 75th Anniversary of the Naval Arctic Research
Laboratory in Utqiaġvik, Alaska. The EASE workshop serves the interest of the
nation by bringing together agencies, universities, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector, local officials, students, and Indigenous
knowledge holders to demonstrate the achievements of collaborative and
community-based research in Utqiaġvik and the greater North Slope region of
Alaska, while envisioning future research efforts in the Arctic. The EASE
workshop will provide a forum to exchange past research successes and challenges
that can guide the advancement of future research and knowledge co-production in
Utqiaġvik, across the North Slope, and in the Arctic for the next generation.
Broader impacts of the workshop are grounded in a legacy of promoting
sustainable Arctic science in Utqiaġvik, as a model for the circumpolar north,
being guided by the important role of Iñupiat peoples in furthering scientific
understanding of climatic and social-ecological change in the rapidly changing
Arctic. The event includes several opportunities for facilitated dialog with
business and industry representatives and local government with the aim of
aligning future capacity-building investment in science infrastructure with the
needs of the science community in collaboration with the local Indigenous
community. With the inclusion of tribal, regional and state planners, including
Indigenous leaders and students, the workshop will broaden participation from
underrepresented groups and diverse institutions in scientific dialog and
knowledge sharing to build capacity for further contributions to science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an unprecedented time to study changes
occurring in the Arctic. The impacts of melting sea ice, melting ice sheets,
thawing permafrost, ecosystem reorganization, and associated human interactions
represent complex issues requiring a reflection on the past, a focus on the
current state, and a coordinated and collaborative discussion about priorities
for future research and capacity-building investments in Arctic science and
engineering. The EASE Workshop is a 5-day, single-session workshop focusing on a
summary of science and engineering in Utqiaġvik and the greater North Slope
region over the last 75 years, an assessment of the current state of the science
and engineering, and a prospectus on science and engineering in the Arctic over
the next 25 years. Specific topics or themes of the workshop include marine and
coastal research, terrestrial and freshwater research, atmospheric research,
social science research, co-production of knowledge, convergent research, and
education and outreach opportunities. The outcome of the EASE workshop will
provide a roadmap that can be used to guide future research endeavors and
investments in Arctic science and engineering that span several disciplines and
knowledge frameworks that align with the mission and vision of the NSF Office of
Polar Programs. The EASE workshop will contribute to six of the NSF’s 10 Big
Ideas: Navigating the New Arctic (NNA), Growing Convergence Research, NSF
INCLUDES, Harnessing the Data Revolution, Mid-scale Research Infrastructure, and
NSF 2026. The workshop will also build on the policy drivers, priority areas,
and foundational activities to enhance societal outcomes outlined in the
2022-2026 Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee Arctic Research
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.