* 2224586
* I-Corps: Microencapsulation technique with a nature-derived biodegradable polymer
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Alireza Abbaspourrad, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of microencapsulation materials. Microplastics pollution is an
environmental issue that has raised world-wide attention in recent years.
Microencapsulated materials in some consumer products that are made from non-
biodegradable materials are one possible source of microplastic pollution. The
proposed technology microencapsulation technique may be suitable to encapsulate
all oil-based materials in the liquid form such as fragrance oils and other
ingredients that are used in laundry products, cosmetics, and agrochemical
products, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
potential development of a microencapsulation technology that uses food grade
natural polymers to potentially replace non-biodegradable microencapsulation
materials currently being used in industry that may address part of the
microplastics pollution issue. Microencapsulation techniques use a polymer layer
to protect the cargo materials from being affected by environmental factors and
subsequently release the cargo materials under designated conditions. Current
commercially available techniques in consumer products mostly contain petroleum-
based materials, which cannot degrade into small molecules in the natural
environment after being used and can cause microplastic pollution. The proposed
technology is a naturally derived material to potentially encapsulate oil-based
materials in consumer products. The proposed technology microencapsulation
method has a novel polymer structure that may combine the characteristics of a
polyanion structure and an amphiphilic molecular structure that may allow the
polymer to be concentrated at the oil-water interface to be crosslinked by the
divalent metal ions to form the stable polymer film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.