* 2224595
* Collaborative Research: Reimagining Educator Learning Pathways Through Storywork for Racial Equity in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Beth Warren, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 05/31/2028
* USD 666,618.00

There is a pressing need for STEM educator learning models to substantively
consider the diversity of STEM practices and values across social and cultural
contexts, as well as how STEM fields are adapting to this diversity. As
educators seek more meaningful approaches to equity that integrate everyday
pedagogies, there is a further need to address how these pedagogies often
reproduce inequitable STEM structures. This collaborative project seeks to
address these challenges by designing, implementing, and studying an educator
learning model that helps educators recognize and transform the moment-to-moment
learning interactions that perpetuate racial inequalities across a myriad of
STEM contexts. The project therefore aims to achieve two primary outcomes.
First, to deepen educators' capacity to mediate the moment-to-moment tensions
that arise between STEM concepts and practices privileged in schools, and those
that attend to students' cultural and intellectual lives; and second, to
generate knowledge on how to systematically support educators as they wrestle
with the conceptual and ethical complexities of unjust STEM teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year study is structured around a
series of modules grounded in storywork, an Indigenous knowledge-systems
approach to centering minoritized learners' language, history, phenomenon-based
storylines, and their racialized experiences of systemic racism when co-
designing STEM learning opportunities. Through long-standing partnerships
between project leaders and K-12 and higher education STEM educators serving
Indigenous, Black, and Latinx youth and families, the iterative design of
modules is informed by the analysis of educator learning trajectories when
codesigning through storywork. In addition to incorporating modules into higher
education programs (e.g., teacher education and various STEM disciplinary
courses), broadly sharing resources and tools with communities, practitioners,
and researchers through multimedia outlets as well as academic and practitioner-
facing publications and presentations, the project has the potential to inform
foundational theory on developing highly adaptable approaches for more racially-
and educationally- just educator-student interactions in STEM spaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program supports
research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial
equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the
voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF's core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Programs across EDU contribute
funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition of the alignment of its
projects with the collective research and development thrusts of the four
divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.