* 2224093
* AAAS-NSF S-STEM Resource &amp; Evaluation Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Travis York, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 3,394,577.00

The vision of NSF’s Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM) program is that all Americans,
regardless of economic status, may pursue a STEM degree and contribute to the
innovation economy. To that end, the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) and its partners the American Institute for Research (AIR),
Quality Education for Minorities (QEM), and MN Associates are launching the
AAAS-NSF S-STEM Resource and Evaluation Center (REC), which will foster a
network of S-STEM stakeholders to generate and disseminate new knowledge,
successful practices, and effective design principles arising from NSF S-STEM
projects across the nation. Among other important activities, the REC will
convene an annual meeting of at least 1,000 S-STEM scholars to build a community
for the program's main beneficiaries: talented low-income STEM students. This
scholar meeting and the larger center, will engage a number of industry
partners, which will support scholars' ability to succeed in their future STEM
careers. In addition, the center will curate and disseminate knowledge, provide
technical assistance, and share resources both within the S-STEM network and to
the wider community of STEM educators and professionals invested in supporting
the success of low-income students. The proposed REC will also produce two
public national reports examining the S-STEM program's national impact on the
domestic workforce, institutional approaches to low-income student success, and
the individual scholars. The REC will build the capacity of S-STEM awardees by
sharing effective, replicable strategies for supporting S-STEM Scholars and will
also build the capacity of S-STEM projects by providing technical assistance to
project evaluators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This center will create opportunities
for the S-STEM scholars to come together to expand their academic and
professional network, learn about academic and career opportunities, and
increase their ability to become proficient members of the STEM workforce. The
REC will ground the proposed activities within Yosso’s theoretical framework of
Community Cultural Wealth which considers cultural capital in college from an
asset approach. Yosso’s model explores the talents, strengths, and experiences
that students often leverage within the college environment and is broadly
generalizable. Within this framework, the center will specifically attend to the
unique strengths and opportunities of S-STEM Scholars specifically and low-
income students more broadly. Advancing our knowledge of evidence-based best
practices for recruiting, retaining, mentoring, and supporting high-achieving
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students from low-
income backgrounds is of strategic importance for the nation. NSF’s S-STEM
program provides awards to Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs) to fund
scholarships to talented low-income STEM students pursuing undergraduate or
graduate degrees and to advance the adaptation, implementation, and study of
evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities that promote recruitment,
retention, and graduation in STEM for academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.