* 2224994
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design: US-South Africa: Turning CO2 to stone: the ecosystem service of the oxalate-carbonate pathway and its sensitivity to land use change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Daniel Breecker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2025
* USD 150,239.00

Mitigation of global warming requires a complete understanding of carbon
exchange between the atmosphere and the land. Near-surface terrestrial carbon
storage typically focuses on above-ground plants and organic carbon in soils,
even though these forms of carbon are relatively unstable. Calcium carbonate
(CaCO3) is a mineral that is regularly overlooked as a long-term and stable
carbon store in soils. In dry environments where plants are rich in calcium
oxalate, certain bacteria and fungi can decompose the calcium oxalate in dead
plant material, which can lead to the formation of CaCO3. This oxalate-carbonate
pathway (OCP) provides a natural and potentially rapid way to sequester
atmospheric CO2-carbon as solid CaCO3. This project will investigate how loss of
biodiversity through land-use change and agricultural practices may reduce the
amount of carbon that is transformed into CaCO3. The project will develop an
international team of ecologists, soil scientists, and geochemists through a
series of fieldtrips, graduate student exchanges, and work packages that uses a
multidisciplinary approach to understanding the importance and resilience of OCP
ecosystems within the Greater Cape Floristic Region of South Africa. The project
aims to develop a toolset that can ultimately be applied to investigate other
candidate ecosystems worldwide. Many such ecosystems are being converted to
agriculture but are only marginally productive. Knowledge generated from this
project will be shared with land users to inform decisions on land conversion,
the potential valuation of carbon, and how this could be applied to improve
monetary yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how the loss
of functional biodiversity limits sequestration of carbon by the OCP in two
important ways: 1) removal of native, calcium-oxalate rich vegetation (through
farming and/or overgrazing) and physical disruption of giant termite mounds
(through deep tillage) limits the supply of calcium-oxalate to the soil, and 2)
loss of soil microbial diversity limits the breakdown of available calcium-
oxalate. The interdisciplinary project will use eDNA-based functional
biodiversity methods to identify the soil microbial assemblage that is the
cornerstone of the proposed carbon sequestration pathway and how it changes upon
disturbance; monitor the soil pore space apparent respiratory quotient (ratio of
CO2 produced to O2 consumed) to spatially and temporally resolve the OCP non-
destructively in soils; use stable Ca isotopes to trace the movement of calcium
through plants and soils to help evaluate the time-integrated importance of the
OCP; and develop a method for near and mid-infrared spectroscopy to measure Ca
oxalate and calcite concentration that does not rely on prior dissolutions or
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.