* 2224271
* AF: Small: Computational Geometry from a Fine-Grained Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Timothy Chan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Many real-world problems require fast processing of large amounts of geometric
data. Computational geometry is concerned with the design of efficient
algorithms for solving such problems. Over the past four decades, a variety of
algorithms have been developed for the most fundamental problems in the area,
and in many cases, the amount of time used by these known algorithms are thought
to be the best possible, or close to the best, in a fine-grained sense. Ideally,
one would like to rigorously prove that no faster algorithm is possible, but
unfortunately, such proofs are beyond reach under the current state of art. To
circumvent this issue, researchers in theoretical computer science have recently
turned to "conditional" proofs which assume certain unproved but believable
hypotheses about the hardness of various "core" problems. The approach is to
show that if a faster algorithm were to exist for the problem at hand, then we
would get an unreasonably fast algorithm for one of the core problems,
contradicting the hypotheses. In this project, the investigator will adopt this
approach to better understand the fine-grained complexity of basic geometric
problems. In addition, material from this project will be incorporated into
courses on algorithms and computational geometry, and help in the training of
several graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore a
variety of problems under this paradigm, about geometric optimization, geometric
searching in low and moderate dimensions, static and dynamic geometric data
structures, matching point clouds, etc. The main goal is to establish a web of
new reductions between these geometric problems, as well as reductions from
known core problems outside of geometry (such as 3SUM and shortest paths in
graphs), in order to prove conditional lower bounds on the complexity of
geometric problems. A parallel goal is to find better upper bounds, i.e., speed
up existing algorithms, when possible. For example, one tool involves the use of
algebraic decision trees. Conversely, geometric techniques might help
researchers assess the believability of standard hypotheses, and new problems
will be identified to enrich the interplay between computational geometry and
other areas of algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.