* 2224821
* Travel support for students and early career scientists to The Clay Minerals Society Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Paul Schroeder, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

These NSF funds provide support to students and early career clay scientists.
U.S. based participants will have the opportunity to attend an international
conference dedicated to the study of clays in Istanbul, Turkey. The meeting is
being jointly run with the U.S. based Clay Minerals Society and the
International Association for the Study of Clays (AIPEA). The conference will
cover clay-focused topics. Clays exist in soils, household products, medicines,
building materials, new nanomaterials, and with strategic resources (including
oil shales and rare earth element deposits). It is important to bring together
senior U.S. based clay scientists with like-minded senior international
scientists. This way ideas are shared, debated, and advanced through
collaboration and ultimately publication. This International clay conference
first met nearly 70 years ago. Like the Olympics, it occurs every four years to
showcase the world’s best clay innovations. It is the largest and most respected
gathering of clay scientists. At this meeting, U.S. based students and early
career scientists become educated and network with senior scientists on a
variety of topics. The goal of networking is to train future scientists and
develop international relationships. These relationships make it more accessible
to explore the timeless advancements of clay science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference hosts four workshops on the topics: 1) AIPEA School for Young
Scientists on Kaolin origins, properties, and applications, 2) Advances in the
characterization of smectites and bentonites, 3) Clay minerals catalysis of
organic reactions, and 4) Early Career Clay Scientists workshop. The first and
fourth workshops are targeted toward connecting experienced scientists with
younger scientists on key topics and explore ways to better publish, obtain
funding, and network. All the workshops are led by experts from government,
academia, and industry, who have widely published and are highly respected in
the clay research community. Two field trips will be led to important economic
clay deposits where the exploration, mining, and end-product uses of clays are
examined. Over 27 thematic sessions at the conference cover a wide range of
topics, which are of interest to geobiology and low temperature geochemistry.
Technical disciplines include those relating to mineralogy, critical zone
science, environmental science, medicine and health science, functionalized
clays and materials science, soil science, engineering and geotechnical
applications, planetary sciences, teaching clay science, history of clay
societies, and industrial materials. Low-cost housing is available to all
student participants. This is located on the campus of Istanbul Technical
University, Istanbul, Turkey. This venue also boasts historically important
locations in the legacy of science where “East meets West”. This is indicated by
the conference theme “New Interfaces: Bridging Continents and Cultures with
Clays”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.