* 2224456
* Broadband and tunable enhanced chiral light-matter interactions at the visible with new ultrathin helical metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Eva Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 03/31/2026
* USD 567,000.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;This project advances understanding about
how light passes around edges and corners which are created by configurations of
very small three-dimensional objects. The light path can be manipulated and
controlled by the size and geometry of spring-like nanoobjects, leading to
artificially engineered materials with unique properties and functionalities.
The research team utilizes experimental and computational approaches to predict,
manufacture and test new ultrathin optical nanostructures which will be arranged
in configurations that are expected to support next generation optical
communications and sensing technologies. Thereby the study closes a gap in the
manipulation of light by using specific geometrical arrangements of
nanostructures. By that, the research benefits the economy and society of the
United States. The project supports undergraduate and graduate student
involvement in research as a means of encouraging pursuit of advanced study and
research careers in new optical materials. The research team extends the impact
of this research to introduce advanced optical concepts relevant to the current
project to underrepresented demographic groups in the STEM pipeline, including
presentations to the Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physical Sciences
(WoPhys) events at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the annual outreach
and Research Experiences for Undergraduates programs of the Nebraska Center for
Materials and Nanoscience. Further, the investigators leverage their research
findings to create one video to teach the broader public about the properties of
light, current research activities for advancing optical materials, and future
device technologies towards high-performance quantum optical and photonic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in nanofabrication techniques have enabled the development of optical
nanoscale metamaterials to enhance electromagnetic chirality. However, current
nanophotonic metamaterial designs that exhibit chiral light-matter interactions
have an extremely weak and narrowband nature, are difficult to control and
enhance, usually operate at infrared frequencies, and cannot be made tunable. In
this project, the research team tackles these problems by designing new
dielectric compact subwavelength helical metamaterials to strongly enhance and
tune their chiroptical response at record-breaking levels and at the entire
visible spectrum. The proposed new artificially engineered dielectric
nanomaterials are expected to unlock novel ways for the efficient and coherent
manipulation of the broadband chirality, spin angular momentum of photons, and
transverse photon spin of incident electromagnetic waves. The new approach is
anticipated to lead to directional spin-polarized radiation and unperturbed
chiral edge modes along interfaces with different handedness. Low-loss all-
dielectric helical metamaterials are investigated both theoretically and
experimentally and applied to different exciting new applications, such as in
the design of new chiral nanowaveguides and nanocavities. The structurally
induced strong chiroptical response of the dielectric nanohelices is tuned to
different frequencies at the visible by varying their geometry. The fundamental
understanding and experimental realization of the proposed new nanomaterials is
expected to be transformative to the emerging field of chiral quantum
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.