* 2224897
* EAGER: JOINT CRYO NEUTRON/X-RAY CRYSTALLOGRAPHY OF RNA AND RNA-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Martin Egli, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The ribose 2'-hydroxyl group (2'-OH) is the key chemical difference between RNA
and DNA. Their divergent characteristics, including structure, stability,
function and activity, can be attributed to various degrees to the presence of
the 2'-OH in RNA and its absence in DNA. The 2'-OH affects the sugar
conformational equilibrium and thereby the geometry of paired RNA strands, and
ultimately the much-expanded 3D fold-space of RNA compared to DNA. The 2'-OH is
the only hydrogen bond donor in the nucleic acid backbone and results in
increased RNA hydration and thermodynamic stability relative to DNA. Moreover,
the 2'-OH acts as nucleophile in RNA splicing reactions and ribozyme-catalyzed
phosphodiester cleavage. Structural biology has ignored the 2'-OH
hydrogen/orientation, owing to technical limitations of X-ray crystallography
(XC) and challenges to solution studies such as rapid exchange. Neutron
crystallography (NC) reveals the locations of hydrogen atoms (2H, deuterium or
D) in biomacromolecules. In the project joint cryo-NC/XC will be used on several
RNA targets to assess: (i) The importance of the 2'-OH in RNA’s expansive fold
space, (ii) How binding proteins might influence 2'-OH orientation to sculpt the
RNA backbone, and (iii) Differences in 2'- and 3'-OH orientations in 5'-3' and
5'-2' linked RNAs, respectively, that might explain the latter’s demise in
nature. The rigorous, combined NC/XC approach will produce improved models of
water structure and a better understanding of nucleic acid structure, function
and interactions with binding proteins. The project work will ultimately enable
refined theoretical treatments of macromolecules and hydration, e.g., by
molecular dynamics simulations. Structural refinements and data science aspects
of this research, including PDB searches and large-scale analysis of pucker
modes provide ideal projects for high-school students/undergraduates as part of
Vanderbilt’s Aspirnaut program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutron crystallography
(NC) reveals the locations of hydrogen atoms (2H, deuterium or D) in
biomacromolecules. Conversely, X-ray crystallography (XC) cannot pinpoint H
atoms even at high resolution. Cryo NC also establishes the orientations of
first- and higher-shell D2O. However, NC research has remained high-
risk/-impact, owing to the need for large crystals, perdeuterated samples and
limited access to beamlines. Recently the PI applied cryo NC for the first time
to an RNA structure using state-of the-art instrumentation at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). Cryo NC uncovered roles of ribose hydroxyls (2'-OHs) in
stabilizing non-canonical backbone geometries, a structural correlation between
2'-OH orientation and sugar pucker, and a 6:1 preference of the 2'-OH to act as
H-bond donor rather than acceptor. These insights lead to hypotheses in regard
to: (i) The importance of the 2'-OH moiety in RNA’s expanded fold space relative
to DNA (ii) How binding proteins might influence 2'-OH orientation and flip the
ribose pucker to sculpt the RNA backbone geometry, and (iii) Differences in 2'-
and 3'-OH orientations in 5'-3' and 5'-2' linked RNAs, respectively, that may
explain the latter’s demise in nature. Water in living systems is omnipresent
and is involved in governing folding, geometry, stability, dynamics, function
and interactions of proteins and nucleic acids. The rigorous cryo NC/XC approach
will produce improved models of water structure, with implications for our
understanding of nucleic acid structure, function and interactions with binding
proteins. The project work will ultimately enable refined theoretical treatments
of macromolecules and hydration by QM-MM and MD
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.