* 2224211
* EAGER: Comprehensive monitoring of protein interaction networks
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Marko Jovanovic, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The genome encodes information for thousands of proteins, which form the
building blocks of cellular machinery in all organisms. Proteins normally do not
function in isolation, but rather in multi-component complexes, such that most
vital cellular functions are governed by essential interactions between
proteins. These protein interaction networks are dynamic, and changes in the
interactions are the major cause of physiological and pathological changes in
cellular and organismal function. Thus, it is essential to have universal and
easily implementable tools that allow scientists to measure the dynamics of
protein interactions. This project aims to develop such a tool, which will allow
researchers to simultaneously map dynamic protein interactions for up to
hundreds of proteins under many conditions. This novel approach will address
many key issues in biology, such as which interaction changes drive
developmental decisions or occur due to mutations that lead to pathological
outcomes. Moreover, the project has high potential to advance biotechnology, for
example, by making it possible to systematically screen drug candidates for the
ability to specifically disrupt protein interactions that drive a disease state.
The project also provides cross-disciplinary research training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
employ a new antibody and sequencing-based strategy in order to map protein
interactions and their changes. There are two fundamental components to the
strategy. First, antibodies are uniquely “barcoded” by a short DNA sequence so
that each antibody – and by extension, its target protein – can be easily
identified by next-generation sequencing. Second, a combinatorial barcoding
strategy, via a spilt and pool procedure, adds unique combinatorial DNA
sequences to the barcoded antibodies. Only antibodies co-bound to the same
protein complex will get the same combinatorial barcode and protein interactions
can be reconstructed by sequencing and matching these barcodes. In summary, this
project aims to provide a facile approach to directly study protein interaction
dynamics at high throughput, but at the same time at single complex
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.