* 2224786
* Institute on Equity-Oriented Mixture Modeling for Discipline-Based Education Research Scholars
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Allison Horst, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,345.00

The goal of the Institute on Equity-Oriented Mixture Modeling for Discipline-
Based Education Research Scholars is to train Discipline-Based Education
Research (DBER) scholars in the use of mixture modeling to address pressing
issues around diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in STEM education. Mixture
modeling is a powerful tool for uncovering heterogeneity in student experiences
and providing a richer way of understanding the experiences of students
typically underrepresented in STEM fields. Although mixture modeling is not yet
common among DBER scholars, it is a well-established tool with great potential
to enrich the fields understanding of DEI-related issues in STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute provides intensive training and mentoring to
two cohorts of 10 DBER scholars. The initial training includes 10 days of
synchronous and asynchronous online training with materials specifically
tailored towards the DBER scholars selected for each cohort. All participants
receive ongoing mentoring from the senior project staff the year following the
summer training to support them as they apply mixture modeling to their own STEM
education research questions and seek to present and publish their work.
Throughout all Institute activities, the senior project staff will work to build
an enduring learning community of DBER scholars interested in the use of mixture
modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by NSF’s EHR Core
Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.