* 2224999
* Collaborative Research: The interplay of nitrogen loading and ecosystem sustainability in threatened wetlands: an extension of the WETFEET project
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Samantha Chapman, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2025
* USD 608,830.00

Over the last decade, pollution in Florida estuaries has had dire consequences
such as red tides and massive die-offs of fish and marine mammals. This team of
researchers has worked closely with land managers in northeastern Florida who
seek data-driven guidance on strategies to mitigate pollution and help sustain
these wetlands. Critical wetland habitats are increasingly being lost to erosion
at the edges, and "ponding" in the interior due to sea level rise. As sea levels
and pollution are increasing, the thin green strips of vegetation that protect
Floridaâ€™s human population from big storms are changing from salt marsh grasses
to mangrove forests. To determine how these wetlands will fare in a future with
higher seas, more nutrient inputs, and larger plants, this project will use a
combination of field experiments, mapping, and mathematical modeling.
Information will be obtained on how coastal wetlands can help remove nitrogen, a
common pollutant in coastal waters. The researchers will investigate whether
wetland decline is contributing to the current uptick in nutrient levels that
threatens the health of humans and other animals. Finally, the team will use the
relationships that they have built with northeastern Florida land managers,
government officials and restoration practitioners to help plan for the future
of these threatened wetlands in the Guana Tolomato Matanzas National Estuarine
Research Reserve (GTMNERR) and beyond. Data from this project will be used to
map nutrient hotspots in the GTMNERR, and to train undergraduate and graduate
student researchers in the study of coastal wetlands and plan for their
restoration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In northeastern Florida, coastal wetland
ecosystems are faced with rising seas and pollution loads, and are undergoing
dramatic climate-driven vegetation conversion from marsh plants to mangroves.
Nitrogen (N) eutrophication and rising sea levels each individually can severely
impact coastal wetlands. This project will explore how these two problems may be
linked by coastal wetland feedbacks, which underlie the project's three central
hypotheses: (1) Excess N loading may interrupt the mechanisms of soil
accumulation that sustain wetlands; (2) Conversion of marsh to mangrove greatly
enhances N demand which may mitigate N pollution of adjacent waterways; (3)
N-eutrophication can accelerate transformation of marsh to mangrove by
satisfying the greater N demand of mangroves compared to marsh plants. Past
studies have shown that N addition can hinder the ability of wetlands to keep up
with sea level rise by stimulating loss of organic matter, whereas others have
shown that N addition may promote plant growth, which can help sustain coastal
wetlands. The discrepancy may result from stark differences in biogeomorphic
processes between wetland edges and interiors. This project will address this
discrepancy directly by leveraging established infrastructure to conduct
experimental N addition at both creekside and interior locations, in addition to
comparing N effects on marshes and adjacent mangrove-dominated plots for the
first time. New hypotheses will be tested about how N may alter mechanisms of
elevation gain and mangrove encroachment across the landscape as well as
hypotheses about how ongoing loss of wetlands and conversion of marshes to
mangroves could have dramatic effects on coastal N budgets. Examining N
influences on wetland resilience to sea level rise was identified as a research
priority by the GTMNERR management at a recent coastal vulnerability workshop
(September 2021). This team of researchers will work with the GTMNERR water
quality data and our own data collection from this project to build a new
nutrient layer onto a coastal vulnerability map that will help prioritize
GTMNERR sites for planned conservation and restoration initiatives. Research
findings will be conveyed to the public by working with the environmental
education center at the GTMNERR to produce an exhibit and curricula for visitors
and camps. Interdisciplinary training of young scientists will also take place
at three institutions- Villanova University, University of Central Florida and
Roosevelt University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.