* 2224439
* LTER: Long-term research on the dynamics of high-elevation ecosystems: A framework for understanding rates of ecological response to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2028
* Nancy Emery, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2028
* USD 1,275,000.00

Mountains provide critical services for human society and important habitats for
diverse forms of life. They are also changing rapidly: temperatures are rising,
leading to shifts in the timing of snowmelt, the amount of water flowing
downstream, and the length of the snow-free growing season. While more than one-
sixth of the worldâ€™s population lives in river basins fed by snow or glacier
melt, we know very little about how changing climate in high mountain areas will
affect biodiversity and water resources. One reason for this knowledge gap is
that rugged mountain terrain causes the patterns of changing temperature to vary
dramatically across the landscape. The Niwot Ridge (NWT) LTER is an
interdisciplinary research program that is investigating how complex topography
interacts with biological processes to determine how high-elevation mountain
ecosystems are changing in response to rising temperature. The project documents
long-term patterns of climate change in alpine tundra, subalpine forest,
mountain lakes, and alpine streams, as well as the associated responses of
organisms, populations, communities, and ecosystem processes. Located in the
populous Front Range of the Colorado Rocky Mountains, NWT LTER is uniquely
positioned to generate results that will directly impact a large human
population while engaging diverse audiences in ecology, conservation, and
mountain science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For over four decades, the NWT LTER has
documented rapidly rising temperatures amidst highly variable precipitation
patterns at the study site. The biological responses to these changes in climate
have been highly variable in both speed and magnitude. In NWT LTER VIII,
scientists will evaluate the ecological mechanisms that determine the rates at
which biota and ecosystem processes respond to rising temperature. Leveraging
the topographic complexity of NWT terrain, the proposed research will examine
how rates of ecological responses to rising air temperature are mediated by
spatial heterogeneity in temperature exposure and other abiotic factors (e.g.,
precipitation, growing season length, nutrients), and if these responses are
accelerated or attenuated by biotic processes that play out across the physical
template (e.g., life history strategies, community dynamics, ecosystem
legacies). The specific objectives of this research include (1) continuing to
characterize how high-elevation mountain systems are responding to climate
change, (2) testing hypothesized mechanisms that explain variation in the rate
at which ecological responses track rising air temperature, and (3) exploring
how the aggregated effects of variable rates of response to warming alter
forecasts of ecosystem function across mountain landscapes. This research
program provides critical information about the effects of climate change on
mountain ecosystems that informs the conservation and management of mountain
catchments and the resources they provide to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.