* 2224464
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Assessing the Effect of Microgravity on Growth and Properties of Metal-Organic Framework (MOF) Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Debbie Senesky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 247,500.00

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a unique class of materials consisting of a
central metal ion coordinated to organic ligands that extend into two or three
dimensions. MOFs have generated scientific excitement due to their extremely
tunable chemical, electrical and mechanical properties with over 20,000
different structures reported and studied within the last decade. Yet,
difficulties in realizing uniform, large-scale MOF crystals have hindered mass
adoption, and perhaps, the viability of target applications such as hydrogen
storage, membrane separation, and water splitting. In this work, MOF crystals
will be grown in gravity (on Earth) and microgravity (on the International Space
Station, ISS). Through experimentation in microgravity on the ISS, large,
uniform MOF crystals may be grown when gravity-driven processes, such as
sedimentation and buoyancy-driven convection, are removed. This collaborative
award also aims to use data collected on the ISS to create analysis-based
curriculum for K-12 and community college students to stimulate active student
engagement with the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three types of MOF crystals
will be grown in prolonged microgravity via an ISS-compatible, room temperature
aqueous mixing process and probed upon return to Earth. This award seeks to
better understand MOF crystal growth in a diffusion-controlled growth
environment and identify potential advantages of growing MOFs in microgravity.
It is hypothesized that long-term microgravity synthesis will produce MOF
crystals that are (1) lower in defect quantity, (2) larger in size, and (3) more
uniform in size and morphology compared to Earth-grown MOF crystals. The root of
this hypothesis lies in solutal convection, a phenomenon that exists in
isothermal, solution crystal growth on Earth. Upon crystal nucleation, MOF
crystals grow by depleting the surrounding solution of the dissolved metal ion
and organic linker. This process leaves behind a less-dense liquid consisting of
simply aqueous solvent, compared to the denser, bulk medium with dissolved
solutes. This density gradient induces convection, specifically solutal
convection, under isothermal conditions. The movement and turbulency prompted by
convection generates conditions for additional points of nucleationâ€”creating
countless crystallites with uneven growth rates resulting in numerous defect-
prone crystals of small size (nano- to micro-scale) that are non-uniform in size
and morphology. The absence of gravity alleviates the detrimental solutal
convection phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.