* 2224724
* Transforming Graduate Education in Transportation Engineering: Applying Cognitive Apprenticeship to Translate Doctoral Student Skills from Research-to-Practice
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yusuf Mehta, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Transportation Ph.D. students increasingly choose jobs within industry or
government agencies upon graduation. Despite the in-depth training during their
degree programs, most of these students do not have the broad skills needed to
start positions at a mid-career level (equivalent to 5+ years of work
experience). This NSF Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to Rowan
University will pilot a new research-to-practice training model to bridge this
gap. Students will progressively build their skills and learn how to apply them
to the transportation industry through intentional learning experiences built
around a cognitive apprenticeship model. In this program, transportation Ph.D.
and Master’s students who are conducting research and writing a thesis will
develop technical competencies, business and communication skills, leadership
and team development approaches, and build their networking capabilities. The
training program is novel as few programs focus on applying a cognitive
apprenticeship model to assist students with learning how to apply their
research skills in a non-academic setting. The training program also
collaborates closely with industry and government partners, which will help
ensure that the transportation Ph.D. students are prepared for mid-career level
positions upon graduation. Moreover, this experience will benefit all
participating graduate students because it provides practical experiences that
will assist in professional development. The revised structure of the
transportation Ph.D. program with an emphasis on industrial/government
applications will attract a diverse student population interested in creating
value for the local and broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot
transportation Ph.D. training program will seek to answer “How can a research-
to-practice model assist students in preparing for a transportation engineering
career outside of academia?” More specifically, it will address three research
questions: (1) What impact does the research-to-practice graduate model have on
developing transportation engineering doctoral students’ professional identity?
(2) How does the cognitive apprenticeship framework prepare doctoral students
for professional practice in transportation engineering? and (3) What influences
does the research-to-practice graduate model have on doctoral students’
motivation towards degree completion? The research design uses qualitative and
explanatory mixed methods approaches, including student reflections, interviews,
and surveys, to address the proposed research questions. As both professional
identity and motivation are related to persistence and retention within graduate
degree programs, particularly for students from groups that are underrepresented
in the field, this research will help address the preparation of a diverse
doctoral student population for careers in transportation engineering. This
effort is also anticipated to lead to better retention of students in the
transportation Ph.D. program. This project’s completion will improve
understanding of how a cognitive apprenticeship model can be applied to scaffold
doctoral students’ professional development in preparation for non-academic
careers. Although the results will be specific to the transportation engineering
doctoral population, using a mixed methods approach will help achieve results
that could be transferable to other engineering programs and contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.