* 2224928
* IUCRC Phase I Indiana University: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* David Baxter, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 120,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University (Bloomington and Indiana University Purdue
University - Indianapolis Campuses), and the University of Notre Dame. The
mission of the CQT is to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders
to identify compelling needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then
develop novel solutions to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are
governed by the physics of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing,
sensing, imaging, metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their
wide-ranging applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be
transformative, with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing,
medicine, and navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but
it is still in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires
significant fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership
with industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching vision of the CQT is to bring together
multidisciplinary experts in academia, industry, and government in a self-
sustaining, collaborative venture facilitating the transition of fundamental
research discoveries in quantum science and engineering into novel, commercial-
ready technologies. Specifically, CQT will focus on three significant industrial
and government interests: quantum computing (including simulation and algorithm
development), quantum sensing, and quantum communications. This includes:
Algorithmic development for general purpose quantum computers, Quantum
programming abstractions and optimizations, Quantum error mitigations and
corrections, Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) and hybrid quantum-
classical platforms for materials and chemical design, Quantum-enhanced sensors
for gravimeters, Microchips for scalable and electrically controlled single
photons, and Fiber photonics for quantum interconnects and repeaters. Due to the
wide applicability of quantum technologies, the relevant industry base is broad.
The technologies developed in the CQT may save energy, speed up computation,
enhance national security and defense, and innovate health care. Indiana
University (IU) houses several unique facilities, including the IU Center for
the Exploration of Energy and Matter, a national resource for the design and
construction of large-scale equipment for use in nuclear, particle, accelerator,
and materials experiments. IU also has facilities for cold atom and ion-trap
state-of-the-art Laboratories; the Multidisciplinary Engineering and Science
Hall for machine and instrument making, electronic, vacuum, detector, and
cryogenic technologies as well as fibers and additive manufacturing-enabled
systems, with draw and additive manufacturing facilities, fiber preform
fabrication and optical/electronic characterization laboratories. The Nanoscale
Characterization Facility and the Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute,
which host many instruments for material processing and characterization are
also available to researchers in CQT. IU investments in QIS, featuring one of
the country's first quantum engineering programs and an intensive one-year,
multi-disciplinary Masters degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.