* 2224307
* ISS: Plasmonic Bubble Enabled Nanoparticle Deposition under Micro-Gravity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tengfei Luo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 726,224.00

Novel technologies that are simple and cost-effective for fabricating highly
sensitive biosensors may significantly benefit a wide range of important
applications, such as early detection of epidemic/pandemic infectious disease,
cancers, and other biological agents. A major challenge for such detection is
the low concentration of the target molecules. This project will leverage the
fluid flow around a thermal bubble on a surface, concentrating and depositing
the target molecules in the liquid sample, to enhance their detectability. The
PI will perform microgravity experiments at the International Space Station to
investigate the concentration/deposition processes, which will enable the
development of improved sensing techniques for disease detection, cancer
diagnosis and environmental monitoring. Given the potential transformative
impacts for terrestrial applications, this project is aligned with the mission
of CASIS to leverage space research to benefit life on earth. This research
project will also educate and train graduate and undergraduate students from
under-represented groups at Notre Dame. Through this project, the PI will
cultivate a future workforce for the U.S. manufacturing and healthcare
industries. The PI will also outreach to the local high schools and participate
in local area science events to extend the outreach of this project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the flow phenomena around a thermal
bubble generated on a surface by a laser excitation. The flow pattern around the
bubble can collect and eventually deposit colloidal particles in the liquid onto
the surface. The overarching goal of this project is to understand the flow and
deposition mechanism in order to control the deposition of suspended particles
and thus enable new technologies for sensing applications. The PI will combine
the microgravity experiments in the ISS and comparative terrestrial experiments
complemented by multi-physics modeling to achieve this understanding. The micro-
gravity environment in the ISS will provide a unique platform to unlock the
fundamental mechanism of bubble nucleation, growth, and detachment. The lack of
thermal convection in the ISS will allow the decoupling of the contribution of
Marangoni effect from thermal convection effect to elucidate their roles in
collecting colloidal particles and depositing them on the surface. This research
will improve the understanding of the fundamental opto-thermal-fluidic mechanism
of the thermal bubble deposition process, which will contribute to advancing the
fields of nanoscale interactions, thermofluids and biosensing. This research
project will also educate and train graduate and undergraduate students from
under-represented groups at Notre Dame. Through this project, the PI will
cultivate a future workforce for the U.S. manufacturing and healthcare
industries. The PI will also outreach to the local high schools and participate
in local area science events to extend the outreach of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.