* 2224819
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design: A multidomain microbial consortium to interrogate organic matter decomposition in a changing ocean
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dana Hunt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2025
* USD 439,396.00

Despite low standing biomass, extensive carbon processing occurs in the oceans,
largely by diverse microbial consumers. Until recently, bacteria were considered
the main degraders of organic matter, while non-bacterial consumers’ role in
carbon cycling has largely been ignored. However, eukaryotes such as fungi
exhibit distinct metabolic capacities and responses to environmental variables,
suggesting global change may alter the balance of microbial activities in the
oceans and potentially alter the fate of marine carbon. Here, researchers
integrate field data with modeling and laboratory experiments with
representative cultures to identify microbes’ functional roles in marine organic
matter degradation and determine their response to changing environmental
conditions. This project will open new windows into the diversity of microbial
metabolisms and how these dynamics may shift with global change driven increases
in temperature and other environmental factors. Additionally, this project
builds a new scientific research team and expands scientific training to levels
ranging from K-5 teachers, to undergraduate and PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a decade-long, coastal
microbial time series, the Piver’s Island Coastal Observatory (PICO), to examine
how diverse heterotrophic microbial communities (bacteria, phytoplankton, fungi
and Labyrinthulomycetes protists) metabolize carbon compounds under different
thermal regimes. Researchers will develop a model microbial consortium that has
the potential to transform our perception of carbon cycling in coastal systems
by integrating functional, organismal-interaction and environment-dependent
responses into a modeling framework. Empirical Dynamic Modeling will identify
drivers of the observed dynamics, differentiate causation from correlation,
infer effects of possibly unobserved variables (e.g. predation), and quantify
interactions between organisms. These data will further be used to develop a
culturable model consortium whose members metabolize distinct components of
phytoplankton-derived organic matter. To test both model predictions and how
well the consortium represents complex microbiomes, both the model consortium
and a “wild” coastal seawater microbiome will be assayed for changes in function
(phytoplankton DOM degradation) as temperatures increase (+4 °C). These
experiments will compare outcomes for individual isolates, the consortium, and a
wild coastal microbiome in composition/abundance, gene expression and
degradation of specific compounds. Finally, experimental results will be used to
parameterize and refine an Ensemble Sparse Identification of Nonlinear Dynamics
model that can predict the fate and transformation of carbon in marine systems
under varying climate scenarios. While this research leverages existing
expertise in marine microbiomes, this model consortium approach can be applied
to diverse systems to answer questions about environmental filtering, organismal
interactions and functional diversity critical to predicting ecosystem-level
responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.