* 2224341
* RAPID: Amplifying threats during cascading crises: Media's role in shaping psychological responses to the war in Ukraine
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,657.00

On February 24, 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine with hostile force, starting the
most intense military conflict in Europe since World War II and leading to
thousands of injuries and deaths and over 4 million Ukrainian refugees in the
first month of the war. Reports of this international geopolitical crisis have
instantaneously flooded traditional and social media outlets with graphic videos
and images of injuries, death, and destruction – media coverage known to
correlate with poor physical and mental health outcomes. But the Ukraine War is
occurring in the broader context of the COVID-19 pandemic whose worldwide death
toll exceeds 6 million people, escalating climate-related crises, economic
volatility and inflation, race-driven social unrest, extreme partisanship, and
low confidence in the scientific and social institutions tasked with protecting
the public. Direct and media-based exposure to these unprecedented cascading
collective traumas are likely to have profound effects on the mental and
physical health of Americans. Effective management of these compounding crises
requires policies that people support and public adoption of recommended
behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project assesses psychological reactions
to the Ukraine War among a large probability-based nationally representative
sample of over 6,500 Americans from the NORC AmeriSpeak panel. They have been
surveyed three times since March 2020. Early responses and beliefs about the war
in Ukraine are collected as the media transitions from heavy coverage of
COVID-19 to heavy coverage of the conflict. Analyses examine how intolerance for
uncertainty, emotion regulation, trust in government, and social identities may
explain the association between media exposure and emotional, cognitive, and
behavioral responses to the war. This study investigates how fears and worries
about these multiple ongoing threats are compounding negative mental health
outcomes and impacting those for whom this multiplicative effect is most
detrimental. Finally, this project investigates how war-related media exposure
may motivate people to take positive action (e.g., prosocial behavior) to help
refugees and defend Ukraine’s democracy. Embedding this project in the larger
study of the COVID-19 pandemic allows examination of national responses to
compounding global crises as they evolve, producing theoretically rich research
with practical importance. Results inform policy makers when communicating
publicly about multiple existential threats and their potential solutions so
they can better promote public well-being without inducing further worry,
distress, or emotional exhaustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.