* 2224687
* IMR: RI-P: Programmable Closed-loop Measurement Platform for Last-Mile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Arpit Gupta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Today's society relies heavily on various Internet-based services for work,
education, health care, and entertainment, and the quality of access (or last-
mile) network dictates the quality of experience for these services. The quality
of access networks in the US varies across different regions, communities, and
demographics, contributing to digital inequities. Policymakers are interested in
bridging this gap; to do so, they require understanding the state of access
quality. This collaborative project will explore the design and deployment
strategies for a new network measurement and analytics platform that enables
policymakers to assess access networks' quality at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative planning project will bring
together researchers from the University of California Santa Barbara and the
University of Chicago to explore the feasibility of a programmable and scalable
data-collection platform, demonstrate the value of closed-loop data collection
with specific use-cases, and evaluate different scaling strategies using the
data collected from its residential deployments in Chicago. Additionally, this
project will organize a workshop inviting different stakeholders from industry,
government, and academia to identify scaling strategies, new features, and
concrete use cases for the proposed platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
platform can answer questions ranging from the state of the Internet performance
and infrastructure in specific neighborhoods to the Internet speeds and
performance characteristics required to support special/new applications (e.g.,
video conferencing, telehealth, etc.). Such capabilities will empower
policymakers and other stakeholders, such as networking researchers, network
operators, and end users. It is envisioned that the open-source tools, methods,
and data will become the standard that these organizations rely on to both
assess the nature of problems in Internet access networks, as well as to assess
the effectiveness of various policy interventions, programs, and infrastructure
investments, and so forth. Project website:
https://pinetrics.cs.ucsb.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.