* 2224674
* Collaborative Research: Engaging Marginalized Groups to Improve Technological Equity
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Brittany Johnson-Matthews, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 439,380.00

This collaborative project investigates the lack of diverse, representative
datasets and insights in the development and use of technology. It explore the
effects of disparities on the ability of technologists (e.g., practitioners,
designers, software developers) to develop technology that addresses and
mitigates systemic societal racism and historically marginalized individuals’
ability to feel seen and heard in the technology with which they engage. The
implications of this project are threefold: 1) it supports building
relationships between technologists and technology users by understanding the
values that most impact historically marginalized communities’ engagement and
data contributions; 2) given access to more diverse data and insights, the
project provides technologists with interventions that empower them to make use
of these data and insights in practice; 3) lastly, the work provides support and
affirmation for the technologists who are already making these explicit
considerations in their work without the adequate support. More broadly,
insights from this project can be applied in practice to promote racial equity
and ensure systemic racism is an explicit consideration in STEM education and
workforce development by incorporating more equitable practices in
technologists’ workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to answer three
main research questions: 1) What are the barriers to engaging and amplifying
marginalized voices in technological spaces and data sets for both technologists
and users? 2) How can marginalized groups be engage when designing and
developing data-centric systems without sacrificing their safety, security, and
trust? 3) What does it look like to provide interventions for engaging the
margins to technologists without compromising the safe spaces for marginalized
groups? Using a multi-modal approach, the project will examine how researchers
and technologists can best learn to engage in data-centric research with
marginalized communities in an ethically and socially responsible manner that
centers the rights and values of the communities of interest. Culturally
relevant approaches and grounding philosophies will drive the research methods
and analyses. Through surveys, semi-structured interviews, design workshops
utilizing a combination of participatory design and community-based approaches,
as well as case study analysis to collect qualitative and quantitative data, the
research team will develop an intervention that supports technologists in
responsible engagement. Aside from real-world implementation, this project will
share its findings through academic and community-facing venues, such as journal
publications, conference presentations, op-eds, blogs, workshops, and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Programs across EDU contribute
funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition of the alignment of its
projects with the collective research and development thrusts of the four
divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.