* 2224988
* PhD Progression: Creating Workforce-driven Flexible Credentials for Doctoral Students
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sarah Hokanson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 462,184.00

The role of doctoral education in the United States workforce has been shifting
for several decades. The number of PhDs awarded steadily increased while the
percentage of tenured faculty shrunk dramatically. Consequently, the vast
majority of Ph.D. degree recipients will not go on to a tenured position but
instead will pursue a variety of career paths outside of academia and in a wide
range of sectors, including industry, non-profits, and governmental agencies. To
supplement existing Ph.D. programs by equipping graduate students with the
complex knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to be successful
professionals in various careers, the project team has created and piloted a
micro-credentialing training program: Ph.D. Progression. By completing Ph.D.
Progression badges, Ph.D. students can gain skills in key areas such as
communication, management, self-awareness, research, and teaching towards
serving effectively in a diverse, inclusive, and global professional landscape.
The digital badging system included in Ph.D. Progression also allows students to
monitor their progress and demonstrate directly to employers the outcomes from
the time they invested in their professional development. This NSF Innovations
in Graduate Education (IGE) award will support the expansion of the Ph.D.
Progression content to be widely accessible with newly integrated perspectives
from the workforce through the creation of a consortium of academic and non-
academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase the
number of Ph.D. Progression badges and integrate workforce perspective and
assessments directly into badge content. The project team will also create
mentoring circles and sponsored internship opportunities for students. Students
will work on short projects with industry professionals to apply their learning
and gain hands-on professional mentorship. These activities will allow students
to interact with employers during their academic training and learn to
communicate effectively with them. In addition, students will get a sense of the
diverse identities, backgrounds, experiences, and expertise within the STEM
Ph.D. workforce. These interactions will also increase the value of the
credentials to both the workforce and students. Reaching these goals will
involve establishing partnerships with industry, universities, and other Boston
University offices. Therefore, the project team intends to use and evaluate a
consortium operating within an Equitable Collaboration Framework to involve all
these partners equitably in the implementation and management of the project.
Through analysis of data collected from students, industry partners, and
trainers, the project will generate and disseminate knowledge about: a) how
academic institutions can enhance Ph.D. student preparation for a broad range of
careers through self-paced badges, and b) how professional development and
doctoral program improvements are informed by emerging workforce needs and
shifting job markets. Data sources include: enrollment (pre-) and post-
completion surveys, badge activities and assessments, Ph.D. student annual exit
survey data, post-graduation job market outcomes, participant interviews, and
employer interviews and surveys. Project findings will help answer questions
about student motivation, industry engagement, learning outcomes in the proposed
training model, employment outcomes, and participant and employer perceptions of
career preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.