* 2224645
* CAREER: Conformal Stamp Printing for 3D Curvilinear Electronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Cunjiang Yu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2022
* USD 119,444.00

Electronics constructed in 3D curvilinear layouts have many applications;
examples include smart contact lens with sensors integrated, wide field-of-view
cameras from curved image sensor arrays, and spherical helix antennas with high
radiation efficiency. However, it is very challenging to create 3D curvilinear
electronics due to manufacturing technology gaps. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to provide needed
knowledge to develop conformal stamp printing approach for 3D curvilinear
electronics manufacturing. 3D curvilinear electronics made from conformal stamp
printing can be used in healthcare, space, telecommunication, and energy
industries. Therefore, outcomes from this research will benefit the U.S. economy
and society. The award will also support educational and outreach activities,
such as providing learning opportunities to high school students and their
teachers, offering research experiences for undergraduate students (especially
those from the underrepresented groups), and disseminating the latest science
and engineering knowledge to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal
stamp printing involves employing an inflated elastomeric balloon (conformal
stamp) to pick-up and print electronic components (inks) onto curvilinear
surfaces to create 3D curvilinear electronics. The first research objective is
to establish the relationship between the deformation and induced strain in the
stamp. To achieve this objective, the stamp's material properties, including
strain-stress relationship and modulus, will be characterized by tension tests
of thin elastomeric sheets. Employing the measured properties, both analytical
models based on strain energy in the stamp and finite element simulations of
inflated stamp under deformation will be used to predict the quantitative
relationship between the deformation and associated strain. The second objective
is to quantify the effects of stamp peeling speed on the interfacial adhesion
strength between stamp and inks. To achieve this objective, a model of adhesion
strength related to peeling speed will be built based on the energy release rate
when peeling to crack an interface between rigid silicon (ink) and viscoelastic
elastomer (stamp). After being verified by experiments, the model will be used
to predict the effects of peeling speed on interfacial adhesion strength. The
third objective is to establish the relationship between the deformation of the
stamp and the deformation, strain and pattern distortion of the inks. To achieve
this objective, finite element simulations of the inks at deformed states during
and after printing will be performed. After being verified by experiments, the
simulations will be utilized to capture the inks' deformation, strain and
pattern distortion with various deformation conditions of the stamp.