* 2224725
* Strength of the Oceanic Lower Crust: New Experimental and Microstructural Constraints
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Andrew Cross, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2025
* USD 641,214.00

New crust forms at mid-ocean ridges. At slow-spreading ridges large detachment
faults act as a geologic conveyor belt moving rocks from the lower crust and
upper mantle upwards towards the seafloor. There is a long-standing debate about
whether the oceanic lower crust is strong or weak. Understanding the strength of
the lower crust is important for understanding how detachment faults form and
evolve. This project will measure the strength of the lower crust using rock
samples from a detachment fault at the Southwest Indian Ridge. Project
investigators will squeeze minerals from the lower crust at high temperatures
and high pressures to determine a relationship with other properties. These
results will be applied to rock samples from the Southwest Indian Ridge to
investigate the evolution and origin of detachment faulting at this location.
Broader impacts include establishing new collaborations with researchers at
Brown University and Boston College and providing professional growth
opportunities for undergraduate guest students and one postdoctoral
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detachment faults play a central role in the
formation of ocean basins and, therefore, in the operation of global plate
tectonics. Despite this, fundamental questions remain over whether the oceanic
crust is rheologically strong or weak. This project will shed light on the
thermomechanical state of a well-characterized oceanic detachment fault
system—Atlantis Bank, Southwest Indian Ridge—with the ultimate goal of
constraining the rheological processes that govern detachment fault nucleation,
growth, spatial distribution, and longevity. Along the way, the project stands
to reconcile long-conflicting views over the strength of the oceanic lower
crust. High-temperature, high-pressure deformation experiments will be performed
on monomineralic aggregates of plagioclase and clinopyroxene using a triaxial
Griggs apparatus at Brown University. The deformed experimental samples will
then be analyzed via electron backscatter diffraction to measure subgrain size
and recrystallized grain sizes as a function of applied stress, and thereby
calibrate piezometric relationships that can be used to estimate the stresses
supported by gabbro mylonite core samples from Atlantis Bank (ODP Hole 735B).
Meanwhile, syn-deformation temperatures will be estimated for the same Hole 735B
core samples via major element and rare-Earth element exchange thermometry,
using electron microprobe and LA-ICP-MS analyses, respectively. Rheological and
geochemical results will ultimately be used to benchmark and develop finite-
element models of detachment fault nucleation and growth in collaboration with
researchers at Boston College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.