* 2224469
* ISS: Uncovering transient dynamics and equilibrium states of particle aggregates in fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 914,819.00

Pollen deposition, paleoecology, algae growth linked to water quality, plastic
pollution, and storm transported sea salt in bodies of water are at first
examples of particles in fluid-gas interfaces. After a certain time, when and if
particles sediment, the dynamics change and the involved processes can become
those of a fluid-saturated granular media. Of particular interest for this
proposal are externally vibrated particle-laden fluids that are used to
segregate different particle sizes and materials, or to fluidize the granular
material and thus improve its flow characteristics such as particulate transport
and enhanced heat transfer. This project aims at exploring and quantifying
transient dynamics of particles in an interface and bulk fluid in the absence of
gravity and leading to improved aggregation models. The proposed research
represents an important step forward towards the understanding of aggregation of
particles in a bulk fluid and gas/fluid interface where times scales are
relatively large and the effects are relatively small on Earth. This can aid the
improvement of models of these transport phenomena in the overall balance of
particle transport processes constantly occurring on Earth. This project is
structured such to have a broader impact on the participating students and the
broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic experimental exploration of
aggregation dynamics of particles in an unforced and forced interface and bulk
fluid will be pursued. New knowledge and understanding about how these forces
affect particle agglomeration rates in the absence of gravity will be created.
To elucidate aggregation at liquid-gas interfaces and in a bulk fluid free from
gravitational effects, a set of experiments to be performed on the International
Space Station is proposed. Drop tower experiments at Portland State University
will be performed to narrow parameters relevant to the study to inform
relatively long experiments on the International Space Station under zero
gravity in collaboration with ZIN Technologies. This project has three main
objectives: 1.) Experimentally disentangle the effects on particles of capillary
immersion from capillary floating and study the long-term particle dynamics of
fluid saturated granular media through a zero-g environment unforced and
subjected to an external harmonic forcing; 2.) Quantify collective effects
promoted by agglomeration/clustering, particle-fluid and/or particle-particle
interactions in a forced and unforced zero-g environment; and 3.) Develop
agglomeration models truly representing effects in the absence of gravity on
inertial particles. Broader impact activities are coordinated as: 1.) STEM
training at the graduate and undergraduate level by a.) Leveraging existing
programs at Portland State University as well as b.) Providing experiences to
interface with partner company ZIN Technologies and NASA astronauts; and 2.)
Oregon Museum of Science and Industry science communication training program
will provide an important opportunity for the graduate student and post-doctoral
researcher to effectively communicate their science with the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.