* 2224303
* Shape-Conformal, High-Resolution Aerosol Jet Printing of Electronics (SHAPE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Adarsh Krishnamurthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2025
* USD 531,491.00

Digital printing methods build precise complex shaped parts following
instructions from a computer. These methods can build devices such as sensors,
circuits and antennae by printing inks containing electronic materials. Most
digital printing methods are tailored for planar surfaces and thus require
relatively simple commands from a computer to generate the desired pattern.
Conformal printing onto three-dimensional (3D) curved surfaces enables the
integration of devices on complex structures but requires advanced calculations
to generate instructions for precision printing. This award supports fundamental
research to establish a knowledge base for conformal digital printing, including
efficient and robust computational strategies to create patterns on nonplanar
(curved) surfaces. The printing method enables electronic devices to be directly
printed onto large, curved surfaces, such as aircraft wings and wind turbine
blades, using a robotic printing system that deposits aerosol containing micro-
scale droplets of ink. Conformal aerosol jet printing research impacts energy,
healthcare, infrastructure, aerospace and automotive industries, thus advancing
national prosperity and security. In addition, this research pursues fundamental
advances in several disciplines, including manufacturing, materials science,
fluid dynamics, optimization, control, and computational science, thus promoting
the progress of science. Coupling the multi-disciplinary research with
curriculum development, K-12 outreach activities, and open-source dissemination
of computational tools promotes workforce development, engineering education,
and diversity and inclusion in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to establish foundational process science and process-aware
toolpath planning tools to support versatile electronics fabrication on curved
surfaces. Conformal aerosol jet printing (AJP) with an articulated robotic arm
can overcome limitations of existing nonplanar printing methods by providing
high tolerance, high resolution, modular configuration and broad material
versatility. To overcome fundamental barriers and realize the full potential of
this technology, the research team plans to develop a process science framework
to guide ink and process design, establish physics-based models of print
resolution and quality based on process parameters, and integrate these models
with curvilinear surface representation and toolpath planning algorithms.
Leveraging the design freedom provided by aerosol jet deposition enables a
versatile approach to process-aware co-optimization of the printing process. The
dynamic balancing of digital and physical constraints required to realize this
framework is enabled by an interdisciplinary team with expertise in aerosol jet
printing, ink formulation, process monitoring and control, and computer-aided
design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) for complex geometries. As a guiding
demonstration, the team plans to leverage knowledge gained to design materials
and optimize processing parameters and toolpaths for manufacturing strain
sensors directly on curved composite parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.