* 2224000
* Transport and Optical Phenomena in Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Dmitrii Maslov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2025
* USD 267,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award theoretical research on
transport and optical properties of materials with unconventional electronic
behavior. Investigations of transport and optical phenomena in condensed matter
systems provides invaluable information about the dynamics of electrons and how
they interact with each other and atomic vibrations. However, the analysis and
interpretation of abundant experimental data is never straightforward and, quite
often, challenging, due to a multitude of competing processes. One encounters
such challenges even when describing electron transport in simple conventional
metals, such as copper and aluminum, where electrons behave as almost free
particles. Analysis becomes even more complicated in materials where strong
electron-electron interaction erases any similarities with the free-electron
picture. In this project, the PI and his team will investigate transport and
optical properties of several unconventional systems, such as those where the
strong interaction leads to a linear temperature dependence of the resistivity,
systems where the electron's energy depends on its momentum in a linear fashion,
and materials in which the spontaneous alignment of electric dipole moments is
overcome by the quantum motion of the atoms. Studying these puzzling systems is
not only important for advancing our scientific understanding of materials in
general, but they could also potentially lead to technological innovations in
the future, such as in lossless transmission of electricity and quantum
information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational
and outreach activities. The PI will develop new moduli on subjects relevant to
this award for a multi-faculty course on Advanced Topics in Condensed Matter
Physics, adopt and revamp a joint History/Physics course that offers a dual
exploration of physics discoveries from scientific and historical points of
view, organize various workshops and conferences, and work on a new book on
Quantitative Methods in Physics aimed at upper-undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project entails theoretical research on transport and optical properties of
unconventional electronic systems. The research has three main objectives. In
the first thrust, the PI and his team will focus on the theory of spin
collective modes in bilayer graphene with proximity-induced Rashba and valley-
Zeeman types of spin-orbit coupling, which will provide a new development in the
Fermi-liquid theory with multiple electron valleys, spin-momentum locking, and
non-Abelian Berry curvature. The second objective is to develop a detailed
theory of intrinsic optical absorption in Dirac and Weyl semi-metals, induced by
electron-electron and electron-hole interactions. At the first stage of this
effort, the PI’s group will study optical absorption in model systems, at the
level of low-energy single-particle Hamiltonians, accompanied by both Hubbard
and Coulomb interaction. Subsequently, the group will turn to more realistic,
material-dependent Hamiltonians and make specific predictions for optical
absorption in real materials. The third objective is to describe theoretically
several puzzling phenomena observed in doped quantum paraelectrics such as
strontium titanate. The topics to be addressed within this objective include (i)
the origin of the quadratic-in-temperature behavior of the resistivity; (ii) a
proper description of charge and heat transport in a thermal metal without
quasiparticles, and beyond the Planckian limit, (iii) the origin of a strong
temperature dependence of the effective mass, as measured by optics and
thermoelectric effect; and (iv) the origin of quasi-linear and quasi-isotropic
magnetoresistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and
outreach activities. The PI will develop new moduli on subjects relevant to this
award for a multi-faculty course on Advanced Topics in Condensed Matter Physics,
adopt and revamp a joint History/Physics course that offers a dual exploration
of physics discoveries from scientific and historical points of view, organize
various workshops and conferences, and work on a new book on Quantitative
Methods in Physics aimed at upper-undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.