* 2224299
* I-Corps: Fast and Accurate Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning Solutions to Inverse and Imaging Problems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Tan Bui-Thanh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of machine learning-enabled software to provide solutions to inverse
and imaging problems with quantified uncertainty. The proposed technology may
have application in the discovery of the location of oil and gas reservoirs, the
discovery of the location of geothermal hotspots and seismic faults for
harvesting clean geothermal energy, the discovery of the location of critical
and rare mineral deposits for extraction, and the imaging of the interior of the
human body for medical diagnosis. The goal is to reduce operational cost through
the use of the proposed software platform; e.g., oil companies (or companies
providing services to oil companies) may deploy this software to monitor,
control, and make critical decisions in real time. The prediction and
uncertainty quantification (UQ) capabilities of the software potentially may
assist in decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of two advanced algorithms: (1) model-constrained machine
learning methods to obtain real-time inverse/inference solutions with quantified
uncertainty and (2) model-constrained methods to obtain real-time forward
solutions with quantified uncertainty. The proposed technology brings together
advances from stochastic programming, probability theory, applied mathematics,
and machine learning. The proposed software is designed to provide both forward
and inverse capabilities. In either mode, it can use training data and the
governing equations to produce surrogate models, i.e., trained deep neural
networks that respect both data and governing equations. The surrogate models
may provide accurate predictions and associated uncertainties in real time for
new scenarios. In addition, the training data may be customized according to the
user needs. For example, oil companies (or companies providing services to oil
companies) may deploy the proposed software to monitor, control, and make
critical decisions in real time. These capabilities reduce the required human
power, time, and finances, while eliminating development and maintenance costs
and reducing update and operational costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.