* 2224615
* Racial Equity: Expanding Mathematical Futures Through Multimedia Storytelling
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Robin Wilson, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,300,000.00

Despite evidence that shows Black students' positive attitudes towards math at
young ages, many of these students become less interested in math due to both
the pedagogy and content to which they are exposed, as well as the dominant
meta-narrative of a limited conception of their ability and interest as
learners. This project seeks to broaden the mathematical imagination and
aspirations of Black and other underserved mathematics students in both in-
school and out-of-school environments. Building on prior work that supported the
collection and curation of a set of digital mathematics stories shared by Black
mathematicians, this project aims to design a digital platform featuring these
stories and supplementing them with interactive activities and learning
resources aligned with math content topics, and explore the impact of these
resources on the math learning and engagement of children and adolescents, as
well as the adults in their lives who engage with these resources. The project
aims to achieve two primary outcomes. First, to explore how storytelling
disseminated in in-school and out-of-school spaces through digital media
influences intergenerational math practices and perceptions among children,
older adolescents, and the adults in their lives. Second, to further disrupt
racial inequities in mathematics education by developing culturally responsive
and inclusive instructional practices and systematically disseminating them to
partners across a variety of social and cultural institutions and media
platforms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the work of authentic
partnerships as a means to systematically foster innovative pedagogy in multiple
environments while building Black learnersâ€™ mathematical identity and a sense of
belongingness in mathematics. The research team will conduct a mixed-methods
study to gain insight into the impact of media-enhanced storytelling and
societal engagement across media platforms. After reviewing the existing
collection of video narratives and conducting exploratory screenings with
resource toolkits to collect feedback, the project team will design the
interactive database that will house the multimedia stories and supplementary
media materials that include interactive web elements (e.g. video annotation,
multimodal responses). Next, a second round of screenings with cross-sections of
community partners will take place, followed finally by a focus on community
engagement by widely disseminating across multiple social institutions and media
platforms including but not limited to the National Urban League, the NAACP, the
Mathematicians of the African Diaspora website, Mathematically Gifted and Black
website, as well as schools, museums, libraries, and other existing STEM and
math initiatives. This applied study seeks to advance racial equity by
harnessing the power of rich storytelling traditions through a multimedia
platform. The dissemination of this database and the findings about its impact
will contribute to building new spaces for mathematics education that serve to
deepen understanding of mathematics by students and others in their networks of
support, and influence commonly held perceptions of mathematics by young people
and of themselves as mathematical doers in order to empower underserved students
to activate and pursue their interests in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Racial Equity award is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF's core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Programs across EDU contribute
funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition of the alignment of its
projects with the collective research and development thrusts of the four
divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.