* 2224743
* LTER:  The Role of Climate Variability in Controlling Arctic Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2029
* George Kling, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 05/31/2029
* USD 1,275,000.00

The Arctic is warming more rapidly than the rest of the planet. Thawing of
previously frozen soils will have consequences for society through alteration of
carbon emissions. Most previous research has focused on how Arctic ecosystems
respond to average warming trends. There is however very little research on
variability of environmental conditions within that average warming trend. The
Arctic Long-Term Ecological Research site (ARC-LTER) community has found that
tundra ecosystems respond strongly to fluctuations in environment on a range of
time scales. ARC-LTER will continue to produce long-term data and perform
modeling simulations that examine the role of that environmental variability on
critical ecosystem functions. The main activities in this renewal will expand
our understanding by focusing on how climate variability affects the terrestrial
production and breakdown of organic matter and how those processes combine to
affect CO2 production in lakes and streams. The project will therefore
contribute understanding of how trends in mean climate, climate variability, and
disturbances all interact to control arctic ecosystem structure and function.
The project will have many broader impacts such as training of young
investigators, engagement of K-12 teachers in research via the Earth Camp
program, schoolyard activities and research experiences for teachers. Outreach
to stakeholders will include briefings to Alaska State, North Slope Borough, and
US government agencies overseeing environmental and natural resource programs.
ARC-LTER will also work with the Study of Environmental Arctic Change program on
co-production of knowledge with Indigenous experts for use in decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2023-2029 ARC-LTER project will determine how
concurrence of climate trends and altered variability of environmental
conditions combine to affect arctic ecosystems. The project will test the
hypothesis that variability in environmental conditions is a stronger driver of
change in the Arctic than are the average long-term trends in climate. The
project will examine how ‘openness’ and ‘connectedness’ of ecosystems relate to
disturbances such as wildfire and climate change. This research will include the
maintenance of ongoing and development of new activities associated with long-
term monitoring, experiments and numerical modeling work in the vicinity of
Toolik Lake, AK. The project will address three main questions which will
integrate research along the terrestrial-aquatic continuum: Question 1: How does
climate variability affect the openness and connectivity of arctic ecosystems?
This research will focus on vegetation and biogeochemical cycles in moist acidic
tundra along an existing nutrient gradient, within warming plots, and in nearby
Alder stands. Question 2: How does climate variability affect key consumers and
their influence on ecosystems? The research activities will focus on how climate
variability affects the composition of consumer communities, their influence on
ecosystems, and the genomic potential and metabolism of microbial communities.
Question 3: How does climate variability affect carbon dynamics along the
terrestrial-aquatic continuum? The project will study how the dynamics of carbon
biogeochemistry along the continuum are affected by environmental variability.
Together, the answers to these questions will improve our understanding on how
long and short-term changes in environment shape ecosystem
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Long Term Ecological Research site is
supported by The Division of Environmental Biology and the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.