* 2224726
* LTER: Ecosystem controls and multiple stressors in a coastal upwelling system - CCE IV
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2028
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,550,000.00

Coastal upwelling regions are found along the eastern boundaries of all ocean
basins and are some of the most productive ecosystems in the ocean. This award
is supporting the California Current Ecosystem Long Term Ecological Research
(CCE LTER) site in a major upwelling biome. It leverages the 73-year California
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI) program which provides
essential information characterizing climate variability and change in this
system. The CCE LTER addresses two over-arching questions: What are the
mechanisms leading to ecological transitions in a coastal pelagic ecosystem? And
what is the interplay between changing ocean climate, community structure, and
ecosystem dynamics? The investigators are working towards diagnosing mechanisms
of ecosystem change and developing a quantitative framework for forecasting
future conditions and how these might affect the management of key living marine
resources, including numerous fishes, invertebrates, marine mammals, and
seabirds. They are training graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
providing educational opportunities for teachers. Public programs and outreach
efforts in collaboration with the Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography are increasing public awareness and understanding of climate
effects on coastal pelagic communities and connecting the public to cutting-edge
ocean research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is adding to understanding of
the mechanisms underlying abrupt ecological transitions with three interrelated
foci: (1) investigation of marine heatwaves and resultant multiple stressors on
organisms and communities, (2) elucidation of ecological stoichiometry and the
response of multiple trophic levels to altered elemental ratios of source
nutrients, and (3) analysis of top-down pressures mediated by a diverse suite of
organisms. It is sustaining multi-scale measurements of five core LTER variables
and responses to ocean warming, increased stratification, acidification,
deoxygenation, and altered nutrient stoichiometry in the Northeast Pacific. The
investigators are using long-term, spatially-resolved time series at multiple
spatial scales to evaluate community shifts at multiple temporal scales, with
new measurements allowing interrogation at finer taxonomic levels. They are
conducting in situ multi-factorial experiments (temperature, macronutrients,
micronutrients, light, grazing) in combination with genomic and transcriptomic
analyses. These will complement time series measurements, inform next-generation
biogeochemical models, and test hypotheses related to ecological stoichiometry
and marine heatwaves. The team is also using a suite of imaging techniques,
molecular and morphological methods, and active and passive acoustic approaches
to quantify vertical structure and cooccurrence of organisms across trophic
levels and test hypotheses about top-down control of the
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.