* 2224643
* CAREER: Large Scale Simulations Enabled Materials Engineering for Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Sapna Sarupria, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 427,700.00

PI: Sarupria, Sapna &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653352 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Clemson University &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Large Scale Simulations Enabled
Materials Engineering for Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling ice nucleation is an
important problem with numerous potential applications in the food,
transportation, and energy generation industries. The goal of this proposal is
to develop an integrated approach combining molecular simulations and data
analysis to enable the high-throughput screening of materials that modulate ice
nucleation. The project will focus on two systems, one involving ice nucleation
on self-assembled monolayers, and the second ice-nucleating proteins. The
proposed approach is based on the hypothesis that there are characteristic
signatures of a material's ice nucleating propensity within the interfacial
water properties. The project aims to identify those signatures and formulate
molecular descriptors that accelerate ice nucleation. The goal of the proposed
education plan is to use an integrated approach to improve the understanding of
the multidisciplinary field of computational materials science by graduate and
undergraduate students. The proposed activities include a hackathon formulated
in the context of computational materials science simulation challenges and a
molLego touch-screen game (similar to Lego) aimed at constructing nanoscale
materials in a visual learning environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research plan aims to understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of ice
nucleation near self-assembled monolayers and ice-nucleating proteins.
Computational tools developed in the PI?s group speed up sampling of nucleation
events by more than a factor of 20 compared to traditional Molecular Dynamics
simulations, thereby enabling studies of ice nucleation near surfaces. The plan
is to analyze the extensive dataset of nucleation events, free energy
landscapes, and interfacial water properties to identify the key signatures that
indicate the ice-nucleating propensity of a surface. Based on knowledge of the
key signatures, high-throughput screening of the surface nucleating propensity
will be performed using membrane-based surfaces. The proposed research will
potentially lead to computationally efficient cost-effective techniques for
screening materials for ice nucleation propensity.