* 2224131
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Minimum Quantum Circuit Size Problems, Variants, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Fang Song, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,549.00

A central pursuit in modern computing is to find a method as efficient as
possible to solve a computational problem. Abstractly, given the truth table of
a function, can one decide the minimum size of a boolean circuit that correctly
computes the function? The investigation into it, termed the minimum circuit
size problem (MCSP), has accompanied the development of theoretical computer
science since the beginning. It manifests diverse and sometimes mysterious
properties that prove to be fruitful in investigating the foundations of
computing. For instance, efficient algorithms for MCSP imply efficient learning
algorithms for important tasks as well as breaking public-key cryptography; and
on the other hand, MCSP is useful to demonstrate no-go results such as lower
bounds on the computational resources necessary to solve a problem. The goal of
this project is to advance quantum information processing through the lens of
MCSP. The tools and objects studied in this project can have significant
applications in quantum information processing and quantum physics. For
instance, we might be able to build novel quantum cryptographic protocols, prove
quantum resources lower bounds for basic problems, and show the hardness of
estimating the wormhole volume by studying quantum versions of MCSP.
Furthermore, this project could stimulate further collaboration between computer
scientists and physicists. The research component will be supplemented by a
concerted education and outreach plan. This will include developing courses in
quantum computing and upgrading the theory curriculum in computer science,
establishing groups in quantum computing at participating universities,
disseminating the findings to a broad audience, and engaging local communities
via successful programs (e.g., Saturday Academy that provides internships to
Portland high school students), and hosting quantum coding contests across the
two universities. They form a vital part of this project to promote greater
interest and proficiency in quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to investigate the minimum quantum circuit size for computing
various objects along three thrusts. 1) A framework for studying minimum quantum
circuit size problems on classical and quantum objects, including functions,
quantum states, and unitary operators. New tools will be developed to establish
their hardness and connections to fundamental problems in quantum information
processing. A new landscape of quantum complexity theory will be identified. 2)
Under the framework developed in thrust 1, the problems of deciding the minimum
size circuit for simulating a quantum system and&lt;br/&gt;for preparing ground
states will be further explored. These two problems represent some of the most
viable applications of quantum computers, and the new findings here will depict
the algorithmic limits of these applications as well as connect them to other
basic primitives in quantum computing. 3) More input models will be explored,
including succinct classical descriptions and purely quantum inputs (e.g., a
quantum state in a register), and the formal treatment will be accompanied by
novel applications, including new protocols for classically verifying quantum
resources as well as novel quantum pseudorandom primitives. The proposed work in
all these thrusts will expand the scope of quantum information processing and
the minimum circuit size problem. Moreover, it will provide new approaches to
studying basic quantum primitives and bridging computer science and quantum
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.