* 2224813
* Workshops on Augmenting Individual Intelligence by Collaborating with People and Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Robert Goldstone, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 11/30/2023
* USD 49,167.00

Most impactful innovations involve people interacting with each other and with
the tools that they build explicitly to help them think and/or perform better.
The investigators will organize two workshops to explore the ways in which an
individual’s thinking is augmented and shaped by other people as well as by
tools. Coordination among people, artificial intelligence systems, decision
algorithms, and learning technologies can give rise to adaptive problem solving
far beyond the capabilities of single individuals. Workshop topics will include
how to: facilitate the spread of useful information while reducing
misinformation, combine judgments from many individuals (humans and other
animals) for improved decision making, create policies and infrastructures that
allow groups to effectively solve their shared problems, best combine the
strengths of human and computer problem solving to create systems more advanced
than either component on their own, and use computers to make human learning
more efficient and flexible. The workshops will feature panelist presentations
organized into themes and monthly group discussions. A broader impact of the
workshop is to provide a venue for students anywhere in the world to learn about
exciting developments in augmented intelligence. For students coming from
smaller universities with few resources for research, the workshop would provide
exposure to state-of-the-art research and opportunities to interact with leading
researchers in this emerging field. The topic of augmented intelligence
represents an exciting area of research that can inform many applications
including: the optimization of team coordination, the design of intelligent
tutoring systems, computer support for human decision making, and the
organization of social media platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-part,
temporally and geographically distributed workshop will integrate perspectives
from cognitive scientists, computer scientists, education researchers,
neuroscientists, and biologists to lay the foundations of a shared conceptual
framework for a new science of augmented intelligence, premised on the
observation that people very rarely solve problems or develop understandings on
their own. Instead, people recruit other people and technologies to help them,
and to such a large extent that the apt unit for understanding cognition is
typically not an individual person, but rather a larger system that incorporates
multiple people and the tools that they created to enhance their capabilities.
The workshop participants will grapple with theoretical and applied questions
involving the nature of minds, how adaptive systems come into existence that can
robustly solve a wide range of problems, and how humans and machines can
complement each other’s strengths during learning and knowledge creation. The
workshop seeks to stimulate new research directions at the confluence of
theoretical, empirical, and technological advances that hold promise of
developing an integrative science of augmented intelligence, drawling from
multiple disciplinary perspectives. Deliverable products from the workshop will
include online public videos of participants’ lectures, archives of
conversations, and special issues of journals devoted to augmented
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.