* 2224591
* CAREER: A Unifying Stochastic Framework for Temporally Consistent Computer Vision Models
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Henry Medeiros, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 488,754.00

Sequential Monte Carlo methods are an effective mechanism to integrate
observations over time in computer vision problems, especially in association
with features generated by deep neural networks. However, it is still unclear
how such networks can be interpreted as components of a stochastic inference
system. This project will combine sequential Monte Carlo methods with neural
networks to create a trainable stochastic framework for computer vision tasks.
The developed framework will enable the design of autonomous and robotic systems
that can interpret and interact with their environment, a critical component for
the automation of tasks that must be performed in complex, unconstrained
scenarios. These capabilities will be demonstrated through the development of
novel agricultural robotic systems that generate accurate models of agricultural
crops at varying levels of spatial and temporal granularity. With particular
focus on under-represented populations, the project will provide research
opportunities and hands-on training to graduate and undergraduate students on
artificial intelligence topics and their applications to agricultural problems.
It will also provide the students with foundational entrepreneurial skills that
will allow them to identify problems of broad societal relevance that can be
solved using machine learning and artificial intelligence
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create a stochastic framework
that learns in an end-to-end manner how to leverage semantic information about
objects of interest to assimilate spatial and temporal visual information and
enforce temporal consistency in computer vision algorithms. Casting the
multiple-object segmentation and tracking problem as a non-parametric pixel
probability distribution estimation task will make it possible to devise
uncertainty-aware models that learn how the appearance of objects varies over
time given the context surrounding them. These research efforts will also
introduce a new paradigm for the representation of motion models that enforce
temporal consistency among video frames at the pixel level, obviating the need
for object detection and localization techniques. Finally, these temporal
association methods will substantially simplify the problem of recognizing and
reconstructing complex objects in unstructured environments. By incorporating
parameters of relevance to agricultural problems and extending the probabilistic
models to satisfy domain-specific constraints, this project will devise novel
techniques to extract semantic information and generate large-scale
reconstructions of entire orchards at the granularity of individual
leaves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.