* 2224313
* A Novel Hybrid-Mode Curved-shape SAW (CsSAW) Sensor For The In-Situ/Real-Time Torque And Temperature Measurement of Rotor Shaft in Harsh Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Haifeng Zhang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 266,833.00

The torque of gas turbine engine rotors is a critical parameter that reflects
the structural health status, powering efficiency, and system dynamic
performance of the engine, however, the high temperature environment makes the
torque monitoring extremely challenging and most existing torque sensors will
not operate normally. In this proposal, we will investigate a new type of torque
sensor that could operate in high temperature (900o C) gas turbine engine
environment. A series of fundamental research topics will be addressed in this
project such as the configuration of the sensor, sensor materials, sensing
mechanism and experiment test. Once developed successfully, the sensor will
enable a better control of the gas turbine engine resulting in higher energy
efficiency and better safety factor. In addition to the impact to gas turbine
engine industry, the sensor will also have significant impacts on the power
efficiency of vehicle internal combustion engines, sensing and control of coal-
fired and nuclear power plants, monitoring of jet engines, aerospace propulsion
systems, hypersonic vehicle engines and gas drilling monitoring. Furthermore,
this project will substantially benefit the university through new course
development, as well as research mentoring for graduates, undergraduates, and
K–12 students. It also will provide opportunities to underrepresented minorities
and women students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to achieve
real time measurements of rotor torque of gas turbine engine to improve the
engine power efficiency and system dynamic performance. As a step towards this
goal, the objective of this proposal is to develop a novel Curved-shape Surface
Acoustic Wave (CsSAW) sensor for the in-situ/real-time torque and temperature
measurement of rotor shaft in harsh environments (900o C). This sensing system
monitors the dynamic torque and local temperature of the rotor shaft in a harsh
environment, evaluate the kinematic performance, and prevent earlier failure by
detecting abnormal torque distribution. The research will be conducted through
the following approaches: (1) Fundamental study and research on the surface
acoustic wave propagating along curved surface; and (2) Investigation of a novel
torque/temperature sensing mechanism, and (3) Experimental test in a mock-up
high-temperature gas turbine engine environment. The successful completion of
this project will generate a new type of sensor that will find numerous
applications in engine industry, flexible electronics, aviation industry,
flexible electronics, and gas drilling industry. The interaction of the
universities and the world’s leading power-generation industry at different ends
of the research spectra will guide the fundamental research to solve this
critical industry need and enable accelerated implementation of the developed
knowledge to generate immediate industry impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.