* 2224824
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Biogeochemistry of water and sediments from a recently drained Greenland ice-marginal lake
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Melisa Diaz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 70,219.00

Water melting from glaciers flow on top of, through, and underneath glaciers,
ultimately ending up in lakes or the ocean. Sometimes, this water does not take
a direct path to the coast, but first enters near-shore lakes next to the
glacier, called ice-marginal lakes, which can be dammed by ice. When the ice
dams holding the water in these lakes fail, the water can rapidly drain to the
coast over several days. The largest ice-marginal lake in Greenland is believed
to be Lake Tininnilik, which recently drained into the ocean in 2021. The
current low water levels mean that sediments in the lake are now exposed. This
will be the first study to measure chemicals, nutrients, and microorganisms in
the lake and sediments. It will also determine how lake storage changes the
chemistry of water melting from the glacier. With continued climate warming, the
amount of water stored in ice-marginal lakes is expected to increase, and
determining the chemistry of Lake Tininnilik is important for understanding
ecosystem change and carbon cycling in the coastal ocean following drainage. The
project leadership includes three women, all of which are ethnic and racial
minorities. As part of this project, a web-based virtual reality tour of Lake
Tininnilik will be created for anyone to use. The tour will be important for
other scientists trying to better understand the layout of the lake and will
also be a teaching tool for the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of erosion
and weathering under ice sheets, subglacial waters are rich in macro- and micro-
nutrients. These nutrient-rich waters can be directly discharged into the ocean
or stored in pro-glacial lakes, including ice-marginal lakes. Lake Tininnilik is
a large ice-marginal lake restrained by an ice dam along Sarqardliup Glacier in
western Greenland. It drains approximately every 10 years into a local fjord,
most recently in 2021, exposing previously inundated sediments. Preliminary work
prior to the 2021 drainage shows that iron (an important minor nutrient for
marine phytoplankton) is 10 to 100 times greater than glacial meltwater entering
the ocean directly. The iron concentrations are also paradoxically high compared
to other redox sensitive element concentrations. This project will collect and
analyze water samples from different lobes of Lake Tininnilik and exposed
sediments to address how ice-marginal lakes change the chemical and microbial
composition and availability of nutrients for near-shore and open-ocean
ecosystems. Sarqardleq Fjord, into which Lake Tininnilik drains, is an important
source of fish for local indigenous populations, and this work will aid future
studies seeking to understand how rapid drainage events may affect the marine
food web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.