* 2224122
* UKRI/BBSRC - NSF/BIO: Modeling of protein interactions to predict phenotypic effects of genetic mutations
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Petras Kundrotas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2025
* USD 301,396.00

Structures of protein complexes are essential for interpretation of genetic
mutations. Approaches to structural modeling of proteins and their interactions
are rapidly developing, powered by advances in knowledge-based methods and
better understanding of physical principles of protein structure and function. A
vast amount of information on human genetic variation, including numerous single
amino acid changes, is available from high-throughput sequencing. The project
focuses on application of modeling techniques to the development of a public
resource incorporating structural modeling with genetic amino acid variants and
assessment of their functional impact. The long-term goals of this research are
to gain insights into fundamental principles of molecular processes in living
systems and the effect of genetic mutations on cellular mechanisms. This
collaborative project combines highly complementary areas of expertise of the US
team on modeling of protein interactions, and the UK team on protein structure
prediction and missense variant effects. The teams will continue coordinating
research and training activities, based on the project, with graduate and
undergraduate programs locally, nationally and internationally. Minority
students and women will be involved in different parts of the research. The
project will enhance infrastructure for research and education. The US and UK
teams have an extensive record of developing and disseminating public resources,
used by many researchers worldwide. The project participants will be actively
presenting their results at various multidisciplinary conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach incorporating predicted complexes
in model organisms with genetic variants and their phenotypic effect assessment
will be further developed. The objectives of the project are: (1) structural
modeling of protein interactome; (2) assessment of phenotypic effects of genetic
variation; and (3) public resource for structural characterization of protein
interactome and phenotypic effects of genetic mutations. Computational
approaches to structural characterization of protein complexes will incorporate
recent advances in application of Deep Learning to prediction of protein
structures and assemblies. The stereochemical approach to prediction of the
mutation effect will involve modeling acceptable conformations for the variant
side chains and evaluating the change in interactions. The GWYRE resource will
incorporate protein complexes for model organisms, annotated by the phenotypic
effects of missense variants. The project outcome will have a significant impact
on the research field by development of the integrated public resource for
structural characterization of protein interactomes and assessment of the
phenotypic effects of genetic mutations. The results of the project will be
available at http://www.gwyre.org and also at http://vakser.compbio.ku.edu and
http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.