* 2224766
* Collaborative Research: Gateway or Gatekeeper: Understanding Why Black Students Choose Engineering Technology or Engineering, and the Implications of this Choice
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Lesley Berhan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2026
* USD 707,521.00

This project will contribute to the development of a more diverse engineering
workforce by highlighting the academic pathways to and through college of a
group of degreed and trained workers, Black Engineering Technology (ET)
graduates, who are often overlooked in conversations around the stated
diversity, equity, and inclusion goals for the Engineering profession. While ET
graduates often work alongside engineers and there may be little distinction
between their entry-level job descriptions, many encounter barriers to career
advancement in the hierarchical engineering field because of their chosen degree
path. In addition, the disproportionately large number of Black students in some
engineering technology programs compared to engineering directly impacts the
number of Black students who later have the degree credentials often required to
enter to the engineering professorate, engineering research careers, and
leadership positions in industry. This study will center on the voices,
experiences, and knowledge of Black ET students through focus group interviews
and surveys in order to gain insight into the factors that led them to their
chosen major and their experiences as Black students in ET. The project will
also compare the engineering and ET programs at the collaborating institutions
and examine whether there are certain engineering majors that are less
accessible than others, and whether Black students are concentrated in some ET
majors more than others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work
is to contribute to the identification and removal of systemic and structural
barriers and racial inequities in ET undergraduate education. The long-term goal
is that the findings of the research will be used to inform interventions and
policy changes. Investigating the reasons why there is a disproportionately high
percentage of Black students in ET compared to engineering will shed light on
the complex social terrain that Black students must navigate to combat the
structural barriers in education to achieve an undergraduate college degree
generally, and an engineering-related degree specifically, with all of the
professional benefits a degree confers. The specific research questions of the
project are as follows: 1. What role do high school counselors, college
counselors/recruiters, and faculty play in Black students’ choice of ET versus
engineering? 2. What are the academic and structural barriers that effect Black
students’ admittance to engineering? 3. What are the structural barriers and
affordances that enable or prevent Black students to transfer from ET to
engineering (and vice versa) from during an undergraduate program? 4. How do
Black ET students perceive their future career opportunities? 5. To what extent
do Black ET students identify with the Engineering and/or ET domain and how is
this related to contextual salience of stereotype threat and belongingness to
the program? 6. How do students’ perceptions of their experiences in ET and the
interpretation of these experiences relate to their self-schemas including their
expectations of success, personal, cultural, and professional identities, and
their career goals? This project will contribute to efforts to develop a more
diverse STEM workforce by examining how these complexities influence student
choice of major and suggesting solutions to lessen their
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Programs across EDU contribute
funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition of the alignment of its
projects with the collective research and development thrusts of the four
divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.