* 2224279
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Automating the End-to-End Verification of Security Protocol Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bryan Parno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 616,000.00

The world critically depends on a wide variety of security protocols for
properties such as authentication, secure communication, commerce, anonymity,
and group messaging. Although widely deployed, these protocols are brittle, with
regular, high-profile vulnerabilities discovered each year. When the
complexities of high performance implementation meet the complexities of
cryptographic protocol reasoning, such vulnerabilities seem inevitable. However,
this project's foundational work on developing provably secure protocol
implementations will help secure basic infrastructure that is used ubiquitously
in all sectors, including industry, education, and national security. Results
from this research will also be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate
security and verification courses taught by the researchers, and they will
develop various outreach programs to educate K-12 students and teachers, as well
as the general public, about online security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, this project will create a protocol-verification framework that achieves
end-to-end verification results in a largely automated fashion. Unlike prior
monolithic tools for verifying security protocols, the framework will be
inherently modular. Since modular proofs are built upon abstractions of
protocols, this will enable non-experts to securely iterate on protocols without
needing to grasp all lower-level details below the abstraction. By lowering the
barrier to entry for developing secure protocols, the framework will enable more
proofs of protocols from a wider community of developers. Second, the framework
will be the first tool to prove the security of protocols in the computational
model (the cryptographic "gold standard") using information-flow typing for a
wide range of cryptographic mechanisms. Finally, the project will also develop
automation that takes in a protocol description and synthesizes a verifiably
secure protocol implementation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.