* 2224014
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Qoyangnuptu: Smart, Connected, and Culturally-centered System to Support the Well-being of Hopi/Tewa Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ashish Amresh, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,929,132.00

Across the nation, behavioral health concerns for youth are on the rise. In this
context, American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) youth experience behavioral
health disparities at some of the highest rates in the United States. Even as
behavioral health services are becoming more available through mobile health and
telehealth interventions, the lack of ubiquitous, high-speed Internet
connectivity in rural tribal communities prevents many AIAN youths from
accessing these critical services. It is in this context that we have partnered
with the Hopi community to propose the Qöyangnuptu Intervention (QI), a
sociotechnical system of care that integrates mobile healthcare (mHealth),
relational support systems, and cultural ways of well-being. This project will
combine community expertise with the expertise of clinical psychologists,
education researchers, and computer scientists to pilot the QI. Importantly,
this project will engage Hopi community members as co-researchers who will help
shape our research design and pilot as we carry out the project. This project
anticipates research outcomes will be helpful to many different communities who
experience pernicious health and digital disparities, including other tribal
communities, migrant communities, and rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QI Pilot will allow us to answer the
research questions that drive our social science and technological Research.
These questions include: (1) In AIAN communities with unique cultural
characteristics, how should a youth-focused sociotechnical behavioral health
intervention be designed to encourage sustained engagement and positively impact
indicators of mental health?; and (2) How can interactive technical
interventions be designed to best support sustained community engagement in a
challenged network environment? This project will utilize an interdisciplinary
approach to designing, piloting, and evaluating the QI; we integrate research
expertise from clinical psychology, special education, human-computer
interaction, computer networking, and public health. This project will take a
participatory action research approach to ensure that our research is community-
driven. This project will produce five key research outcomes: (i) QI App that
enables Hopi youth to engage with culturally-tailored interactive experiences to
build social and emotional resilience; (ii) a cross-age peer mentorship program
facilitated through the QI App; (iii) family resilience workshops that raise
awareness and literacy about behavioral at a community level; (iv) a community-
curated database of behavioral health resources that help guide Hopi youth and
families to relevant and accessible resources; and (v) digital skills workshops
focused on training Hopi youth in the technical dimensions of app
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.