* 2224030
* Mechanical Phase Transitions and Critical Fluctuations in Fiber Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Frederick MacKintosh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2026
* USD 396,579.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most soft tissues including skin and
even organs in humans and animals depend on networks of stiff, fiber-forming
proteins such as collagen to provide mechanical support and stability. Similar
networks, made of another fibrous protein called fibrinogen, are also important
in wound healing. Common to these naturally occurring networks is an inherent
mechanical resilience in which tissues become more rigid and stable as they are
deformed under a load. This is in stark contrast to synthetic rubber or other
polymer materials. The principal investigator and collaborators have recently
demonstrated that the self-stabilizing mechanical response of collagen and other
fiber networks under load can be understood as a phase change, somewhat similar
to the change in state of water to form ice on cooling. The mechanical
rigidification of fiber networks, however, occurs as a function of deformation
rather than temperature. The aim of this project is to develop a quantitative
theoretical model for the mechanics of such fiber
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantitative and predictive theoretical model
of collagen and other biopolymer networks is not only important for our
understanding of tissue mechanics but can also aid in the rational design of
synthetic materials with similar properties for tissue engineering. A specific
aim of this project also addresses the role of compression resistance in
composites of collagen with hyaluronic acid. It is known that hyaluronic acid
plays an important role in the compression resistance and lubrication of joints,
although such compression resistance has been missing from prior physical models
of fiber networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the training
of graduate students working in Chemical Engineering and Physics, with
application perspectives in Tissue Engineering and Materials Science. The
research will also impact the teaching of undergraduate and graduate students
working in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Applied Physics and Materials
Science at Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the spectrum from fully flexible to rod-like,
semiflexible polymers remain in many ways the most challenging to understand
theoretically. Such semiflexible polymers are important throughout biology, from
cytoskeletal networks within individual cells to extracellular matrices at the
scale of tissues and organs. The most prevalent single protein in mammals is
collagen, and networks of collagen fibers give soft tissues their mechanical
stability. Although collagen and related extracellular matrix components have
been extensively studied for decades, theoretical models of collagen and other
fiber networks with predictive ability comparable to classical flexible polymer
theory have been lacking. This is due in large part to the almost entirely
athermal nature of especially collagen type I, rendering such concepts as
entropic elasticity inapplicable. Recent advances have been made from another
direction, based on mechanical phase transitions such as rigidity percolation,
where classical constraint counting ideas going back to Maxwell can be useful in
predicting mechanical stability. Importantly, however, these ideas do not
directly apply to fiber networks in 3D since such systems lie far below
Maxwell’s isostatic stability threshold. Instead, signatures of a mechanical
phase transition as a function of strain rather than the constraints of
connectivity have now been identified theoretically and confirmed experimentally
by the PI and collaborators in extracellular matrix mechanics. Advances along
these lines have, however, mostly been computational in nature and limited to
the fully athermal regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to (1) develop
a predictive effective medium theory for 2D and 3D athermal fiber networks, (2)
extend this and related computational models to address thermal semiflexible
polymer networks, (3) study the role of active stresses in controlling
semiflexible polymer network mechanics, and (4) develop computational models to
address the role of incompressibility in extracellular matrix
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings together statistical
physics ideas and approaches from the study of critical phenomena with rheology
that can be studied experimentally as a function of strain, rather than
temperature. These approaches can have significant potential application to
other soft condensed matter and materials science. The thermal aspects to be
addressed here have received little attention to date. Not only are such effects
important for a better understanding of real networks, natural or synthetic, but
these also raise the prospect of novel phase behavior analogous to quantum
critical systems, with the added prospect of relative ease of studying such
effects experimentally at ordinary temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
quantitative and predictive theoretical model for fiber networks is not only
important for our understanding of tissue mechanics but can also aid in the
rational design of synthetic materials, e.g., for tissue engineering. Part of
this project also aims to address the role of compression resistance in fiber
networks, which has largely been missing from prior physical network models but
is important for understanding the role of hyaluronic acid and other components
of the extracellular matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the
training of graduate students working in Chemical Engineering and Physics, with
long-term application perspectives in Tissue Engineering and Materials Science.
The research will also impact the teaching and curriculum for undergraduate and
graduate students working in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Applied
Physics and Materials Science at Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.