* 2224086
* What explains ambitious climate policy? Comparing updated climate targets and Covid-19 recovery packages and their drivers
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Jonas Meckling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Many countries updated their national climate targets or Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) during the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, these
countries introduced vast COVID-19 economic recovery packages and fiscal reforms
that may either serve to strengthen or upset existing carbon-intensive economic
systems. This project will study how long-term climate goals, as indicated in
countries’ NDCs, and short-term implementation of climate policies through
pandemic recovery spending plans affect each other and why some countries lead
in climate policy implementation, while others lag. The study is based on the
collection of and analyses of large data sets across several countries. This
study, to be carried out by research teams from several countries, will help
identify opportunities for policymakers and international financial institutions
on how to promote and implement climate change policy ambitions. In addition to
helping to understand cross country differences in climate policy
implementation, the results of this research will provide inputs into
formulating efficient and innovative climate policies in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study two inter-
related issues. First, it studies the links between long-term national climate
ambitions enshrined in NDC updates and short-term implementation plans embedded
in COVID-19 recovery packages, and fiscal reform. Second, it investigates the
political and economic drivers underlying differences in climate ambitions and
implementation abilities in these types of policy intervention across countries.
To do so, the project integrates political science and economics, focusing on
the role of policy feedback and financing conditions in driving climate ambition
and climate policy interventions. In a mixed-methods design, the project
combines descriptive statistical analyses with qualitative comparative case
studies in the three analytical tasks. The intellectual merit of this project
lies in identifying patterns in the relationship of long-term climate targets
and plans (NDCs) and short-term implementation (economic recovery spending) as
well as the causes of cross-national variation in this relationship. The results
of this research will provide inputs into formulating efficient and innovative
climate policies in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.