* 2224322
* NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: Machine Learning Based Physical Layer and Mobility Management Solutions Towards 6G
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Danijela Cabric, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 392,690.00

5G evolution and future 6G cellular networks are targeting operations at higher
millimeter wave and sub-Tera Hertz (sub-THz) bands due to the availability of
large channel bandwidths to further improve data rate, latency, quality-of-
service, and reliability. However, the use of these bands for mobile radio
access imposes substantial technical challenges, including the quality, cost-
and energy-efficiency of the electronics, the extreme path loss and propagation
characteristics, and the overall deployment costs to provide indoor and outdoor
network coverage with mobility support. Considering these challenges, this
project will investigate the utility of machine learning algorithms, that have
been successful in solving complex problems in various domains, for designing
physical layer technologies and network management procedures, involved in both
user equipment and base stations, that aim to improve robustness and reliability
of connectivity under mobility. The projectâ€™s expected contributions are at the
forefront of emerging 6G standard and applications of modern machine learning
tools in wireless communications at high frequency
bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address three key thrusts: i)
Thrust 1 will develop machine learning assisted and data driven approaches for
user equipment beam training and tracking using compressive sensing-based
channel probing for low latency and robustness to phased antenna array
impairments. In addition, it will accelerate beam training and tracking on the
base station side by using deep reinforcement learning for optimizing beam
probing strategies based on environment characteristics and user trajectories.
The outcome of this thrust will be significant reduction in beam management
overhead in the presence of mobility; ii) Thrust 2 will use a novel receiver
processing architecture where the signal path exploits convolutional neural
network layers in both time and frequency domains to compensate the effects of
the power amplifier nonlinearity and phase noise in a wideband orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) receiver, while accounting for frequency-
selective multipath channel effects. The outcome of this thrust will be
improvement in transmitter power efficiency, coverage and bit error probability.
iii) Thrust 3 will develop intelligent handover algorithms to minimize
disruptions in user connectivity by exploiting position estimates and beam-level
reference signal power measurements with distributed deep reinforcement learning
while considering user rate requirements and reducing measurement reporting and
sharing overheard between base stations. The research methodology will rely on
extensive measurements and data set generations using millimeter wave testbeds
for the development and evaluation of the proposed
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.