* 2224749
* A Study of Electric Field-Assisted Direct Ink Writing with Conducting Polymers for Electronic Textiles (E-textiles)
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Yayue Pan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2025
* USD 512,366.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to an
electronic textile manufacturing process, promoting the progress of science,
advancing national prosperity, and potentially securing the national defense.
Electronic textiles or e-textiles are fabrics that can conduct electricity.
E-textiles enable smart systems that are capable of sensing, heating, lighting,
or transmitting data. E-textile applications include muscular activity
monitoring for sports and fitness, data transmission for consumers or military,
sensing for space exploration, and even pathogen detection for medical
treatments. The most common approach for fabricating e-textiles is to first
fabricate conductive filaments and then knit or weave the filaments into
fabrics. Another common e-textile manufacturing approach is to first fabricate
conductive films and strips with desired geometries, and then laminate them on
fabrics using adhesives or hot pressing. Despite recent advances, these existing
manufacturing processes involve multiple steps and platforms, thus are usually
tedious, slow, and have limited resolution and geometric complexity. This award
supports fundamental research to provide the needed knowledge for developing a
rapid e-textile manufacturing technology which directly prints highly conducting
inks on fabric and textile. This project supports efforts to establish United
States international leadership in smart textile manufacturing. The project
meets the educational needs, especially, of under-represented minority groups in
the Chicago area and elsewhere, by engaging and training students from all
levels, K-12 to graduate, and encouraging their
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
understand the critical physics and mechanisms for printing conducting polymer
inks on non-conducting textiles, such as cloth, using an electric field-assisted
Direct Ink Writing (eDIW) process. Three hypotheses are tested: (1) the
electrode configuration in eDIW generates a Coulomb force that affects the ink
extrusion profile along the z-axis and also the ink wetting on the substrate (xy
plane), allowing faster and micron-scale resolution printing of conducting
polymers on rough fabrics; (2) the process fabricates conducting traces and
circuits on textiles with a unique morphology, which is characterized by highly-
branched and interconnected networks; and (3) such unique morphology enhances
in-plane electrical conductivity of the printed e-textile. Both theoretical
modeling and experiments are performed to establish a comprehensive
understanding of the eDIW manufacturing system, process, and the electrical
conduction mechanism of the printed traces. New knowledge is generated at the
intersection of electrohydrodynamics, materials science, machine design, and
manufacturing fields, advancing a huge leap in direct printing and e-textile
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.