* 2224154
* Clock-controlled vitamin A regulation of animal photoperiodic responsiveness
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Christine Merlin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Life on earth is subjected to daily and seasonal variations that are intimately
linked to the timing of sunrise and sunset that sets day-length. For organisms
living at temperate latitudes, seasonal changes in day-length (aka photoperiod)
are key regulators of seasonal responses in development, physiology, and
behavior. To adapt to a rhythmic environment, animals, plants and microbes have
evolved timekeepers known as circadian clocks. These clocks regulate the
rhythmicity of molecular pathways that in turn effect seasonal changes, but how
changes in day-length are sensed and translated into seasonal changes remain
poorly understood in animals. One way in which circadian clocks regulate
seasonal biology is via the rhythmic regulation of vitamin A in the brain. This
project will characterize the precise role of vitamin A in animal photoperiodic
responses using the iconic monarch butterfly as a model system because monarchs
exhibit strong seasonal changes in migratory behavior and reproductive biology.
Because seasonal adaptations to photoperiod are ubiquitous in animals, this work
will provide a framework for comparative analyses in diverse groups of animals,
thus having far-reaching implications for broadening our understanding of
seasonal adaptation beyond migratory species. This project will also have a
variety of broader impacts, including the training of students and post-doctoral
researchers, and outreach activities at public street events and local schools
to sensitize and engage students and citizens alike in monarch
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to adapt to the changing seasons
is widespread in nature, and in many organisms the primary trigger for this
phenomenon is changes in daylength (aka photoperiod). The Eastern North American
monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus, is a powerful model for understanding the
molecular and cellular basis of seasonality. It undergoes a yearly seasonal
migration in response to decreasing photoperiod in the fall during which it
enters reproductive dormancy, can be genetically manipulated, and photoperiodic
responses can be induced in laboratory conditions. In this system, a functional
circadian clock is necessary for sensing and responding to the photoperiod, and
is involved in the rhythmic regulation of the vitamin A pathway in the brain.
However, how the vitamin A pathway integrates circadian and photoperiodic cycles
to ultimately regulate photoperiodic responses is still unknown. Vitamin A can
generate two different products, retinal and retinoic acid, which could both
effect seasonal adaptations. This proposal employs cutting-edge functional
genomics and molecular tools in the monarch to test two non-mutually exclusive
hypotheses: i) that retinal functions in the regulation of photoperiodic
responses via the production of an opsin-based deep brain photoreceptor for
photoperiodic induction; and ii) that retinoic acid reprograms gene expression
in a photoperiod-dependent manner to rewire the neuronal circuitry in the brain
in response to changing seasons. Illuminating the yet unknown photoperiodic
photoreceptor(s) and/or molecular mechanisms underlying insect photoperiodic
sensing and responses will greatly advance our understanding of the molecular
bases of seasonal rhythms, which are likely to be widely conserved among the
animal kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.