* 2224253
* Multifunctional Zwitterionic Solid Polymer Electrolytes for High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anh Ngo, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 464,665.00

Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have played a key role in the most popular energy
storage systems for portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, owing to
their high energy density, high operating voltage, and good cycling performance.
However, commercial LIBs with the organic liquid electrolyte are associated with
uncontrollable side reactions and critical safety issues such as toxic liquid
electrolyte leakage, flammability of electrolytes, and poor thermal stability.
Therefore, replacing the liquid electrolyte with solid electrolytes is quite
necessary. Among several solid ion conductors, solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs)
can offer excellent flexibility, interfacial compatibility with electrodes, good
processibility, low cost, and light weights that can overcome the limitations of
ceramic ion conductors. However, current SPEs often encounter limitations such
as poor mechanical strength and dimensional thermal stability, inferior
electrochemical stability, and low lithium-ion conductivity at room temperature.
The proposed research will study molecular-level design principles to establish
relationships between the molecular structures of ion-conducting polymers and
the mechanical/electrochemical performances of SPEs. This project will advance
our understanding of the design principles of next-generation multifunctional
polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries and play a
critical role in developing energy storage technologies for sustainable energy
generation and global warming mitigation efforts. The project will support and
train two graduate students and several undergraduate students, and
complimentary hands-on research experiences for high school students and
teachers will help to disseminate the research methods to a broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the molecular-level
design of a series of lithium ion-conducting zwitterionic polyurethane (zPU)
electrolytes with excellent electrochemical and mechanical stabilities. The
effect of different tethered anionic group, length of spacers between tethered
cationic groups and anionic groups, and polymer backbone structure will be
investigated to develop high-performance polymer electrolyte materials.
Theoretical atomistic molecular modelling will be employed to investigate the
dissolution and dissolution of lithium salts and lithium-ion transport
mechanisms in zwitterionic polyurethanes. A suite of electrochemical
characterization methods combined with theoretical molecular simulation studies
will be employed to systematically investigate ion conductivity, interfacial
stability, and battery performance during charging/discharging. The proposed
effort is centered around a collaboration between a polymer chemist, a molecular
simulation scientist, and a membrane electrochemist to advance understanding of
the correlations of zPU SPEs. Results will be used to design next-generation
solid-state batteries with maximum electrochemical
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.