* 2224832
* BoCP-Implementation: Functional diversity of the smallest predators in the current and future ocean
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Grieg Steward, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Carling
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,420,915.00

Photosynthesis by primary producers is the foundation of Earth’s ecosystems. On
land the major producers are plants, but in the ocean most photosynthesis is
performed by single-celled microorganisms. Remarkably, many of these tiny
‘plants’ are also predators that eat other microbes. These organisms are the
Venus flytraps of the sea and are called ‘mixotrophs’ because of their mixed
nutrition. Previous research compared mixotrophs to autotrophs (organisms that
only act as plants) and found that mixotrophs are more abundant when ocean
waters have a distinct warm layer at the surface (called stratification). Such
an increase in mixotroph abundance could have significant implications for ocean
ecosystems because the oceans are becoming more stratified globally as the
planet warms. As mixotrophs will likely play a larger role in the future ocean,
it is critical to study whether mixotrophy changes how ecosystems work. In this
project the researchers will address how mixotrophy changes the flow of energy
and nutrients through food webs, and what the consequences may be for the future
ocean. These questions are important for society’s reliance on the biosphere,
because a more mixotrophic future could mitigate or exacerbate the effects of
climate change on ocean productivity. This project will support the training of
a postdoc, two graduate students, and undergraduate students in integrative
biodiversity science that includes field, lab, and modeling components. Ideas
about mixotrophs and their role in the ocean will be developed into an
educational game for science outreach events in Hawai’i, and the PIs will
recruit undergraduates through programs at UH Manoa that serve Pacific Islanders
and other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of
this project is to quantify functional diversity among common mixotrophic
consumers and compare them to common heterotrophs that do not photosynthesize.
The researchers will use in situ and lab experiments to ask whether diverse
mixotrophs and heterotrophs differ in their consumption of the most common
bacterial prey: the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus, the heterotrophic bacterial
clade SAR11 (Pelagibacter), and the heterotrophic bacterial family
Rhodobacteraceae. They will use lab experiments on diverse isolates to ask
whether the mixotroph-heterotroph spectrum leads to consistent shifts in
predation rates, the transfer of nutrients up the food chain, and the elemental
composition of the plankton. They will analyze global survey data to ask how
mixotrophic and heterotrophic taxa shift in relative abundance with increasing
stratification and other environmental gradients. Finally, they will use
mathematical models to assess whether patterns of community structure are
consistent with theoretical predictions based on experimental results. In total
this work will quantify functional biodiversity among a globally important but
poorly studied group of microbes, project how communities and ecosystems will
change due to global warming, and advance the theoretical understanding of
microbial food webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.