* 2224174
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost Quantitative Lateral Flow Assay for Cytokine Release Syndrome Detection in Point-of-Care/Point-of-Need Settings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Long Chang, FEMTOMAG, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a biosensing technology that may enable
highly sensitive, quantitative, point-of-care diagnostics. Once validated, the
proposed biosensor, disposable sensor chips/cartridges, and electronic readout
modules can be readily mass-produced using existing medical device manufacturing
capacities. The technology may have an impact on the health and welfare of
patients. The immediate goal is to examine interleukin protein monitoring for
early detection of cytokine release syndrome, a potentially life-threatening
health complication that develops in patients undergoing immunotherapy
treatment, organ transplant, infectious disease, sepsis, etc. Additional
applications include early detection of cancers or cancer recurrence, dry eye
disease, existing and emerging infectious disease, biothreats,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is a proof-of-concept demonstration of a low-cost, magnetic biosensor
technology that may enable analytical laboratory capabilities for reliable
biomarker detection and quantitation at the point of care. The proposed
biosensor will be adapted for quantitative detection of interleukin proteins in
blood for early diagnostics of cytokine release syndrome. The technology
integrates magnetic sensing into the ubiquitous lateral flow assay (LFA) format
(used in pregnancy tests) utilizing magnetic nanoparticles as reporters of
biomolecular interactions. The tests are well-suited for point-of-care
applications where rapid and convenient access to low-cost diagnostic tools
helps improve patient care. The rationale for this project is that the proposed
biosensors can provide clinically-relevant quantitative data rivaling those of
state-of-the-art laboratories while preserving the advantages of LFA tests in
terms of low cost and ease of use. The disposable chip with its clam-shell
design builds upon the usual LFA cassette design. The disposable chip will be
produced and assembled from low-cost printed circuit board (PCB) manufacturing
and is expected to add only cents to the cost of an LFA test. A low-cost
portable reader capable of ultrahigh sensitivity quantitative readings will be
built from conventional off-the-shelve electronic
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.