* 2224888
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: The impact of climate change on functional biodiversity across spatiotemporal scales at Lake Tanganyika, Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Jennifer Latimer, Indiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 09/30/2027
* USD 122,630.00

Lake Tanganyika is renowned for its biodiversity, but the spectacular life in
this vast and ancient ecosystem is threatened by warming temperatures in ways
that are not well-understood. As one of sub-Saharan Africa’s most prolific
inland fisheries, a healthy Lake Tanganyika is critically important to the
nutrition of four developing nations. If global warming alters internal
processes that affect the fish production in Lake Tanganyika, then the food
security for millions of people will suffer. Moreover, the impacts of climate
change on the characteristics of different groups making up Lake Tanganyika’s
open water and lake floor communities, as well as interactions among these
groups, are unknown. This project aims to study the response of Lake
Tanganyika’s food web to several different scenarios of climate change using
sediments, fossils, and genetic tools. The results of the project will reveal
how aquatic organisms, particularly economically valuable fish, respond to
changes in temperature and precipitation within large tropical lakes. With this
information, fisheries and ecosystem managers will be better equipped to
safeguard food resources and biodiversity in their areas of responsibility.
Finally, this project will include strong international partnership to train
students, conduct workshops and develop materials for public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use Lake Tanganyika’s high-
resolution sedimentary record to set up a series of historical experiments to
track functional biodiversity lake-wide. This framework integrates geochemical,
fossil, and genomic tools to assess open water and bottom-dwelling community
structures and functions under different scenarios of climate change, as well as
the physical and physiological responses of key organisms to these changes.
Because the hydroclimatic conditions of the Holocene are underrepresented in
historical data, this approach provides the opportunity to evaluate the
consequences of environmental change for Lake Tanganyika’s food web in a way
that was previously impossible to know. In addition, the project will identify
shared and divergent responses to climatic fluctuations across the lake’s
diverse fauna, and link these responses to trait-based understanding of
community assembly and functioning. This work holds potential for predicting
changes in biodiversity amidst severe climatic uncertainty in large tropical
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.