* 2224006
* Developing Expertise and Building Collaborations to Advance Atmospheric Science Education Research (ASER)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Kathleen Quardokus Fisher, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2024
* USD 97,269.00

Atmospheric Science Education Research (ASER) aims to improve teaching and
learning in atmospheric science through evidence-based knowledge and practices.
However, the atmospheric science community has yet to broadly encourage this
type of scholarship or the use of evidence-based practices in teaching and
learning, and awareness of this important work still lags behind other
disciplines. This conference will equip atmospheric science educators with
knowledge and skills in education research by pairing atmospheric science
educators with education researchers. Research projects developed during the
workshop will be developed in consultation with education research experts. This
will increase the rigor of research being conducted on teaching and learning in
atmospheric sciences and set the foundation for increased collaboration on
teaching and learning projects in the future. The conference will provide
training and professional development opportunities for those interested in
pursuing or advancing their skills in ASER. Graduate students, postdoctoral
scholars, women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities
engaged in or interested in ASER will be particularly invited to this meeting to
develop their knowledge of the ASER discipline and formulate the future of
education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Association of Geoscience
Teachers recognizes the unique research needs of the atmospheric science
education community. In the Community Framework for Geoscience Education
Research, Grand Challenge #5 specifically calls for activities to broaden the
relatively small number of faculty in atmospheric and related sciences engaged
in educational research. This two- and half-day conference has two overarching
goals: 1) Enhance the education research skills of atmospheric science educators
through training provided by education research experts and 2) encourage
collaborations between education research experts, current ASER scholars, and
atmospheric science educators that will lead to well-designed education research
projects with concrete goals and deadlines. The conference topics will introduce
participants to education research on the science of teaching and learning and
discipline based educational research continuum, human subjects research and
consent processes, qualitative methods, statistical analysis for social science
research including instrument validation, research design, theoretical
frameworks and strategies to fund educational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.