* 2224250
* I-Corps: Bio-inspired ground anchor technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a bio-inspired ground anchor technology. Ground anchors are a
structural component of many retaining walls and building foundations that
resist forces attempting to pull the structure from the ground by transferring
those forces to the surrounding soil. Such forces are called pullout loads. The
conventional ground anchor may be fabricated and installed easily using simple
tooling and components, but they are not highly efficient at resisting pullout
loads. An economically competitive alternative to conventional ground anchors
must be nearly as simple to install and more efficient in its use of materials.
The proposed technology uses a bio-inspired root design to meet these criteria.
The geometric design of root systems resists pullout loads more efficiently than
the cylindrical external interfaces of conventional ground anchors. The proposed
technology seeks to develop higher pullout load capacities than conventional
anchors within a shorter bonded length. Shorter anchors use less cement and
steel, require less drilling, consume less diesel fuel, and require fewer
working hours to install.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a root-inspired ground anchor system. Prototypes have been
studied in the lab as well as in preliminary field trials and they have
demonstrated the feasibility of installing, expanding, and loading the bio-
inspired system. The ongoing research is focused on scaling-up the technology to
full field-scale using both numerical simulations and field tests on
instrumented anchors. The proposed anchor consists of three primary components:
a stressing element identical to the steel cables or bars used in conventional
ground anchors; an expansive root mechanism, which is initially cylindrical but
expands during installation to mimic the geometry of plant roots; and cement
grout, which gives the systems stiffness and protects its components from
corrosion. Certain plant species have root systems that anchor the organism in
the soil much more efficiently than any ground anchors currently used in civil
infrastructure; Their capacity to resist pullout loads is very high relative to
the mass of the root system. The expansive root mechanism of the proposed
technology seeks to use the geometric principles of these root systems to resist
pullout loads more efficiently than the cylindrical external interfaces of a
conventional ground anchor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.