* 2224038
* MLO Signaling in Polarized Plasma Membrane Domains
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Sharon Kessler, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2026
* USD 816,954.00

Humans have harnessed the power of plants to provide the bulk of their calories
through seeds which are a direct product of pollination. Plants are rooted in
place and are therefore continually assaulted by both biotic and abiotic
stressors in nature while also striving to grow and reproduce. As the world
population continues to grow in a changing climate, the ability to ensure food
security relies on a better understanding of how plant cells make the
appropriate response to signals from their environment. This project uses
pollination and tip-growing cells as model systems for dissecting how plant
cells perceive signals from other cells and scale their responses to promote
beneficial interactions and discourage harmful interactions. This research has
the potential to impact society by leading to new approaches for enhancing
beneficial plant-biotic interactions in the extreme environments that plants
will face if global climate change continues at its current pace. In addition to
training the next generation of scientists through direct participation of
undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoc, this project will also enhance
STEM participation and education of underrepresented minorities at the high
school level through a summer educational outreach and mentoring program at an
inner city community center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Receptor-like kinases (RLKs)
play key roles in perceiving and reacting to external signals secreted from an
invading organism or cell wall perturbations that result from attempted
invasions. FERONIA (FER) and related RLKs have been proposed to be sensors of
extracellular perturbations that trigger a signal transduction cascade that
results in communication with the invading cell. In pollination, one outcome of
FER signaling is the signal-mediated trafficking of the MLO protein NORTIA to a
polarized membrane domain in the synergid cells of the female gametophyte. FER-
mediated trafficking of MLO proteins to discrete polar membrane domains may act
as a mechanism to turn up the volume on the extracellular response. However,
knowledge is lacking on the extent to which MLO proteins act as amplifiers of
FER signaling in other parts of the plant. The overall objective of this project
is to understand the link between RLK signaling and MLO accumulation and
function at polarized membrane domains. The central hypothesis is that MLO
amplification of FER signals to the extracellular space is a common mechanism in
RLK regulation of both plant-biotic interactions at polarized membrane domains
and polarized cell expansion and acts to modulate the cellular response to
external signals. The overall objective will be met through three specific aims:
1) testing conservation of the FER/MLO signaling module in plant-biotic
interactions and tip-growing cells; 2) determining the intersection of FER and
MLO activities in polarized membrane domains; and 3) identifying new proteins
involved in MLO function in polarized membrane
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.