* 2224907
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, Vision-Enhanced, High-Efficiency Heat Cable Control System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Thomas Clardy, POWDER WATTS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,922.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be realized through the development of
vision-enhanced, smart control for heat cables. Heat cables are installed on
millions of roofs in North America to prevent build-up of roof-damaging ice dams
but they currently have flawed, rudimentary controls, and consume large amounts
of energy (tripling the energy consumption of a typical home during the winter
months). Combining information from easy-to-install roof cameras, temperature
sensors, and local weather forecasting, a machine learning system will turn on
heat cables only when needed. A total of 8 billion installed feet of heat cable
on roofs and gutters in North America annually consume 135 Terawatt-Hours of
electricity and emit 52 Megatons of carbon dioxide and methane. Preliminary data
indicate this consumption, the associated costs, and carbon dioxide and methane
emissions can be reduced significantly, creating a large commercial impact for
residential and commercial building owners, a payback period for the customer of
one winter season, and a considerable decrease of the nation's carbon footprint.
Because of heat cables' large electrical power consumption, the technology will
also provide electrical utility companies with a tool to stabilize the
electrical grid and load balance, contributing to national energy security and
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
pursue innovations to enhance the energy efficiency of heat cable systems. This
system will including an energy harvesting system to power a roof-mounted,
camera-based, sensor system that uses machine-vision and machine-learning to
precisely control roof heat cables based on their primary function: the
prevention of ice dams. Surprisingly, little is known about optimal heat cable
control, including key input variables such as temperature, weather and the
variability and role of roof features (type, angle, orientation). Collecting and
analyzing these data will further the understanding of optimal heat cable
control. Heat cable power consumption will be compared to historical and model-
derived power consumption. Technoeconomic analysis will help to fine-tune and
scale the revenue model. The energy harvesting technology based on trickle-
charging the roof-based camera system battery will make the system cordless,
easy to retrofit to existing installations, and low-
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.