* 2224360
* 2022 Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Karin Olson Hoal, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2023
* USD 19,950.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on the Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits is
the 26th in a series of conferences that serves as one of the premier
conferences for international researchers with differing levels of experience to
gather and discuss issues concerning the geochemistry of metal transportation
and deposition in the natural environment. This year, a focus of the GRC is on
game-changing developments in mineral deposits, such as big data, biosystems,
new frontiers, and stewardship. In the current climate of needing to discover
and sustainably extract more mineral deposits that ever before in human history,
and the accelerating demand for rare materials to support the renewable energy
transition, the 2022 meeting will be critical to generate innovative approaches
to transform the science. The joint meetings of the GRC and GRS will ensure that
the next generation of leaders will be able to engage with current leaders in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 Gordon Conference on the
Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits will present a forum to present and discuss new
data and ideas. The GRC will open with a discussion of how â€œbig data'' and
machine learning techniques can be applied to the study of, and exploration for,
ore deposits. Sessions include detailed appraisals of mineralizing processes
that control the formation, and size of a wide range of ore deposits including
precious metals, base metals, and other critical elements relevant to supporting
a cleaner, more electrified world. There is a session dedicated to the practical
realities of using geochemistry in exploration programs. Other sessions will
focus on the next generation of models, biological processes and the challenges
of mining frontier settings such as the seafloor and in space. The final session
will discuss where the future lies and will also showcase one of the young
scientists who presented at the GRS, who will have the opportunity to give their
talk again to the GRC attendees. There is no doubt that the pandemic has greatly
impacted the networking and development of especially early-career scientists.
This award will allow early-career scientists to present research and engage
with scientists from around the world who are focused on the evolution and
sustainability of ore minerals for our growing society. The format of the
meeting provides for an abundance of interaction among participants, and is an
ideal venue for early-career researchers to advertise who they are and get
feedback on where they are going. A Gordon Research Seminar will be organized
by, and for, students, and will have a mentorship panel focused on careers with
members from government, academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.