* 2224885
* Capacity: Biological Collections: Enhancement of the Caenorhabditis Natural Diversity Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robyn Tanny, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 08/31/2025
* USD 292,650.00

Studies of conserved biological processes require model organisms that share
attributes with humans. Most model organisms are easily grown in the laboratory
and enable experimental manipulations. Over the last forty years, the nematode
worm Caenorhabditis elegans has been instrumental in numerous fundamental
advances in genetics, developmental biology, and neurobiology. However, all of
these discoveries come from studies of a single genetic strain of the species.
This limitation is similar to the argument that we can understand all of human
biology by the study of a single person in our species. This project seeks to
expand the C. elegans Natural Diversity Resource (CeNDR), which includes nearly
2,000 genetically distinct strains from across the world, and create the
Caenorhabditis Natural Diversity Resource (CaeNDR), incorporating almost 2,000
C. briggsae and more than 700 C. tropicalis strains. This combined genetic
diversity facilitates discoveries about the evolution of physiological and
behavioral traits, including responses to chemical and biotic stresses. Because
humans share many of the same genes and processes as this nematode species,
studies using these organisms can teach us a great deal about how the human
population varies and how evolution works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CaeNDR has three
major goals: (1) Collect, organize, and disseminate wild Caenorhabditis strains;
(2) Organize and disseminate whole-genome sequence and variant data for wild
strains; and (3) Provide a genetics portal to facilitate mappings and
interpretations of results. The project will further increase the capacity of
CaeNDR by expanding the set of strains and preparing them for easy dissemination
to the community, adding new tools and extensibility to existing CaeNDR genomic
resources, and releasing all of the data for the three Caenorhabditis species on
an updated and redesigned website (CaeNDR.org) with critical improvements to
security, infrastructure costs, and user interface and experience. The extensive
CaeNDR user-base from C. elegans will be amplified by researchers using C.
briggsae and C. tropicalis, allowing for novel comparative approaches across the
Caenorhabditis genus. Most research groups do not have the combination of
experimental, computational, and statistical training to easily perform studies
of natural variation. This project will make these tools available and usable by
a large number of research laboratories across diverse model organism
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.