* 2224108
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Impact of Solar Wind Dynamic Pressure Enhancement on the Cusp and Polar Cap Ion Source
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Chih-Ping Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 587,299.00

Outflow ions from the ionosphere are one of the major particle sources for the
Earth's space environment. Their dynamics in the region inside the
geosynchronous orbits play a crucial role in space weather disturbances, whose
effects include satellite drag, disruption in communication and navigation
systems, and damaging electric power grids. This project is focused on
understanding the physical processes of how one of the drivers from the Sun,
solar wind compression of the geospace, generates these outflow ions and their
transport. The compression can often be strong and impulsive, but we currently
have little knowledge in both observations and simulations on the resulting
outflow ions. This project will establish such knowledge, which is urgently
needed in the space community to improve our forecast ability for impulsive
space weather events. This project supports the education of a graduate student
by providing balanced tasks for developing the student's essential research
ability in both simulations and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science
goal of this project is to understand how solar wind compression impacts outflow
ions. The two main objectives and methods are (1) Investigating Cluster
satellite data to establish a better observational understanding of temporal
variations of the ion fluxes in the cusp and lobes resulting from the
compression. (2) Conduct 3D global hybrid simulations to evaluate the physical
processes behind the outflow ions caused by the compression. The hybrid
simulation is currently the most appropriate tool to take into account the
kinetic processes of these outflow ions. The simulations are designed to be
compared with the observation results to establish a solid physical
understanding. It will also improve our current model specification of the
outflow ions that can eventually be incorporated into space weather modeling to
achieve a better forecast of the impact of solar wind
compression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.