* 2224371
* Collaborative Research: Validated Complementarity Contact Conditions for Suction-Friction of Multiphasic Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Timothy Truster, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 371,766.00

This project will study adhesion and friction, and develop a physics-based
contact model in various soft materials swollen by liquids. The ever-growing use
of soft swollen materials in engineering and biomedical applications catalyzes
demands for modeling of their mechanical behavior. Those materials experience
large deformations and exhibit nonlinear mechanical response that depends on
loading rate. In contact loading, rate-dependence stems primarily from liquid
diffusion within soft solid network, viscous shearing of swelling liquid and
viscoelastic deformation of the solid network. In recent studies, the rate-
dependence of adhesion and friction were observed during the onset of peeling
and sliding in synthetic and biological soft swollen materials. Current contact
formulations lack a methodology to describe those observations. The research
will fill this gap by exploring the mechanisms leading to rate-dependent and
coupled physics of adhesion and friction, and by correcting current contact
formulations accordingly. The physics-based contact formulation will enable
modeling of friction-adhesion in numerous contact applications encountered in
musculoskeletal joints; soft robots interacting with their environment; surgical
cuts, suturing, and traumatic and ballistic impacts in soft tissues and
surrogates; contact of flexible electronics with human skin; and other tough gel
applications carrying significant mechanical loads. This novel contribution to
contact mechanics will be discussed in graduate level courses and hands-on
seminars for high school students. Finally, to ensure broad and quick
dissemination of research products to the community, the formulation will be
implemented in an open-source and widely used finite element code for soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to test a
major hypothesis that in soft swollen materials, solid network controls the
strength in both adhesion and friction, and therefore a modified effective
traction-based formulation would resolve both rate-dependence and nonlocality in
contact separation (peeling) processes. The PIs further hypothesize that the
coupling of nonlocal adhesion (suction) and friction response is governed by the
intrinsic relaxation time constants of the materials. Those hypotheses will be
tested through novel computational and experimental efforts. In the
computational program, a unified contact framework will be derived for the soft
swollen material interfaces using the Variational Multiscale Discontinuous
Galerkin method, which can weakly impose the entire range of loading and
unloading of a material point along the interface without numerical tuning
parameters. The experimental program will complement the computational framework
with validation data to be obtained from bulk mechanical characterization,
adhesion and friction tests on synthetic soft swollen material interfaces.
Besides the global force-displacement responses, advanced laser and particle
image velocimetry techniques will deliver full field characterization in the
vicinity of interfaces. This time-resolved global and local data will enable
robust validation of the modeling framework. After validation, this framework
will deliver the first physics-based contact model that is fully parametrizable
with measurable bulk and interface properties. This unified formulation will be
achieved by exposing the transformative knowledge that local and nonlocal
interfacial mechanisms act in tandem, with direct analogy to the behavior of
bulk response (cohesion and suction) in soils and granular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.