* 2224894
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intermediate-severity wind disturbance and cultural fire in the maintenance of mixedwood forests
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Justin Hart, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 03/31/2024
* USD 17,493.00

Forest ecosystems worldwide are projected to face increasing stress over the
next century as climate change modifies the ecological conditions driving forest
growth. Biodiverse forests that contain a wide range of plant species are
hypothesized to be more resistant and resilient to disturbance events and forest
stresses than systems with less biological diversity. But it is not clear how
future stresses to forest systems will affect biodiversity in different types of
forests. This project quantifies the impacts of intermediate-severity wind
disturbance on forest succession and development of shortleaf pine neighborhoods
in a mixed oak-pine forest. This project also documents the effects of
prescribed fire in shortleaf pine dominated mixed oak-pine forests previously
unaffected by prescribed burns. Forest managers are increasingly embracing
biodiversity enhancement as a management goal to improve ecosystem adaptation
potential and this project provides new data and analysis to forest managers
working with mixedwood species assemblages.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
understanding of disturbance and development patterns in mixedwood forests is
essential to create forest management systems that enhance native forest
diversity, maintain critical ecosystem functions, and promote resiliency while
also being economically sustainable and socially responsible. In these forest
management systems, tree harvesting and other operations are patterned after
natural processes both of which modify the distribution of tree species over
time. This project explores the hypothesis that intermediate-severity canopy
disturbance and fire are critical processes essential to perpetuate desirable
species assemblages. This project uses field measurements in different forest
experimental plots to quantify (1) the impacts of intermediate-severity canopy
disturbance on forest succession and development and (2) the effects of
prescribed fire on forest ecosystem conditions. This research provides data and
reports to forest managers and stakeholders vested in the ecological integrity
of forest systems and managing forests in the context of future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.