* 2224293
* The Poloidal Convection Model and Multi-Scale Moist Circulations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joseph Biello, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,905.00

Tall cumulus clouds produce most heavy rains globally. They form as air rises
from near the surface to the upper reaches of the atmosphere. To make room for
the ascending, moisture-laden air, cool, dry air is forced downward around the
cloud. The ascending air forms visible cloud droplets and rain drops within it,
but the descending air is largely invisible and may extend to distances far away
from the cloudy core. The importance of this pairing of ascent and descent to
the behavior of cloud is appreciated, but it is not well described. Current
models and descriptions of raining convective clouds focus on the air that
ascends inside the cloud and greatly simplify the descending portion. The
project aims to remedy this by incorporating both ascending and descending air
in one framework. By doing so, it will be possible to understand some observed
behavior of convective clouds for the first time. For example, the project aims
to mathematically describe how tall convective clouds interact with one another
through their three-dimensional flow and thus how individual clouds coalesce to
form heavily raining, long-lived weather systems and to better understand why
and when certain shaped clouds grow and why others do not. This understanding
will then be incorporated into a model to assess and forecast global
precipitation patterns and behavior. The project will also train students at
various levels in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will test and further develop a new model that describes an arbitrary convective
circulation as poloidal. The poloidal model will be contrasted with a plume
model. By coupling convective ascent and descent with a smoothly varying
complete velocity field, the project will develop descriptions of dynamical
aspects of clouds and circulation such as how advection and diffusion affect
growth and decay of circulations, how pairs of circulations interact, and how
localized latent heating within updrafts contributes to spinning up or down the
return circulation. By simultaneously incorporating dynamical aspects of
poloidal circulations into a simple model, it will be possible to address long
standing questions like how individual convective circulations feed upscale to
synoptic ones like the Madden Julian Oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.