* 2224702
* A Graphical Species Distribution Model of life history connectivity and multi-scale co-existence of marine species
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Hongsheng Bi, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 542,081.00

An understanding of the spatial distribution of marine species within
ecologically and economically important regions is essential for testing
fundamental ecological theory. It is also crucial for conservation efforts and
to forecast potential impacts of climate change. Technologies are increasingly
available and affordable for ecologists to sample the fine-scale distribution
and habitat condition of ecological communities. Specifically, imaging systems
can generate rich and integrated biological and environmental data at multiple
spatial scales. However, there is a lack of statistical tools to analyze these
multi-scale data, which limits our ability to extract critical information. This
project will develop a statistical framework that encompasses the complex
dynamics between marine ecological communities and spatial scales. The approach
will improve our understanding of how biotic interactions and habitat factors
shape the spatial patterns of marine communities, yet will be simple enough to
contribute to broad ecological research and guide various actions of
conservation and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the
following activities: develop, evaluate and quantify the performance of a
graphical species distribution modeling (GSDM) within an R environment; employ
the GSDM framework to leverage the rich multispecies, multiscale data inherent
in imaging systems, and available to us from ongoing NSF-funded programs; and
facilitate the co-development of an open-source R package by the marine
ecological community to inform conservation and management decision making. This
project will build capacity in marine biology through developing new species
distribution modeling frameworks that overcome the computational challenge of
incorporating data from sampling platforms with high spatial resolution. The
frameworks will be coded in the R computing language to access the increasingly
available, high resolution, multispecies data collected by image-based sampling
systems. This approach, leveraging the most recent advances in Graphical and
Bayesian network models, will improve the understanding of trophic interactions
and life history connectivity within productive marine ecosystems. It will also
further the development of generic ecological tools for the research,
conservation, and management communities. Target audiences include graduates and
the ecological research community of the University System of Maryland, and
fisheries managers and agencies through the Goal Implementation Teams of the
Chesapeake Bay Program. Feedback from community members will be engaged in a co-
development process through online workshops, conference sessions, webinars, and
dedicated websites (https://esc.cbl.umces.edu/gsdm).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.