* 2224189
* Participant Support for the Eighth Triennial Conference on Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation (FOMMS 2022)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jeffrey Errington, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 48,375.00

This grant will make it possible for 26 graduate students, 10 postdocs, and 7
plenary speakers from underrepresented groups to attend the 8th triennial
conference on the Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation (FOMMS 2022)
to be held in Delavan, WI on July 17-21, 2022. Molecular-level modeling and
simulation are ubiquitous tools for advancing science and engineering in
applications ranging from the design of new materials to understanding how drug
molecules interact with protein receptors in the body. The FOMMS conference
series was initiated in 2000 to foster interaction among academic, national
laboratory, and industrial molecular researchers developing and applying
molecular-based computational methods. FOMMS 2022 will feature 18 plenary
speakers, one keynote speaker, a FOMMS Metal Lecture, workshops with an
educational focus, and two poster sessions. With no parallel sessions, the
meeting structure is designed to encourage interaction between established and
early career researchers and promote mentoring of the latter. The diverse and
international selection of invited speakers strikes a balance between industrial
and academic researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of FOMMS 2022 is
“Molecular Modeling and the Data Revolution,” recognizing the increasingly
important role of data science within the molecular modeling and simulation
community. Artificial intelligence, machine learning, cluster analysis, and
advanced visualization techniques now figure prominently in the computationally
efficient analysis of the dynamic behavior of molecules in response to their
environment and molecular neighbors. Molecular-level modeling is an increasingly
powerful tool for predicting the properties of materials and molecular systems
and for obtaining insights into their structure/property relationships. These
methods find applications in areas ranging from polymers to catalysts to
pharmaceuticals. The description of molecular modeling encompasses quantum
chemical chemistry, molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations, meso-scale
modeling including field theoretic and particle-based coarse-grained
simulations, multiscale simulation methods that bridge ab-initio MD and hybrid
QM/MM methods, and the application of these methods for the discovery of
molecules using these approaches augmented by AI. These topics will be explored
by the 26 graduate students, 10 postdocs, and 7 plenary speakers supported by
this grant to attend FOMMS 2022. A diverse slate of speakers from the U.S.,
Europe, and Asia have been selected to address the challenges and opportunities
that currently exist in molecular-level simulations and among them, those
researchers supported with this funding will play a crucial role in the success
of this meeting. The Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems, and the Division of Materials Research contributed funds to
this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.