* 2224608
* LTER: Plum Island Ecosystems, the impact of changing landscapes and climate on interconnected coastal ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Anne Giblin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2028
* USD 2,598,840.00

The Plum Island Ecosystems Long Term Ecological Research (PIE LTER) site
consists of a linked watershed-marsh-estuarine system connected to the Gulf of
Maine. The goal of the PIE LTER is to advance our predictive understanding of
the long-term response of coupled land-marsh-estuary-ocean ecosystems to changes
in three key drivers: climate, sea level and human activities. This research
sheds light on how marshes are responding to sea-level rise and controls on
carbon storage, or blue carbon, in marsh and estuarine ecosystems. To understand
how nutrients and carbon from land influence the estuary and how marshes and
estuaries contribute to oceanic carbon and nutrient budgets, the investigators
are measuring the flows of carbon and nutrients across the watershed-to-ocean
continuum. To understand how estuarine and marsh ecosystem food webs are
changing with sea level rise and warming temperatures, the investigators are
measuring changes in abundance of key species and analyzing the entire food web
using tracer techniques. This information is being shared with managers from
local, regional and federal agencies, as well as non-profit orgainzations. In
collaboration with Mass Audubon the investigators are running a K-12 Schoolyard
program, “Salt Marsh Science”, which provides ten schools with experiential
learning opportunities for students and teachers. They also work with the Gulf
of Maine Institute (GOMI), a non-profit that provides intensive training and on-
going support to teachers to help them develop environmental community-based
stewardship projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIE LTER is organized around
three questions that build on previous findings and integrate long-term studies
with new observations, experiments, and model development. Activities within the
three questions integrate across the entire watershed-marsh-estuary domain to
facilitate a broader synthesis of long-term data and new observations. The first
question is: “How are the sources and fates of organic matter and nutrients in
the linked watershed/estuary system being altered by changing land use, sea-
level rise (SLR), climate, and geomorphology?” To answer this, the investigators
are examining how the linked coastal system influences estuarine production and
water quality, as well as the role of coastal ecosystems in modulating carbon
and nutrient fluxes to the nearshore ocean through a combination of expanded
observations and numerical modeling. The second question, “How do food webs and
energy flow respond to new geomorphic configurations, SLR, changing climate, and
associated estuarine responses?” is being answered through a new integrative
effort to determine how the landscapes’ ability to transfer energy to food webs
changes with habitat. This effort is combining long-term abundance data, stable
isotope data on niche size, and mapping of landscape features to model how
future changes in the marsh-estuary configuration will modify energy flow. Given
the importance of coastal ecosystems in supporting nearshore food webs,
understanding how this link will change with climate, land use change, and SLR
is critical. Finally, the investigators are asking: “What internal feedbacks
might accelerate, slow down, or even reverse the predicted changes in emergent
marsh configuration and the fate of carbon, nutrients and energy?” Society needs
to understand more about internal feedbacks that might increase marsh resilience
or compromise marsh survival as sea levels rise, systems warm, and watershed
inputs continue to change. With new collaborations, the team is also leveraging
large-scale marsh restoration to test hypotheses on feedback mechanisms within
the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.