* 2224243
* 2022 Graduate Climate Conference (GCC); Eatonville, Washington; October 28-30, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 45,000.00

This award supports the 16th Graduate Climate Conference (GCC), planned for
28-30 October 2022 at the Charles L. Pack Conference Center. The conference is
annually and alternates between Woods Hole the University of Washington.

The GCC is an interdisciplinary climate conference organized entirely by and for
graduate students. It provides a discussion forum for students conducting
research on climate in a variety of disciplines including atmospheric dynamics,
ocean dynamics, ocean biology and chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, climate
dynamics, paleoclimate, and human dimensions of climate variability and change.
The meeting is intended to help students familiarize themselves with the breadth
of climate science, gain exposure to the enormous range of tools available to
address climate-related questions, and understand how their research fits into
the broader landscape of current climate science. The conference seeks to better
prepare graduate students for scientific inquiry in a field that increasingly
demands interdisciplinary approaches. Funds provided here support travel and
subsistence for 120 students chosen through a competitive process which places
emphasis on selecting a cross-section of applicants that reflects the diversity
of the next generation of scientists

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.