* 2224227
* Collaborative Research: Conference: 2022 CISE Education and Workforce PI and Community Meetings
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Alan Peterfreund, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 431,438.00

CISE Education and Workforce (EWF) programs aim to create equitable and
inclusive opportunities for computing education and develop a diverse workforce.
STARS Computing Corps, a CISE Broadening Participation in Computing Alliance,
will support two research community meetings: the CISE EWF Principal
Investigator (PI) Meeting and the CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site New PI Workshop. Both convenings will provide opportunities for the
principal investigators of projects funded by CISE EWF programs to share their
research outcomes, promising practices, and lessons
learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the CISE EWF PI meeting and the REU Site New
PI workshop will be large events for the Foundation and their respective
community, bringing together PIs with representatives from government, academia,
and non-profit. For each event, there is a pressing need to meticulously plan
and organize agendas, venue and hybrid/remote conference logistics. This grant
provides funding for the venue and logistics, including conference registration,
audio visual, and meeting space for the hybrid CISE EWF PI meeting. It will also
support the remote logistics of the CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site New PI Workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.