* 2224967
* The Writing SySTEM: A Systemic Approach to Graduate Writing Instruction and Intervention
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jeffrey LaMondia, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 434,807.00

Few graduate students receive sustained, discipline-specific foundational
instruction in STEM writing, instead relying on ad-hoc support from faculty
advisors. This form of writing support may work for students who already possess
the knowledge and skills to write successfully in their fields, but it is not
inclusive nor best practice. Moreover, without systematic writing support,
students who are either members of populations historically underrepresented in
STEM fields or international students especially face obstacles to success in
graduate programs. For students who struggle to differentiate disciplinary
characteristics of effective writing from their advisors’ idiosyncratic
expectations, engaging in these existing forms of writing support can be
confusing, frustrating, and futile. In addition, such writing instruction and
intervention methods do not help students develop self-efficacy, i.e., the
belief that they can carry out a specific task to achieve the desired result. It
is anticipated that self-efficacy will lead to improved confidence in writing
abilities and higher success rates for students. This NSF Innovations of
Graduate Education (IGE) award to Auburn University will implement an
innovative, multifaceted, sustainable writing program for graduate students in
engineering. The structure of the program will encourage them to develop self-
efficacy in writing. The research is innovative because it takes existing and
evidence-based components of writing instruction and intervention — including
workshops, graduate-level writing courses, small group writing support, and
writing-intensive curriculum development — and integrates them within the
disciplinary contexts of engineering. The research seeks to equip graduate
students with strategies and resources for writing effectively in STEM fields
and to establish evidence-based, systemic writing instruction and interventions
that are sustainable, scalable, and adaptable across STEM contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Writing SySTEM comprises four components: (1)
workshops to teach writing skills and promote the recruitment of diverse
participants into other components, (2) discipline-specific graduate writing
courses, (3) peer writing groups, and (4) writing resources hosted on a publicly
available Open Educational Resource site. Students may electively participate in
any of the components. The goal of this research is to determine how components
of the SySTEM, individually or in concert, affect STEM writing abilities by
evaluating students from small (biosystems), medium (aerospace), and large
(civil) graduate engineering programs at Auburn University. Relationships among
self-efficacy, self-regulation of writing, and writing ability will be evaluated
using direct and indirect measures. Student-focused direct measures include
students’ self-efficacy and self-regulatory factors for writing and the quality
of their writing as assessed by the research team. Indirectly, students will be
interviewed to acquire additional information about their experiences
participating in the Writing SySTEM’s components and their self-efficacy and
self-regulatory factors for writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.