* 2224915
* BoCP-Design: Developing network-based models to evaluate functional biodiversity responses to climate change and species invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* John Largier, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2025
* USD 524,000.00

Marine biological communities contain multiple species that interact to form
dynamic networks. These networks profoundly shape the coexistence of species and
function of marine ecosystems. Climate change and species invasions threaten
these networks at planetary scales. Predicting how marine communities respond to
these changes is challenging because the disturbances they cause can affect the
interwoven networks in unexpected ways. In addition, marine organisms may adapt
to those perturbations. For example, they may adapt to eat new species, be
better defended from predators, or to assimilate nutrients more effectively from
oceanic currents. This project will develop new models to predict how
environmental changes influence organisms and how they adapt to those changes.
These models will integrate empirical data and the fossil record of three of the
most productive coasts in the world,- the Californian, Chilean, and South
African coast. The fossil record of these marine communities will inform the
models of how these communities responded to climate change and species
invasions thousands of years ago. This project will also offer workshops for
early career scientists once a year. This project also supports diversity
initiatives through the Center for the Advancement of Multicultural Perspectives
on Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together scientists
from the fields of network ecology, oceanography, paleontology, evolution,
theoretical ecology, and community ecology. Together, they will develop new
network models to evaluate how functional-trait responses to climate change and
species invasions may affect the resistance and resilience of marine ecosystems
to multiple environmental stressors. At ecological timescales, this project will
leverage long-term data of biological and physical variables. At evolutionary
timescales, this project will leverage the historical paleontological record,
which shows strong evidence of the role of climate change and species invasions
in shaping the functional biodiversity of these systems. These models will allow
the scientific community to test hypotheses on how functional biodiversity
responds to environmental change from the organismal to the ecosystem level, at
ecological and evolutionary timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.