* 2224177
* 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Ocean Mixing: The Impact of Ocean Mixing on the Earth, Ocean and Atmosphere Systems, Climate and Society
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Jonathan Nash, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 40,000.00

This project provides partial support for the 2022 Gordon Research Conference
and Gordon Research Seminar on Ocean Mixing. Turbulent mixing results from
complex and chaotic motions that span a large range of spatial and temporal
scales. As such, it is particularly challenging to measure and model, yet it has
vast and important consequences. In the ocean, turbulent mixing controls
transport of heat, freshwater, dissolved gasses, and pollutants. It is crucial
for ocean biology because it both determines the flow field for the smallest
plankton, and it sets large-scale gradients of nutrient availability. It is also
central to understanding the energetics of the ocean and reducing the
uncertainties in global circulation and climate models: recent work has shown
that the spatial and temporal non-homogeneity in deep-ocean mixing may play a
critical role in climate; understanding the physics that drives the distribution
of deep-ocean mixing intensity is critical. Yet even after a half a century of
efforts to understand its global distribution, observations are still sparse; a
variety of direct and indirect methods are still needed to characterize the
dynamical processes that lead to turbulence, and inferences of mixing from
larger scale budgets. As such, the physics of ocean mixing is actively studied
using a variety of observational techniques (direct measure of velocity and
temperature fluctuations at the smallest (mm) scales, inferences from large-
scale turbulent overturns, observations of net mixing by purposeful dye release)
numerical and theoretical approaches, as well as laboratory experiments.
Finally, the consequences of mixing for larger scale climate models (which do
not directly resolve mixing) are addressed by turning dynamical insights of the
previously mentioned work into practical parameterizations. As a concrete
example, using different mixing schemes in numerical climate models changes
predicted tropical ocean temperatures by more than a degree and predicted sea
level rise by more than 30 cm. Mixing is one of the greatest sources of
uncertainty plaguing today’s models with impact of great societal relevance. A
regularly held GRC on Ocean Mixing provides a needed forum to improve the
broader community’s understanding of turbulent mixing in the ocean, and with it
a variety of deep and broad implications for everything from climate change to
global nutrient patterns that underlie our fisheries. The GRC format encourages
precisely the sort of interdisciplinary thinking and collaboration that is so
vital to addressing these societal issues. This GRC, in particular, helps our
scientific community be the most vibrant &amp; inclusive it can be. The ocean
mixing has historically suffered from poor diversity, which, while improved in
recent years, still needs an influx of new people, a broadening of ties amongst
domestic and international collaborators, and increased interdisciplinary
interactions. NSF support will explicitly be used to expand the demographic,
professional and geographic diversity of participants by supporting attendance
of under-represented and under-resourced groups who stand to benefit from the
intellectual environment and networking opportunities of the GRC
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose and scope of this Gordon
Research Conference is to provide a forum for discussion of the rapidly evolving
field of ocean mixing. Emphasis is threefold: observations of mixing in the
world, new insights into dynamics that control mixing rates, and impacts of
mixing on regional and global circulation and budgets. The latter two include
development of parameterizations to turn dynamical insights into useful things
to include in regional models and global numerical climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.