* 2224849
* Understanding the Coupled Interactions Between Hair-Like Micromechanoreceptors and Wall Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ebenezer Gnanamanickam, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 274,932.00

The proposed research will focus on understanding the interactions between
turbulent flows and long (high aspect ratio), flexible hair-like microstructures
or micropillars inspired by those encountered in nature. Some examples include
lateral line sensors in fish, airflow sensors in bats and hair cover of animals
such as seals and bats. These structures perform several physiological functions
such as balance and equilibrium sensors, flow sensors, flight control sensors,
thermal regulators and water harvesters. Particularly, hair-cell sensors have
such structures which in conjunction with the animal's nervous system forms a
mechanoreceptive device i.e., they turn a force or displacement, in response to
the flow energy, into a nervous system response. These structures that vibrate
in response to the background flow are also important in energy harvesting
systems. However, these interactions are poorly understood primarily due to the
complexity of the underlying physics. Capturing this physics requires
simultaneous, combined measurements of the micropillar motion and the flow
velocities which are challenging. The proposed research will use advanced image-
based flow diagnostic tools to measure in detail the interactions between arrays
of these micropillars and the background flow. The planned outreach activities
will target a group that is almost exclusively comprised of students who are
under-represented in the sciences, while also being economically disadvantaged.
The graduate student supported will be involved in outreach activities,
inculcating a spirit of outreach into the next generation of
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interactions between wall turbulence and
these micropillars occur in the following manner. Flow structures of scales
spanning several orders of magnitude, present within wall turbulence, excites
the response of the micropillars. The deflection or vibratory response of the
micropillars will then feedback and modify the non-linear, background
turbulence, resulting in a non-linearly coupled system. In addition, this
interaction occurring at the wall can affect the entire layer resulting in a
multiscale interacting layer. Of particular interest are energy transfer
pathways between the micropillars and the background turbulence. To describe
this coupled interaction and the associated energy transfer mechanisms, advanced
diagnostic tools such as multi-camera, multi-resolution, mosaicing particle
image velocimetry will be used to capture the dynamics of the background flow
while simultaneously tracking the motion of relevant micropillars using particle
tracking techniques. Together these tools will provide unique multiscale
measurements that will elucidate the coupled physics, advancing fields ranging
from physiology to aerospace engineering to non-linear energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.