* 2224520
* Organizational Problem Solving and the Use of Research in Education Policy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Samuel Workman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 112,184.00

This project addresses how organizations use a push and pull process to
influence the provision and use of research in education policy in the United
States. The pull effects of organizations shape the prevalence and types of
research available across policy issues. Organizations tasked with problem
solving in education vary in their propensity to solicit research for use in the
policy-making process. Organizations also exhibit push effects on the use of
research evidence, taking in the supply, and pushing this into resultant
regulatory policies. Together, bureaucracies and interest groups synthesize
research evidence and use it to shape resulting regulatory policies. In doing
so, organizations filter the research used in crafting public policies. The
project will enhance the basic understanding of how groups make arguments aimed
at influencing public policy, and which groups are more likely to use research
to bolster their arguments. The project will provide interest group and
education issue profiles for the use of research in developing regulatory
proposals in education. The study will generate insights that can subsequently
inform strategies used by organizations and citizens hoping to shape regulatory
policy decisions in education and other issues. The project will contribute
significantly to student training in the process of social research at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels by developing skills in working with data,
analysis, presentation, and communication of research. The project is therefore
in line with larger initiatives across university campuses to engage in skills
development. Finally, the project will generate insights for interest groups,
policymakers, and citizens hoping to influence education policy, and general
lessons for impacting regulatory reform proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages theoretical debates addressing how organizations channel
attention to various issues, with a particular focus on how they use research
evidence to channel that attention. Regulatory policy-making in education
represents a flash-point for the importance of organizations, particularly given
their conspicuous absence in two major strands of literature that converge in
education regulations. The first is the study of the rule-making process. This
literature largely focuses on the role of interest groups in shaping regulatory
agendas, ignoring how bureaucracies, like USED, shape both regulatory agendas
and the agendas of other actors. The second strand of literature is in education
policy, where attention is disproportionately focused on legislation and
educational outcomes, all but ignoring regulatory reform as a significant source
of policy change. This project focuses on the institutionalized, structured, and
transparent process of federal rule-making at USED. This process is unique from
nearly all other modes of federal policy-making in that there is a policy
proposal, followed by the opportunity for public commenting, then followed by
the issuance of a revised regulatory policy. This process allows us to assess
the extent to which organizations within USED shape the supply of research
evidence from other actors, and in turn, examine how they incorporate research
evidence into resultant regulatory policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.