* 2225206
* HSI Pilot Project: Improving Online STEM Education for Undergraduate Students at HSIs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Yunfei Hou, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,952.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 pilot project aims to study online
education across several disciplines at California State University, San
Bernardino. Online education provides flexibility and access for students that
may otherwise struggle to engage in a traditional in-person college experience.
At the same time, understanding and strengthening online STEM education can be a
challenge due to the variety of needs and practices across disciplines. The need
to understand effective online education was magnified during the COVID-19
pandemic, which necessitated rapid, whole-institution moves to online courses.
This project will explore online teaching and learning in four disciplines:
biology, computer science and engineering, psychology, and information decision
sciences, and will investigate and compare practices that specifically show
potential to positively impact students in an HSI setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching goal of the project is to focus on how best
to serve a broad and diverse population of online learners. Four areas of online
teaching practice will be investigated: lecture attributes, student practice
strategies, online labs, and testing practices. In addition, the project will
look at key, overlapping issues for students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM, low-income individuals, first-generation college
students, and other groups. A key aim of the project is to understand how issues
such as reduced online access, living conditions, and preference for structure
and sense of community might impact student outcomes in online courses. Project
research will use surveys, focus groups, and data from online classrooms to
analyze practices in each of the four focal disciplines. Dissemination will
focus on sharing both promising and potentially harmful educational practices
(as cautions), as well as specific approaches that show promise to improve
learning in each of the targeted disciplines or areas of online teaching
practice. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by
this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.