* 2225223
* HSI Pilot Project: Experiential Learning STEM Opportunity for Latinos (ELSOL)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jon Juarez, Dona Ana Branch Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 291,659.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Pilot Project aims to improve knowledge
about how to increase participation in STEM careers for minoritized individuals
living in high poverty urban and rural areas seeking to transfer with an
Associates of Science degree to a 4-year university. This goal will be achieved
by using two key methods to promote mathematical and science identities toward
retention in STEM. These methods include: 1) implementing teaching practices in
mathematics courses to improve student self-efficacy and a growth mindset, and
2) engagement through experiential learning in which students will participate
in undergraduate research. The expected outcomes of this work are: 1) to improve
students’ perceptions on their abilities and sense of belonging in mathematics
and science, 2) to improve student retention in STEM programs upon transfer, and
3) to develop a model for implementation of the program at other community
colleges. This project will address the underrepresentation of Hispanics among
STEM workers and the critical shortage of STEM professionals nationwide.
Students participating in this project will gain important knowledge and skills
that will prepare them to transfer successfully to a bachelor’s program. Data
collected through this project will contribute the knowledge on best practices
for students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research suggests that minoritized
individuals living in underserved communities do not easily sustain an identity
in STEM career pathways, thus Dona Ana Community College will implement a
program to enhance STEM education and broaden participation in STEM. The
project’s STEM education research will utilize a mixed methods design to answer
the following question: Does experiential learning opportunities strengthen
student mathematical and science identity and retention in STEM career pathways?
The quantitative survey aspect of the research will ascertain the impact of each
activity on math and science identity. The case study approach will examine
qualitative aspects of the cohort experience that promote identity and
retention. Students will also be tracked to determine the impact of the program
on retention in STEM. The results of the STEM educational research will be
disseminated through regional and national conferences, and through publication
in professional journals. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.