* 2225554
* RECODE: Defining Environmental Design Criteria for Directed Differentiation of Type 1 from Type 2 Lung Alveolar Epithelial Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Daniel Weiss, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Injury to the lungs can have devastating consequences, as exemplified by the
recent COVID19 pandemic. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which
the lung repairs itself remain poorly understood. The objective of this RECODE
project is to utilize novel and sophisticated bioengineering approaches to
better define cell and molecular pathways underlying lung development and
repair. The project focuses on cells involved in the major function of the lung:
gas exchange which provides oxygen to the body. This information will inform the
development of new tunable biomaterials to guide lung cell development. The
research efforts of this RECODE project are integrated with educational and
outreach objectives to promote active learning in biomedical engineering and
biologic sciences undergraduates, to develop outreach programs to encourage and
inspire local high school science, engineering, and mathematical sciences
students by hosting educational workshops poster sessions, and to promote
biomedical engineering research and education towards the general public at each
of the participating sites in Vermont, Colorado, and
Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There remains a critical need for better
understanding of fundamental cellular and molecular mechanisms of lung
development and repair, particularly with respect to the alveolar epithelium, a
fundamental component of gas exchange. Current in vitro model systems, including
organoid cultures, have provided important information but fail to fully
reproduce native tissue structure or relevant environmental influences such as
extracellular matrix (ECM) composition or stiffness. The central vision of this
RECODE project is to devise and validate a robust system for delineating the
mechanisms by which ECM composition and stiffness regulate differentiation of
alveolar type 2 epithelial cells (AT2s) to alveolar type 1 epithelial cells
(AT1s). Utilizing AT2s derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells
(iAT2s), sophisticated tissue engineering approaches incorporating hydrogels
derived from alveolar-enriched regions (aECM) of decellularized human lungs will
be developed to evaluate effects of physiologically relevant ECM composition and
stiffness on AT2 to AT1 directed differentiation. In silico modeling will be
deployed in parallel to direct the empiric studies and to develop a holistic
differentiation control framework. These approaches will be assessed in specific
directed objectives: 1) To determine the specific ECM components regulating
primary vs iAT2 stemness and driving AT1 differentiation; 2) To investigate the
impact of dynamically tunable microenvironmental stiffness on primary vs iAT2
stemness and AT1 differentiation; and 3) To leverage agent-based and statistical
modeling to predict combinatorial effects of composition and stiffness on
primary vs iAT2 to AT1 differentiation. These unique and innovative approaches
involve a multidisciplinary and multi-institutional combination of materials
science, lung regenerative medicine, lung stem cell biology, and in silico
modeling. Further, the paradigms and approaches generated will have broader
impact and applicability to understanding cell-ECM interactions in enabling cell
differentiation in a wider range of organ systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RECODE project is jointly funded by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and Animal Developmental
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.