* 2225818
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: AI-Boosted Precision Medicine through Continual in situ Monitoring of Microtissue Behaviors on Organs-on-Chips
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ming Shao, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 512,105.00

Cancers are among the leading causes of death around the world, with an
estimated annual mortality of close to 10 million. Despite significant efforts
to develop effective cancer diagnosis and therapeutics, the ability to predict
patient responses to anti-cancer therapeutic agents remains elusive. This is a
critical milestone as getting the right choice of therapy early can mean
superior anti-tumor outcomes and increased survival, while the wrong choice
means tumor relapse, development of resistance, side effects without the desired
benefit, and increased cost of treatment. An cyber-physical system that allows
an accurate prediction of patient tumor responses to anti-cancer therapies; that
is, enable real-time precision medicine, can have a transformative effect not
only on health outcomes, but also on the costs of treatment. The goal of this
project is therefore to develop an engineered cyber-physical system that
combines advanced biological models with state-of-the-art artificial
intelligence methods for predictive, automated screening of anti-cancer drugs
and optimizations of their dosing. This will move science towards realizing the
long-desired precision medicine paradigm leading to significant social impacts.
The project has additional social impacts, including minimizing the
exponentially growing ethical issues surrounding the use of animals in the past
years through increased adoption of the engineered human cancer and heart tissue
model systems. The project will provide opportunities to promote STEM education
for K-12 students, train students, especially those from under-represented
groups, and disseminate science and engineering knowledge to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will leverage their expertise in
biofabrication, tissue engineering, microfluidics, bioanalysis, and artificial
intelligence to develop a generalized, self-dose-optimizing "multi-sensor-
integrated multi-organ-on-a-chip" platform, which can be used to accurately
predict both efficacy and safety of anti-cancer regimens in this project. The
first innovation is the adoption of three-dimensional bioprinting for generating
the vascularized ductal carcinoma model and vascularized cardiac tissue model,
leading to the construction of a truly biomimetic human myocardium for
evaluating drug toxicity. The adaptation of both of the bioprinted models to
microfluidic systems is also a major innovation. Additionally, the real-time yet
non-invasive monitoring of key biophysicochemical parameters will generate
large-scale multi-dimensional data to enable accurate data-driven predictive
modeling. Moreover, the platform will enable self-dose-optimization on the chips
through a novel joint Bayes modeling implemented by two deep learning models
capable of addressing multiple-instance learning, and dependency in sequences of
multi-dimensional data, respectively. The project will use a range of
commercially available cells to construct models and pursue the initial platform
development and optimizations. Extensions are anticipated for human specimens in
future iterations and other cancer treatment, drug combination, and dose
optimization in anti-cancer regimens as a rapid and safe testing-
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.