* 2225241
* HSI Planning Project: Shifting perspectives about why women of color are underrepresented in biology: the role of intersectional identities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Leticia Marquez-Magana, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,998.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Planning Project aims to better
understand the reasons women of color majoring in biology at San Francisco State
University (SF State) leave their major. While women are well represented in the
field of biology, women of color remain underrepresented. This
underrepresentation both limits the career advancement of women of color in the
life sciences, and the unrealized benefit to science by inclusion of their
unique perspectives and skills in the biological sciences workforce. This
planning project seeks to identify the barriers and facilitators for women of
color in biology, using critical information gathered in this project. A
smartphone application will be used to capture information about the day-to-day
experiences of women in the biology department at SF State, who are highly
diverse. Detailed information about these experiences will be gained by
conducting informational interviews with a subset of the women of color who
contributed information about their day-to-day experiences via the smartphone
app. This planning project will help to elucidate the complexities encountered
by women of color who hold intersectional identities in biology to develop an
evidence-based interventions to further supports their valuable advancement in
the life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.
This project achieves these overarching goals by generating new knowledge about
the complexities experienced by undergraduate women of color in biology at SF
State, an HSI. These experiences remain largely unidentified and have not been
investigated using asset-based or intersectional lenses. These lenses will be
used to analyze data about the microaffirmations and microaggressions
experienced by undergraduate women of color in biology at SF State collected
through use of the MA2 smartphone application. Responses from 600 participants
will be collected to document quantitative and qualitative results. To validate
the qualitative results, 20 informational interviews will be conducted (i.e.,
respondent validation) to better understand the factors (behaviors, norms,
values, social environment) that facilitate persistence in biology for women of
color. This new knowledge will be used to design an asset-based intervention
that improves persistence of women of color having intersectional identities in
the life sciences. Overall, the funded planning project will provide women of
color with the opportunity to share their experiences in biology from their own
perspective to authentically inform an intervention focused on faculty
development and improved pedagogical practice that is culturally-responsive.
Dissemination of the findings will contribute to efforts at institutions across
the country to enable the persistence women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.