* 2225507
* NSF-AoF:A Bayesian Paradigm for Physics-Informed Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Ulisses Braga Neto, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 11/30/2025
* USD 586,319.00

Machine learning algorithms have proved to be indispensable to modern industry
and society. However, traditional machine learning extracts information from
observational data, while ignoring the tremendous amount of information encoded
into scientific laws of nature. This research concerns physics-informed machine
learning, an emerging area that promises to have a profound and lasting impact
in science and engineering, by coding scientific laws directly into machine
learning algorithms. This dramatically reduces the data size requirement of
these algorithms, and even allows them to extrapolate to domains where there is
no data. This project will develop a Bayesian paradigm for physics-informed
machine learning, which will include new probabilistic methods with quantified
uncertainty, new computation and analysis methods, and new unsupervised
algorithms. The results of this research will benefit applications in petroleum
engineering, aerospace engineering, materials science, and astronomy being
developed by the investigators and their collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a Bayesian paradigm for
physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) and physics-informed Gaussian processes
(PIGPs). The investigators will develop probabilistic solvers for nonlinear
partial differential equations that leverage recent probabilistic solver methods
in combination with PINN and PIGP models to solve physics-informed machine
learning problems. Training dynamic analysis methods for neural networks with
multi-part loss functions will be developed in order to investigate the
performance of Bayesian PINNs. The investigators will study Bayesian model
averaging for PINN ensembles based on traditional multiple initialization,
particle swarms, and variational inference. In addition, new unsupervised
methods to combine PINN and PIGP algorithms will be developed to ameliorate the
issue of propagating information throughout the physical domain, which is a
common failure mode of physics-informed machine learning algorithms. This work
will result in Bayesian physics-informed machine learning tools for problems in
oil reservoir simulation, computational fluid dynamics, phase-field modeling in
microstructure informatics, and radiative transfer in supernova atmospheres,
among other multidisciplinary research projects conducted by the investigators
and their collaborators at the recently-established Scientific Machine Learning
Laboratory of the Texas A&amp;M Institute of Data Science
(TAMIDS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.