* 2225022
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design US-Sao Paulo: Land use change, ecosystem resilience and zoonotic spillover risk
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Florencia Sangermano, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2025
* USD 236,162.00

Habitat loss affects plant and animal abundance, composition, and ecology. These
changes affect how species interact, leading to changes in ecological function
and services, including the transmission of pathogens from animals to humans
(called zoonotic spillover). The Brazilian Atlantic Forest is rich in
biodiversity, including diverse populations of rodents also considered
reservoirs for pathogens. Because of this, the area is a potential hotspot for
future emerging infectious diseases. The Atlantic Forest has a dynamic forest
cover with thousands of hectares experiencing deforestation and restoration
yearly. These dynamics make the area ideal for studying the effects of landscape
changes on small mammal communities and their impact on the transmission of
pathogens to humans. The research aims to understand how the reorganization of
biodiversity due to landscape changes affects human health. This research will
increase knowledge on the interactions between landscape change, biodiversity
loss, functional diversity change, and spillover risk. In addition, it will
provide information to delineate policies and guidelines to maintain and create
landscapes, which can conserve biodiversity and deliver health-provisioning
ecosystem services. Results will be communicated to stakeholders, including
NGOs, governments, researchers, and local communities. In addition, awareness
talks will inform communities about the relationship between land change and
infectious diseases to decrease spillover risk and prevent future pandemics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zoonotic diseases are characterized by complex
interactions between multiple species and their environment. Because of this,
they are expected to be affected by landscape characteristics. The research has
two objectives: 1) To understand how habitat loss and landscape structure affect
functional diversity, viral diversity, network composition, and zoonotic
spillover risk; and 2) To understand how forest restoration can reinstate
functional diversity, ecosystem resilience, and the provision of disease
regulation services. For the first objective, the researchers will use secondary
data to establish rodent-pathogen (viral diversity) networks to understand how
forest cover and landscape structure affect spillover risk. Results will be
extrapolated to the entire Atlantic Forest, creating a spillover risk map that
will help policymakers and stakeholders to create policies and guidelines.
Objective 2 will be based on primary data collection. The researchers will
evaluate the effect of forest restoration on the recovery of small mammal
species richness, the recovery of functional diversity, the reestablishment of
interaction network composition (small mammals and pathogen networks), and the
reduction of spillover risk. Finally, the influence of landscape structure and
the restoration age on the recovery of the disease regulation services will be
assessed. This research will advance the knowledge on disease ecology by
developing tools for predicting the effects of land-use change, including forest
restoration, on complex networks and zoonotic spillover risk. Knowledge of the
effects of land-use change on spillover risk is essential, as zoonotic diseases
have complex transmission cycles involving agents that respond differently to
landscape changes. Understanding how restoration affects viral diversity and
zoonotic risk is critical to developing win-win strategies to ensure healthy
landscapes for humans and animals and to avoid new epidemics and
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.