* 2225624
* RECODE: Spatial engineering of morphogens for the reproducible formation of cortical organoids with arealization
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Momoko Watanabe, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

The human brain is comprised of different regions, including primary, sensory,
and motor cortices. These areas are affected in many neurological disorders. It
is crucial to reproducibly create brain areas in organoids to better understand
early development. This project aims to develop hydrogel-based bioengineering
technologies to accurately make different areas of the cerebral cortex in
cortical organoids. To accomplish these goals, a multidisciplinary team will
leverage expertise in cell and developmental biology, soft materials
engineering, and bioinformatics. The broader societal impacts of this project
include educational and outreach activities that engage the public and students
from underserved communities in partnership with the UCI Stem Cell Research
Center, UCI Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, UCI Office of
Access and Inclusion, and OC STEM Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct
access to human tissue is indispensable for deep understanding of the mechanisms
underlying human brain development and disease. Therefore, cortical organoids
that closely mimic many aspects of the fetal cortex have emerged as accessible
and promising in vitro tools. However, cortical organoids currently lack
arealization – the reproducible cellular diversity and distinct spatial
organization within the neocortex. To achieve arealization in cortical
organoids, a novel responsive hydrogel platform will be developed that can
generate spatial patterning of morphogen sources. This platform will be
leveraged for examining gene regulatory networks underlying signaling
interactions for specifying different areas, using single-cell and spatial
transcriptomics. The approaches and insights developed in this project can be
applied towards understanding morphogenesis and generating reproducible
organoids in other systems beyond cortical organoids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RECODE project is funded by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.