* 2225888
* Stereoscopic Insight into Dilute Superconductivity of Perovskite Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Patrick Irvin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2025
* USD 509,500.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physical mechanism
that gives rise to the phenomenon of superconductivity in some materials remains
challenging, even decades after the first successful theory of superconductivity
was developed by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer. Some semiconducting materials
manage to become superconducting when doped with very few electrons,
contradicting conventional theory. One such material, strontium titanate, a
perovskite oxide, was shown to be a superconductor in 1964. More recently,
superconductivity was discovered in a similar compound, potassium tantalate,
whose properties are similar, but not identical, to strontium titanate. This
research program compares the properties of nanometer-scale devices fabricated
from potassium tantalate with devices made from strontium titanate as a way to
understand the fundamental behavior, including the origin of superconductivity,
of both systems. These devices are created using two complementary approaches:
(1) conductive atomic force microscope lithography, and (2) ultra-low-voltage
electron-beam lithography. Both techniques are capable of creating nanometer-
scale devices whose properties reveal fundamental aspects of these materials and
why they behave the way they do. The resulting insights are important for
developing novel quantum technologies that make use of the remarkable properties
of these materials. The project provides scientific research opportunities
available to students at all levels, especially to traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM. Research opportunities will specifically be
provided to students who are in their first or second year in college in the
hope that some will continue throughout their undergraduate career and beyond.
One of the most challenging aspects of scientific mentorship, especially to
underrepresented groups, is how to instill a “growth” mindset. A “mindset
intervention” method recently implemented in an upper-level course in
introductory quantum mechanics will be adapted to undergraduate and PhD students
working in a research environment. Its efficacy for instilling a growth mindset
will be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
research project investigates the microscopic origin of superconductivity in
potassium tantalate (KTO). Nanoscale devices are created with KTO(110) and
KTO(111) using techniques previously developed by the PI to control conductivity
and superconductivity in strontium titantate (STO)-based heterostructures. The
project directly addresses important questions such as: Why do KTO(111) and
KTO(110) heterostructures exhibit superconductivity while KTO(100) does not? Is
KTO superconductivity associated with a near-surface structural phase
transition? Does KTO exhibit signatures of electron pairing outside of the
superconducting regime (like STO)? What is the role of spin-orbit coupling? The
“stereoscopic” insight provided by this research program focused on KTO, when
combined with an existing base of recent knowledge about STO, will help to
pinpoint which shared properties of KTO and STO conspire to produce
superconducting behavior at exceptionally low densities. A deeper understanding
of a, presumably, shared mechanism may lead to higher-temperature analogues, or
simply help provide a deeper understanding of a family of materials that may one
day be exploited for future quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.