* 2225645
* Collaborative Research: Ferrimagnetic Insulator Based Bilayers for Interface-Driven Topological Spin Textures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xiaoqin Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 318,712.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data is everywhere. It is
generated at an accelerating pace by the devices we carry with us, embedded
electronics in our homes and cars, and increasingly powerful computers and
servers. This requires an enormous amount of energy for data creation, storage,
and transmission. Innovations in data storage and processing are needed, and
conventional electronics based on semiconductors are not equal to the task.
Spintronics combines electronics with spin, an intrinsic property of elementary
particles. The goal of this project is to develop a new material platform for
spintronics, allowing new types of devices for energy-efficient memory and
computing. Investigators will focus on heterostructures consisting of ultrathin
magnetic films with an adjacent metallic layer. Investigators will grow high-
quality bilayer films, characterize interactions at the atomically sharp
interfaces, and optimize their properties for use in applications. This
fundamental research could lead to portable, nonvolatile memory devices that are
smaller in size, higher in density, and more energy efficient than those
currently available. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to work
in the critical science and technology fields to support an innovation-driven
economy. The PIs will jointly teach a course on spintronics as well as expand a
course on “Being Human in Physics” to both of their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic skyrmions are a promising candidate
for future ultrahigh-density, high energy efficiency magnetic memory devices.
They exhibit robust topological stability, have nanoscale sizes, and a low
electrical current is required to write, erase, and transport them. In order for
skyrmion-based next-generation magnetic memory technology to become a reality,
the fundamental interactions at the interfaces of magnetic bilayers need to be
thoroughly understood, including exchange coupling, Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction, and magnetic anisotropy. These interactions need to be judiciously
tuned to host nanometer-sized skyrmions at room temperature. To achieve this
goal, the PIs pursue a collaborative research project on ultrathin magnetic
garnet-based bilayers as energy-efficient spintronic materials. The team
integrates epitaxial film growth with advanced spectroscopy methods and aims to
achieve the following goals: (i) establishing the structure-property correlation
via a rapid feedback loop of growth and spectroscopy characterization; (ii)
optimizing bilayers for skyrmions with desirable characteristics and chiral
domain wall motions with record-breaking velocity; and (iii) exploring a new
class of bilayers consisting of an epitaxial ferrimagnetic insulator film and a
van der Waals overlayer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.