* 2225341
* EAGER: Leveraging Smart Meter Data for Enhanced Situational Awareness of Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 220,000.00

Electric power distribution systems are becoming active due to integration of
consumer owned rooftop solar generation, electric vehicles, energy storage, and
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI). The goal of the proposed research is to
investigate fundamental approaches to effectively integrate AMI data to increase
situational awareness of distribution systems for more effective operation.
Further, the research will focus on integrating machine learning models to learn
from historical data for increasing modelling accuracy and uncertainty
quantification. The research will result in fundamental advancement in data-
based operation of power distribution systems by demonstrating the value of AMI
and other smart meter data for efficient operation of the distribution system.
In addition to accelerating the adoption of data-driven grid management
strategies, the proposed work can serve as a practical guide for utilities to
leverage AMI data for situational awareness. The utilities will be able operate
the system more efficiently which in turn will lead to economic benefits for the
utilities and the consumer. The project will support and train a doctoral
student on data-based approaches for operation of power distribution systems.
The results will be disseminated through conference and journal publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate innovative approaches for
optimal polling of smart meter to obtain a holistic picture of the low-voltage
distribution system, reconciling multi-time scale heterogenous meter data to
empower novel sparsity-based state estimation strategies, and systematic
integration of historical data and real time measurements via a machine learning
framework that includes uncertainty quantification. The proposed data-driven
approach that leverages real time measurements from a limited subset of smart
meters represents a significant paradigm shift in current operational practices.
It will also lead to new pathways for future research on utilizing the AMI data
to enhance reliability, resiliency, and efficiency of power distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.