* 2225608
* Conference: The Seattle Snowmass Summer Study 2022
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Shih-Chieh Hsu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This is a conference proposal to help participants attend the Snowmass Community
Study meetings 17-26 July in Seattle. The participants will be mainly from early
career members and students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Snowmass Community Study
is a field wide effort. Attendance at the final summer meeting&lt;br/&gt;will be
important for building consensus in the community. Each frontier will be
discussing the major challenges it faces and its vision for the next decade.
Early career members of the community have traditionally been underrepresented
in the Snowmass conversation, despite being the most likely to be part of the
community in the coming decades. The funds requested in this proposal will make
it easier for younger members of the community to be a part of this
conversation.&lt;br/&gt;The Particle Physics Community Planning Exercise (a.k.a.
“Snowmass”). Snowmass is a scientific study. It provides&lt;br/&gt;an
opportunity for the entire particle physics community to come together to
identify and document a&lt;br/&gt;scientific vision for the future of particle
physics in the U.S. Snowmass will define the most important&lt;br/&gt;questions
for the field of particle physics and identify promising opportunities to
address them.&lt;br/&gt;The Snowmass Community Study has 10 frontiers addressing
different aspects of the field. They&lt;br/&gt;are: Energy Frontier, Neutrino
Physics Frontier, Rare Processes and Precision Measurements
Frontier,&lt;br/&gt;Cosmic Frontier, Theory Frontier, Accelerator Frontier,
Instrumentation Frontier, Computational&lt;br/&gt;Frontier, Underground
Facilities, Community Engagement, and the Snowmass Early Career
Scientists.&lt;br/&gt;At the summer study the frontiers will agree on their
final, individual, reports. The frontiers conveners,&lt;br/&gt;along with the US
High Energy Physics community, will draft a final summary document that
presents&lt;br/&gt;the big questions facing the field and science of particle
physics along with research paths forward.&lt;br/&gt;The Snowmass Report will
provide input to the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel. The
Particle&lt;br/&gt;Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5), a sub-panel of
HEPAP, will produce a strategic report for&lt;br/&gt;the field later in
2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help fund participation of
underrepresented groups by selecting:&lt;br/&gt;• Early Career members who do
not have other funding for the conference.&lt;br/&gt;• Applicants who are
actively involved in the Snowmass process&lt;br/&gt;• Applicants who are
presenting at the conference (talk or poster)&lt;br/&gt;• Members of
underrepresented groups (women and underrepresented minorities)&lt;br/&gt;This
broader participation will help shape the future of High Energy
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.