* 2225488
* Collaborative Research: RECODE: Microfluidic and genetic technologies to direct and select retinal cell types from human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived retinal organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Budd Tucker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2026
* USD 541,665.00

The differentiation of cells is the result of a complicated set of processes.
Most stem cell differentiation methods result in a mixture of desired and
undesired cell types. Better understanding of key molecular control points of
differentiation could decrease the generation of undesirable cells. That in turn
could increase the effectiveness of cell-based therapies. Genetic and mechanical
techniques will be employed to better understand the differentiation pathway
resulting in retinal cells. The hope is that this will lead to new treatments
for degenerative eye diseases. Biomanufacturing workforce development will also
be supported in several ways. Graduate students will be trained in stem cell
biology and bioengineering, undergraduate students will be provided research
opportunities, and outreach to industry will be accomplished through the Center
for Cell Manufacturing Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling human
induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) differentiation is a challenge. Cell
molecular pathways are programmed to react to external cues. Most protocols
depend to a great degree on spontaneous cell fate commitment. This often results
in a heterogeneous mixture of tissue specific cell types, many of which are not
needed, or detrimental, for regenerative cell replacement strategies. Applying
microfluidic cell separation and geno-mechanical techniques will be evaluated
for their ability to reliably direct differentiation of hiPSCs to retinal cells.
The first objective is to develop genome-wide methods that use both cell
differentiation and biomechanical properties as screens to target desired
endpoints during retinal cell differentiation. This objective could uncover new
target pathways that can be exploited during culture to regulate retinogenesis.
The second objective is to use systems biology to identify master regulators of
retinal cell differentiation These regulators will be validated by observing the
effects of modulation of these pathways on differentiated retinal subtypes. A
third objective is to use cell separation approaches coupled with novel markers
to enhance the production of the proper proportion of rods to
cones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project is funded by the Engineering
Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.