* 2225617
* NSF-AoF: Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: 6G Wireless Communications via Enhanced Channel Modeling and Estimation, Channel Morphing and Machine Learning for mmWave Bands
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The project addresses challenges of next generation 6G wireless communication
systems. For these systems, millimeter-wave (mmWave) and terahertz (THz)
frequency bands that support wide bandwidth transmissions will play an important
role in providing the advanced services envisioned of next generation systems.
Due to the small wavelength, a key enabling technology for reliable and high
data rate communication is the deployment of massive Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO) systems which consist of a very large number of antennas for
transmission and reception. This allows for dense spatial sampling and use of
spatial degrees of freedom for effective communication system design. However,
the small form factor makes traditional radio-frequency (RF) circuitry design
impractical due to circuit complexity, increased cost, and power consumption.
These constraints lead to nonlinearities that call for developing nontraditional
processing algorithms for which recently developed machine learning networks are
suitable. Another challenge is the wireless channel which at these higher
frequencies has significant path loss and varies in nature across different
frequencies in the bands. To deal with the higher path loss there is a need for
finding ways to enhance the quality of the channel, to which this project
applies advanced channel morphing methods. The theoretical ideas resulting from
the work will be supported with appropriate experimental work to lead to
practically viable systems. The project will lead to state-of-the-art wireless
communication systems that should help with maintaining leadership in wireless
technology as well to train the next generation of researchers in this area of
strategic importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop next generation mmWave and
THz based massive multiple input multiple-output (MIMO) wireless communication
systems using machine learning (ML) algorithms, this project has four major
components. One is ML-based sparse channel modeling in severely constrained
environments, i.e., limited sensing, limited number of measurements, limited
precision, and system imperfections. This work combines domain knowledge with
data driven techniques to deal with the nonlinearities and imperfections in the
system. A second component is novel channel modeling using block-sparse
techniques and development of associated model-based and ML-based inference
algorithms. Block channel structure is not analytically tractable in two
dimensions and calls for ML techniques to learn from data. A third component is
incorporation of reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RISs) for channel morphing
to improve channel quality. A final component of this project is experimental
work, channel sounding and ray tracing, to support, validate, and refine the
theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.