* 2225270
* GEM: Numerical Modeling of Ultra-Low-Frequency (ULF) Waves and the Production of Geomagntically Induced Currents
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Yan Song, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 11/30/2025
* USD 478,013.00

The magnetic field of the Earth is not static and is constantly fluctuating.
Magnetic field lines can, in some sense, be thought of like strings on a musical
instrument, like a guitar or harp. Just like the strings of a harp, these field
lines are of different lengths and have different densities, so each field line
fluctuates at its own frequency. In addition, the region around the Earth can
also act as one of a set of kettle drums that also have their own frequency.
These fluctuations give rise to electrical currents that flow through space and
can often flow on and beneath the surface of the Earth. These currents can have
important effects, such as disruptions in the power grid and corrosion of oil
and gas pipelines. A computer model was developed to describe the currents
flowing in space and their effect on ground currents. The proposed work will
further improve this model by including more realistic conditions based on
statistical models and satellite measurements of the density of particles in
space. &lt;br/&gt;This work will also support a graduate student who will learn
more about computer simulation as well as the
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-low-frequency (ULF) waves play a major role
in the transport of energy in the near-Earth regions of the magnetosphere. The
primary goal of the proposed research is to extend our models of these waves and
to apply these models to better understand the structure of ULF waves in a more
realistic magnetosphere and to relate observations in space and on the ground,
particularly regarding the excitation of geomagnetically induced currents
(GICs). In previous work, the proposers have developed a three-dimensional
numerical model in dipole geometry to describe the propagation of ULF waves in
the inner magnetosphere. They have also developed a similar code in spherical
geometry that covers all latitudes. &lt;br/&gt;A major task will be to integrate
the dipole code and the spherical code. The proposers will base the underlying
density structure in the inner magnetosphere on empirical models of the
ionosphere and plasmasphere. The model results will be compared with data from
the Van Allen Probes and other platforms in space, as well as with observations
from ground magnetometers. This project will investigate the response of the
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling system to external perturbations, such as the
interaction of the magnetosphere with interplanetary shocks with the
perturbations induced during substorms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposers will
also investigate the excitation of geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) on
the ground by extending the model from the ionosphere through to the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.