* 2225201
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project Voces (Voices for Organizing Change in Educational Systems)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Yesim Darici, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2027
* USD 990,952.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 project aims to transform university
practices by integrating student-generated strategies and actions into faculty
professional development and university operations, thus, improving student
learning and graduation success across all STEM disciplines. Students at HSIs
bring a wealth of experiences and come through numerous educational pathways.
However, the richness of their experiences is generally an underutilized
resource and not integrated into institutional decisions. This project will
utilize students' experiences to sustainably improve Florida International
University's (FIU) student success through the establishment of a STEM Voceros
program, creation of faculty professional development with students as partners,
and institution practices and policies that integrate students' perspectives.
The expected outcomes of this work include new student-led educational
improvement models that can be adapted and implemented at HSIs across the nation
and have the potential to transform educational systems to better serve
students' needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project include
creating a resilient institutional change movement that advances STEM
opportunities for FIU's historically underrepresented student body. Central to
the project is the establishment of the STEM Voceros program that will develop
and deploy undergraduates across all STEM disciplines to improve instructional
practice and policies systemically at the institution. STEM Voceros (literally,
the one that speaks on behalf of others) will be students engaged in faculty
professional development, through multiple organized workshops as well as
deployed in STEM classrooms, co-facilitating and co-designing evidence-based
curriculum that engages our highly diverse student body and leads to improved
faculty practice and student outcomes. Voceros will be engaged in the project’s
research enterprise to examine institution-level outcomes as well as bring their
student-focused perspective to guide the research. The Voceros’ instructional
and research roles will intentionally prepare them for STEM policy engagement,
their third major role. They will 1) conduct STEM degree program reviews across
STEM departments to promote student needs in program design, 2) establish a
Student ComPASS, a yearly accountability review to promote the educational
outcomes of all students, and 3) establish a student steering committee to guide
the Voces project. This multi-layered design will integrate our diverse STEM
students’ voice and experiences throughout the instructional practices, research
mission and institutional policies and practices. Faculty and university
leadership will become reliant on student voice and create the opportunity to
re-envision the decision-making norms and thereby establish sustained systemic
change at FIU. Voces will generate new knowledge on the effectiveness of
student-led institutional change models, as well as increase our understanding
of its impact on students' agency, faculty practices, and institutional
structures and processes at an HSI. The strategies and outcomes will be
disseminated locally to partner institutions as well as nationally through
established networks and professional meetings. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.