* 2225626
* EAGER: Causal Theory of Residential Electricity Consumption and Production: Unveiling Full Scale Demand Side Flexibility
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mojdeh Hedman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 197,828.00

This NSF project aims to enhance residents’ interactions with smart energy
systems and empower all to benefit from new opportunities of smart electric
grids. Distributed energy resources, e.g., rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV)
systems and flexible demand-side assets, such as smart thermostats, provide new
opportunities for residents. Unlike conventional power system resources, many
emerging smart energy technologies are located at the residents’ premises and
their level of participation depends on many human-related factors. This NSF
project proposes novel strategies to discover and account for critical
underlying human-in-the-loop factors of distributed energy resources. The
project will bring transformative change by enabling socially-aware design and
operation of smart grid resources, which provides a wide range of financial and
energy resilience benefits to residents. Understanding causality of resident
behavior towards smart energy systems enables more effective design of customer
programs for electric utilities, enhances retail electricity market design, and
empowers more effective utilization of all distributed energy resources. This
knowledge will be achieved by causal learning and analysis of consumer
participation in smart grid operations. The intellectual merits of the project
include design of innovative approaches to enable capturing critical components
of residents’ behavior towards energy resources and their participation in
energy system balancing. The broader impacts of the project include enabling
effective utilization of all grid edge resources. By taking a holistic approach,
which explicitly considers the interplay of social, behavioral, technological,
and engineering aspects, the outcomes of this research will span multiple
academic disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of socially-aware and
behavior-aware smart grid solutions is the critical step to achieve dependable
and widespread participation of diverse residents in smart grid practices
leading to maximum utilization of distributed energy resources. The proposed
project will pursue innovative methods based on artificial intelligence
algorithms for causal analysis of residents’ behavior towards emerging smart
energy systems. The complex nature of human interactions with energy relies on
many factors and understanding behavior causality is a core and unsolved
challenge. This project makes meaningful inroads towards establishing the next
generation of power systems operational strategies by enabling better
utilization of all resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.