* 2225260
* Hilton Head Solid State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Workshop, June 5-9, 2022
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Reza Ghodssi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund travel for students and post-
doctoral fellows who are US citizens to attend the Solid-State Sensors,
Actuators and Microsystems Workshop, to be held over five days in Hilton Head
Island, South Carolina from June 5 to June 9, 2022. This is the 20th in the
series of Hilton Head Workshops on the science and technology of solid-state
sensors, actuators, and microsystems. It is an exciting multidisciplinary event
that has occurred biennially since 1984 with a rich history going back to the
establishment of the field of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS). The main
theme of the workshop is Grand Challenges in Engineering and how microsystems
technologies in combination with other technologies can address these
challenges. Topics such as industrial short courses, MEMS and Sensors Industry
Group (MSIG) special session, and early faculty development will also be
addressed in special sessions within the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
travel awards enabled by this NSF grant provide travel assistance to US citizen
students and post-doctoral associates of various groups including those
underrepresented in science and engineering. The PIs will select travel award
winners from the list of accepted papers paying close attention to diversity and
inclusion including outreach to microsystems faculty in HBCUs, HSIs and 4-year
Undergraduate in Engineering programs. The Workshop will benefit students with
interest in academic and industrial careers as well as active faculty members.
It is important to provide an inclusive climate for the participants and to help
expand their network of professional contacts to ensure their future success.
The hope is that they will return to their institutions inspired by their
interactions and the technical content they witness at the workshop under the
guidance of workshop leaders. The impact to the profession is recruitment and
retention of well-informed personnel that feel supported and empowered. The
website developed for the workshop will provide information about its activities
and the organizing committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.