* 2225149
* Investigating Family Science Habitus and Science Capital to Support the Language of Possibility Around Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Julianne Wenner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,579.00

Families are children’s first teachers and significantly influence children’s
interest, engagement, and aspirations (IEA) in science. Family attitudes,
conversations about science, expectations for their children, and family
science/STEM career role models can be influential, particularly for people who
identify with populations that are underrepresented in science. However, what
families from these populations provide in terms of support for IEA in science
is often framed as inadequate or deficient. This may not present an accurate
picture of family interactions, nor does it consider overlooked or undervalued
assets available to these families that can be leveraged to support IEA in
science. Consequently, it becomes imperative to expand notions of what family
science supports look like so that a wider segment of the U.S. may see
experiencing the joy and wonder of science as possible for them. Broadening the
lens of what actions and behaviors are recognized as what ‘counts’ as supporting
science in the home may encourage those who typically feel excluded from science
to see that what they already possess (skills, knowledge, dispositions), and who
they are, is not only valued in science but needed to move forward as a society
to advance scientific discoveries, foster science literacy, and promote careers
in scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
develop a validated instrument for families that captures and measures broader
and more inclusive notions of family science habitus (tacit ideas of “what we
do” and “who we are” as a family in terms of science that becomes a child’s
‘language of possibility’ in science) and science capital (science-related
resources that a person might have). There is currently no validated instrument
that asks families themselves about their family science habitus and science
capital; the creation of this instrument endeavors to enable familial voices to
be heard and valued. A secondary goal of this project is for the PI to build
capacity in quantitative research, learn more about families from
underrepresented populations in science, and forge connections for future
research with local communities and experts. This project and mentoring
experience aim to position the PI to conduct needed research that pinpoints
strengths and assets in families that can be built upon to provide more
opportunities and supports. The outcomes of this project hold potential to
change what stakeholders believe about families and science as well as how to
truly engage with families as partners in science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.