* 2225240
* Building Capacity for Equitable Research on STEM Learning Processes using Quantitative Ethnography
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,995.00

The goal of the Quantitative Ethnography Institute is to increase the capacity
of STEM education researchers to conduct quantitative ethnography (QE) to
address fundamental questions in STEM education. A key challenge in STEM
education research is using large amounts of rich qualitative data to develop
models of student learning that accurately represent diverse learning processes
and can be implemented at scale. QE helps mitigate this challenge by unifying
quantitative and qualitative techniques, enabling researchers to produce models
of large-scale qualitative data that are (1) fair and actionable for diverse
learners, educators, and policy leaders and (2) statistically valid and
generalizable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quantitative Ethnography Institute will
recruit three cohorts of 30 participants, the majority of whom will be
underrepresented early-career researchers, to engage in a 4-part series of
training and mentoring activities identified as the Accelerator, the Incubator,
the Booster, and the Multiplier. The Accelerator is the initial 4-day in-person
workshop focused on the fundamentals of QE theory, methods, and techniques. The
Incubator, which occurs approximately 3 months after the Accelerator, is a 1-day
online workshop which gives participants the opportunity to present their QE
research-in progress and receive feedback from peers and mentors. The Booster,
which occurs approximately 3 months after the Incubator, is a 2-day online
focused on techniques for writing successful QE conference papers, journal
articles, and grant proposals. The Multiplier, which occurs approximately 3
months after the Booster, is a 2-day online workshop which teaches participants
how to run their own QE and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by NSF’s EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.