* 2225179
* SBE-UKRI: Understanding imprecise space and time in narratives through qualitative representations, reasoning, and visualisation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Zephyr Frank, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 11/30/2025
* USD 496,525.00

This project explores how Geographical Information Systems and related tools can
identify, analyze and visualize qualitative senses of place alongside the
quantitative spatial information that typify these systems. The project develops
concepts and tools that enhance the ways that people integrate and interpret
geographical data, including locations and associated sentiments, in large
textual collections. The researchers examine places that are described in
archival texts, including poetry and oral histories, and subsequently construct
spatial representations of these textual geographies in the form of maps and
visualizations. These goals are achieved by developing approaches to textual
sources that allow imprecise and ambiguous spatial information to be used
effectively by geospatial technologies that were initially designed for
precisely measured spatial data. The project includes a team of historians, data
scientists, and cartographers in collaboration with partner teams at research
institutions in the United Kingdom. Additionally, the project supports graduate
students and junior researchers as well as offering its results and tools to the
wider scholarly community and heritage partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon two case studies comprising extensive textual corpora: a)
poetic depictions of landscapes in the Lake District of England, an expressive
and often metaphorical language of place; and b) survivor testimonies from the
US Holocaust Museum, describing place and movement under extreme conditions and
disorientation. These case studies allow the researchers to develop concepts and
tools for complex and varied textual materials while enhancing the applications
of the techniques with stakeholders working on cultural heritage projects. The
approach is founded on the application of natural language processing and
qualitative spatial and temporal reasoning to extract, locate, and contextualize
imprecise information about places, which can subsequently be explored with
advanced visual analytics and representation to test and communicate results.
The project aims to show how these techniques can reveal not only where a place
or event is located but also what it might feel like to be there and what it
meant to particular historical actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
awarded under the SBE-UKRI Lead Agency Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.