* 2225091
* Support for U.S. Doctoral Students to Participate in the Annual Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) and co-located Educational Data Mining (EDM) Conferences
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The United States has historically been the global leader in the field of
artificial intelligence in education (AIED), or ways to use computerized
artificial intelligence to enhance teaching and learning in contexts ranging
from children learning math in school, to soldiers learning highly technical
jobs in the US military. The preeminent conference in this field is the AIED
conference; at this conference the latest research is presented and
practitioners learn the state of the art techniques that allow creation of these
important educational technologies. A related conference that is equally
significant is the Educational Data Mining (EDM) conference, which focuses on
research on big data and analytics for education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal would provide partial travel support for 10 Ph.D. students from the
United States, selected through a competitive process, to attend the AIED
conference and/or EDM conference, present their work, and receive additional
mentoring outside of their dissertation committees as part of a doctoral
consortium. The intellectual merit of the work rests on the studies the graduate
students submit to be considered for participation in the early career track of
the conference; this work is then enhanced by guidance from world-class mentors
who meet with the students in a structured format to improve their research. The
broader impact includes the career impact on the twenty selected students,
especially since promising graduate students whose advisors may not have funding
to send them to the conference can still be included, and their work can be
showcased and improved. Possible long-term broader impacts include building the
field of artificial intelligence in education and data analytics researchers and
thus eventually, improving the quality of education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.