* 2225649
* I-Corps: Customer discovery for breast cancer detection technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Andre Khalil, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software to create and recommend personalized breast screening
plans, using only the patient’s first (baseline) mammogram. This individualized
care could result in limiting the patient’s exposure to radiation or could
provide the patient with access to supplemental screening. Improving the
screening process for women at a young age offers the chance of a better
prognosis. In addition, early detection could allow for novel treatment options
to target cancer-prone breast tissue, potentially leading to the prevention of
the disease. The software would be comparable and complementary to genetic
testing for breast cancer risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a proposed computer-aided detection software and its
potential to discriminate between healthy, organized, dense mammographic breast
tissue versus unhealthy, disorganized, dense breast tissue often associated with
the onset of a tumor. The subtle differences between healthy and unhealthy
tissue are challenging to identify visually. This technology discriminates
between healthy and unhealthy tissue to identify the sub-regions of mammographic
breast tissue that are particularly “risky”. The technology may explain the
effect breast density has on someone's increased risk for breast cancer.
Computer-aided breast cancer detection software has been used for over two
decades without signficant clinical improvement. The existing computer-aided
detection programs have been criticized by medical professionals for producing
high numbers of false positives, resulting in unnecessary biopsies and increased
evaluation times. The proposed technology may solve these problems, offering a
less stressful option to patients and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.