* 2225920
* Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Eduardo Fradkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2027
* USD 194,919.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education aimed at understanding condensed matter systems involving many
strongly interacting electrons whose behavior is governed by strong effects of
quantum mechanics. Advances in understanding could lead to the prediction of new
states of matter with novel properties as well as new materials with potentially
useful applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular state of strongly
interacting electrons is the “pair-density wave superconductor”, which is a
quantum mechanical and superconducting analogue of molecules found in liquid
crystal displays. It shares properties of both a solid and a liquid. The PI will
further investigate whether such phases can explain the peculiar properties of
materials known as high temperature superconductors. At sufficiently low
temperatures, electrons in superconductors enter a cooperative quantum
mechanical state that enables them to conduct electricity without any
resistance. High temperature superconductors are interesting because they
exhibit superconductivity at much higher temperatures than many other known
classes of superconductors. The proposed pair-density wave state of matter may
help explain how this is possible and how materials that exhibit
superconductivity at room temperatures might be discovered. This could lead to
virtually lossless transmission of electric power and other energy-related
applications. The other focus of the research concerns understanding experiments
seeking new states of matter. Of particular interest are those called
topological states which are predicted to have unusual properties that would
enable computation based on the laws of quantum mechanics. Such a computer could
solve certain problems much faster than any currently existing
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research engages cutting edge problems in the
physics of materials and provides opportunities to train the next generation of
theoretical scientists at an exciting frontier. Research and education will be
further integrated through the development of advanced curricular materials.
Advances from the prediction and discovery of new states of electronic matter
open new possibilities for future technologies related to advanced solid-state
materials for electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project provides support for research into the theory of
condensed matter and associated education. The objective is to understand
condensed-matter systems involving many strongly coupled degrees of freedom
whose behavior is governed by strong effects of quantum mechanics. The electrons
in such strongly correlated systems organize spontaneously in electronic liquid
crystal phases and topological phases. An unavoidable feature of these phases is
that they naturally describe intertwined orders. They are closely related to
mechanisms of high temperature superconductivity, a fundamental problem in
physics which already has had a strong impact in technology. Topological phases
are quantum fluid states of matter that do not have an order parameter, and
therefore do not break any symmetry, but possess a kind of hidden quantum order
in which the ground state degeneracy is determined by the topology of the space
in which they exist. The quantum states of a topological fluid are strongly
entangled, a property that can be used to devise a topological quantum computer,
a frontier problem in physics and mathematics having great potential impact on
technology. Related topics that will be investigated include the relation
between electronic liquid crystal phases and high temperature superconductivity,
quantum coherence and interference phenomena in quantum Hall systems, quantum
entanglement and topological quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
use the methods and ideas of quantum field theory, because they are natural
approaches to attack problems involving the statistical and quantum physics of
strongly interacting systems. Such an approach enables the project to exploit
the continuing and mutually enriching cross-fertilization of ideas between
condensed matter systems, high energy physics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.