* 2225215
* CMMI-EPSRC: Quantitative Characterization of Mission Critical Microstructures of Engineering Metals with Diffusive Ultrasound
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Christopher Kube, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 592,223.00

This award is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering - UKRI
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead Agency (ENG-EPSRC)
Opportunity, a collaborative solicitation between NSF and the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) of United Kingdom Research and
Innovation (UKRI). It will fund research that enables reliable assurance of
safety-critical metal components, for example those used in the aerospace and
nuclear power industries, thereby promoting the progress of science, and
advancing the national prosperity and welfare. Thermomechanical processes that
occur during manufacturing of metal parts result in grain microstructures that
dictate strength, fatigue life, and creep and corrosion resistance. It is
essential that these microstructures be carefully controlled during production
and non-destructively characterized once a component is finished. Although
ultrasound technology is the only practical means to access internal material
properties, it has seen very limited industrial usage, as accurate
interpretation of ultrasonic signals in terms of such microstructure remains an
unsolved problem. Alternative techniques that rely on destructive testing of
sacrificial samples after elaborate preparation are recognized as inadequate, as
evidenced for example by failures of aircraft engines. This project will
overcome these shortcomings by advancing a new method of interpreting ultrasonic
wave scattering due to microstructural texture and inhomogeneities, potentially
revolutionizing the use of non-destructive, contactless, ultrasonic
characterization throughout production and in service, at elevated temperatures
and on complex shapes. This capability will support the growth of new advanced
manufacturing processes, whose vital need of quality control and assurance on
complex geometries is currently only partially met. Collaboration with Dr. Bo
Lan of Imperial College London will provide opportunities for international
research exchange and training of postdoctoral scientists, as well as routes for
industry outreach facilitated through the United Kingdom Research Centre in
Nondestructive Evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make
fundamental contributions to the development of an ultrasonic diffuse wave field
method that enables volumetric characterization of mission critical
microstructure of engineering metals. It will achieve this objective by
designing and calibrating experimental transduction mechanisms and signal
processing techniques for extracting the full Greenâ€™s tensor from the diffuse
wave field on different sample geometries, and relating properties of
diffusivity, attenuation, and scattering to microstructure-related properties.
Further, a general multiple scattering theory will be derived in combination
with radiative transfer theory, to account for the effects of texture and
microstructures on coherent waves and to describe the incoherent wave diffusion.
Computational models of such wave diffusion will be validated against
experimental results and used to construct a knowledge database of quantitative
linkages between the diffuse wave field and material microstructures. Finally, a
robust inversion method will be developed for deducing critical microstructural
properties from the diffuse wave field data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.