* 2225879
* EAGER: Fast High-Accuracy Navier-Stokes Solvers for Reacting Flow Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Tony Saad, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2024
* USD 252,703.00

The scientific understanding of reacting flows, such as those encountered in
fires and car engines, often relies on simulations to gain insight into how the
flow behaves and interacts with chemical reactions. Such simulations enable
predictive capabilities that enhance the design of safe infrastructure such as
tunnels and fire-safe buildings, cleaner burning reactors such as coal boilers,
and are of national importance. Unfortunately, conventional methods for reacting
flow simulations are often expensive, both computationally and economically. For
example, a single high-fidelity indoor fire calculation could take up two weeks
of calculation even on the fastest supercomputers. The proposed research aims at
challenging conventional simulation methods by eliminating the costly elements
in a simulation and replacing them with suitable approximations, without
sacrificing accuracy and fidelity. The proposed methods are expected to halve
the cost simulations and are easy to implement in existing software. The work
will enable faster turnaround times for simulations at a lower cost thus
enhancing design and analysis workflows of reacting flow
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop fast high-accuracy
solvers for low-Mach turbulent reacting flows by replacing expensive
calculations of the pressure field with suitable approximations that do not
affect accuracy or stability. These methods will halve the cost of simulations
of complex flows such as fires leading to faster turnaround times and enabling
higher-resolution calculations. Preliminary results for incompressible flows
showed speedups of up to 60% compared to conventional methods. The proposed
methodologies will be prototyped in Python and verified using the method of
manufactured solutions. They will then be implemented in a large-scale
multiphysics code to study and demonstrate performance and scalability of the
new algorithms. The proposed algorithms are agnostic to reaction models and
combustion chemistry, radiation, and other multiphysics phenomena making them
extremely flexible and applicable to a very wide range of variable density and
reacting flow problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.