* 2225803
* In-situ Diagnostics and Modeling of Ammonia spray Physics and Combustion Behavior at Elevated Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Zhili Zhang, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

With the global trend of decarbonization and growing interests in sustainable
transportation and propulsion, it becomes increasingly important to understand
the combustion performance and emission characteristics of carbon-free fuels
under practical operation conditions. Ammonia has attracted extensive research
interests as a carbon-free fuel and an effective hydrogen carrier, due to its
relatively high volumetric energy density, low cost, convenience to store and
deliver, and mature production infrastructure from renewable resources. A major
obstacle yet to be resolved is the emission of nitric oxide and unburnt ammonia
during combustion, both of which are strongly coupled with the spray and mixing
process. This proposal focuses on the understanding the characteristics of high-
pressure liquid ammonia spray and combustion, with pressures up to 80 bar, to
inform future carbon-free transportation and propulsion systems. The proposed
efforts will also broaden participation in research and integrate research with
teaching to enhance student learning. The proposed work will not only impact on
the fundamental spray dynamics and combustion kinetics, but also be
transformative for the development of carbon-free transportation and propulsion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to combine
comprehensive in-situ laser diagnostics and numerical simulation to provide in-
depth understanding of ammonia sprays under non-vaporizing, vaporizing, and
reacting conditions. This fills a substantial knowledge gap and requires a
combination of expertise in advanced laser diagnostics and high-fidelity
numerical simulations. Advanced laser diagnostics will include 2D Raman, PLIF
and rainbow reflectometry to acquire flow, key reaction intermediates and
droplet size distribution. These experimental measurements will provide
unprecedented details about the performance and emission characteristics of
high-pressure ammonia combustion as a carbon-free fuel. Information of the flow,
temperature, droplet and chemical intermediate distribution will also provide
valuable targets to validate simulations using both open source CFD code and
commercial software to enhance modeling and prediction capability for future
clean combustion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.