* 2225229
* Developing a High-Quality Academic Environment for Broadening Participation of Hispanic Students in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Stephanie Ludi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 10/31/2025
* USD 499,608.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Implementation and Evaluation (Track 2) project
aims to broaden the participation of Hispanic students in computing by
integrating cultural capital into a variety of educational activities. These
include innovative curriculum development, adoption of high-impact pedagogies,
supporting exemplary interactions, and fostering a diverse and inclusive
culture. The project will develop a responsive environment infused with
culturally competent practices to facilitate student success in computing. It
will also broaden participation in computing education by teaching essential
competencies for career development. The project is designed to fundamentally
change computing education and support institutional cultural change.
Significant factors and cultural capital structures that impact the broadening
of the participation of Hispanic students in computing will be identified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement four groups of asset-based
initiatives. First is infusing computational thinking and professional skill
development into the curriculum. Second is building an effective platform for
supporting students' interactions with peers and faculty. Third is developing
active and personalized learning for teaching computing courses. Fourth, and
finally, is collaborating with education experts to foster an inclusive
educational culture. An adaptable plan for recruiting Hispanic high school
graduates and community college students will be developed. The project will
enhance the quality of computing education to increase the enrollment,
retention, and graduation rate of undergraduate Hispanic students in computing
programs. Another anticipated outcome is gaining an understanding of cultural
capital's impact on student academic achievement, retention, and well-being. The
team will support implementing the initiatives for other programs at
universities and community colleges in North Texas by sharing the experience,
research results, and educational outcomes. Findings will be broadly distributed
through articles and presentations. Given the diverse nature and context of
HSIs, achieving these goals requires attention to creative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation. Action research will be
embedded in a mixed-methods design to identify effective strategies for
instruction, communication, and retention. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves understanding of how to build institutional
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also draw from
these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.