* 2225095
* BCSER: Examining inclusive science communication education as a tool to empower historically disadvantaged STEM students
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Nicole Kelp, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 11/30/2025
* USD 346,658.00

Broadening participation in STEM is critical on many levels, from the equity
perspective of removing barriers for success for people from historically
excluded groups and from the perspective of increasing knowledge in the field of
STEM. Both people and scientific endeavors benefit from increasing inclusion.
However, evidence indicates that students who experience marginalization due to
their socioeconomic status, first generation college attendance, or race and
ethnicity are underrepresented in STEM and face challenges for retention and
career success in STEM. Various mechanisms have been explored to help retain
diverse students in STEM, including active learning in the classroom and faculty
mentoring programs. Such mechanisms are necessary but insufficient for
overcoming barriers to full participation of students from groups that are
marginalized in STEM. This project aims to examine how training in inclusive
science communication may be a tool that empowers students to grow in factors
like science identity and self-efficacy, which are correlated with increased
STEM retention. This project is novel and significant in that it capitalizes on
the interdisciplinary topic of science communication as an additional mechanism
for engaging students in STEM. Inclusive science communication explicitly
centers inclusion, equity, and intersectionality. Helping students to see
inclusive science communication as a tool to solve societal problems and to
recognize themselves as having valuable perspectives to contribute to science
may help students have the desire and confidence to continue in STEM.
Additionally, science communication is a competency that will prepare students
for diverse jobs in STEM and STEM-adjacent fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has two goals. First, the researchers aim to develop and implement
inclusive science communication trainings scaffolded throughout the four-year
curriculum for students in bioscience and engineering programs. This wide scope
will enable many students to benefit from the inclusive science communication
training. The researchers will analyze how these trainings improve student
factors like science identity that are correlated with STEM retention. Second,
the researchers plan to pair more experienced students with first year students
to co-construct science communication deliverables. This will provide near-peer
mentoring opportunities for the students as well as facilitate practical
application of inclusive science communication trainings. The researchers will
evaluate how this mentorship and application programming affects science
attitude, science communication skills, and career aspirations of both groups of
students. Through both of these project components, researchers will be able to
assess how inclusive science communication trainings, whether in the classroom
or in smaller group application activities, impact different groups of students
and supports student success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.