* 2225028
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design: US-China: Functional divergence between females and males: consequences of climate-induced shifts in composition of dioecious plant populatio
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 08/31/2024
* USD 122,698.00

Most animals and many plants have separate biological sexes: individuals can be
either female or male. In addition to their distinct body plans, females and
males often differ ecologically. They may have different dietary needs,
different vulnerability to predators, or different responses to climate stress.
As the Earth’s climate rapidly changes, scientists predict that females and
males will differ in their ability to cope, and this may cause an over-abundance
of one sex and a shortage of the other. In this project, the research team will
test how climate change will affect the sex ratio of dominant trees and shrubs,
and whether changes in sex ratio can influence biodiversity of the community and
nutrient cycling through the ecosystem. The project brings together American and
Chinese scientists to compare whether these responses to climate change play out
similarly in North America and Asia. Many important food and landscaping plants
have separate sexes (spinach, pistachio, holly, and willow, for example), so
this research will help scientists predict how these and similar plant species
will respond to future climate change. In addition, students will be trained via
a distributed, five-institution graduate seminar, as well as research
experiences for undergraduate and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional divergence of the sexes raises the potential
for climate change to perturb population sex ratios through contrasting effects
on females and males. Little is known about the consequences of sex ratio shifts
for populations, communities, and ecosystems. The binational team will develop
the foundations needed to understand and forecast the direction and magnitude of
changes in sex ratio under global climate change, and to test the cascading
effects of climate-induced sex ratio shifts on population viability, host-
associated biodiversity, and ecosystem function. The team will develop a
comparative system of woody dioecious plants in Sichuan Province, China and
Texas, US. Like many dioecious plants, these habitat-forming woody species
support diverse micro- and macro-biota that affect ecosystem-level fluxes of
carbon and nitrogen. This Design project will bring together the research team
for workshops in the US and China to develop theory for the ecological
consequences of sex ratio sensitivity to climate change, and to develop the
methods and modeling approaches required to test its predictions. The project
will support development of molecular markers to identify the sex of non-
flowering individuals, DNA barcoding technologies to characterize host-
associated communities, and assays of sex-specific soil carbon and nitrogen
dynamics. Dioecy is among the most common forms of demographic structure and
climate change is expected to alter female:male sex ratios. This project is
among the first to evaluate how functional divergence of the sexes and climate-
induced changes in sex ratio lead to cascading effects across scales of
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.