* 2225438
* Collaborative Research:  Modular, vascularized microphysiological systems to study the outer blood retinal barrier
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Steven George, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2023
* USD 517,977.00

Certain vascularized tissues such as the outer blood retinal barrier are
difficult to study using animal models due to major physiological and anatomical
differences. Microphysiological systems (MPS), also known as tissue chips, are
an alternative to animal models that enable the study of complex tissue systems.
MPS can incorporate patient specific stem cells for personalized medicine and
are easily scalable for larger scale investigations. This project will support
the development of a new MPS that controls physical, biochemical, and cell
signaling cues to guide the development of microvascular tissues, including the
cues needed for forming perfusable blood vessels. It is expected that successful
completion of this work will provide a greater understanding of how physical,
biochemical, and cell signaling cues guide microvessel development and establish
an alternative to animal models for pre-clinical drug testing. This work will
support the training of junior scientists from diverse backgrounds and prepare
them for careers in research and education. The Investigators are proactive in
working to increase diversity and expose high school students to possible STEM
career opportunities. Further, findings that are made from this research will be
shared through numerous outreach activities and programs including: Teach the
Teachers, undergraduate and high school student mentorship, and speaking at
public engagements such as the Annual Benoit Laboratory Alexâ€™s Lemonade
Stand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in tissue engineering and tissue chip
technology have catalyzed the rise of microphysiological systems (MPS) as an
alternative to animal models for preclinical testing. MPS for vascularized
tissues either forego perfused microvasculature or rely on oversimplified
endothelial cell-lined fluidic channels. Microvascular tissues are 3D and have
tissue specific molecular transport, angioarchitectural, and paracrine-tissue
crosstalk properties. Engineered extracellular matrices (eECM) comprised of
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogels crosslinked with matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-degradable peptides and functionalized with cell adhesive ligands have
been shown to support vasculogenesis. In this project, vasculogenic eECM will be
introduced into a novel MPS designed for microvascular network development.
Specifically, pressure/flow and eECM biophysical and biochemical cues will be
explored to guide the development of in vivo-like perfusable microvasculature
specific to bone, salivary gland, and the retina. Successful completion of the
proposed aims will elucidate the role of flow in microvascular development,
advance the development of MPSs, and augment our understanding of the eECM
biochemical cues that mediate endothelial cell
vasculogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.