* 2225351
* Adapting Problem-Solving Cycles in Professional Development with Foundational Mathematics Course Coordinators: A Potential Gateway for Instructional Change
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Kimberly Rogers, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 10/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Undergraduate mathematics courses are required foundational courses for almost
all STEM majors, since science, technology, and engineering are all built on
mathematical underpinnings. Therefore, effective mathematics instruction at the
undergraduate level opens the door to these fields, making it possible for
students to pursue studies in scientific and technical areas. Unfortunately,
students typically cite ineffective or uninspiring classroom instruction in
foundational mathematics courses as prominent obstacles to their degree progress
and, as a result, may be discouraged from seeking STEM degrees. It has long been
known that using student-centered instructional approaches (e.g., less time
spent lecturing and increased use of active-learning strategies) improves
student learning outcomes and persistence in math courses. However, because
undergraduate foundational mathematics courses are often taught by instructors
with little background or training in active-learning strategies, a critical
need to provide mathematics faculty professional development to improve
instructional practices in these courses remains. The objectives of this project
are to develop the PI’s expertise about faculty Professional Development (PD)
design; to create, iteratively implement, and examine how PD cycles affect
foundational math instructors’ teaching practices and perspectives; and to
contribute to theory about supporting meaningful instructional change in
foundational mathematics courses. By supporting instructional change, the
project should have broad impacts on undergraduate STEM education including the
following: improving instruction for students taking foundational mathematics
courses, thus positively impacting STEM major’s persistence and involvement in
the STEM workforce; and developing an infrastructure and model that can be used
to support instructional change and PD in other undergraduate STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To inform theory about the key components and
factors in faculty PD that support instructional change, this project plans to
design, analyze, and refine cycles of PD with foundational mathematics course
coordinators in a community of practice around active learning strategies.
During pre-existing, bi-weekly Foundational Mathematics Committee meetings, the
PI will facilitate PD opportunities with all foundational mathematics course
coordinators in her mathematics department. The PD will include iterative
Problem-Solving Cycles (where each ‘cycle’ is a series of interconnected
meetings organized around a rich mathematical task, enabling instructors to
share a common learning, planning, and teaching experience) and a community of
practice approach with Core Reflection practices to develop a system of supports
with and for the course coordinators. Through the adoption of this design-based
research approach (i.e., designing, field-testing, analyzing, &amp; refining),
the participating coordinators, the PI, and research team members will
collaborate to inform PD design and theory development regarding the key
components and factors in the faculty PD program that support instructional
change. These results will enable the participating course coordinators to
improve their own classroom use of pedagogical strategies that have been proven
effective, and to influence instructional innovation among the other instructors
of their courses. This project is significant because the theory informed by
this PD program will allow other institutions to increase faculty participation
in teaching-related PD that has similar impacts on undergraduate mathematics
learning outcomes. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.