* 2225513
* CIF: Small: Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Contagion Processes in Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Osman Yagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Contagion processes such as propagation of influence, information, and viruses
can have dramatic impacts on the health and well-being of the society. This
project will reveal how contagions are affected by various factors and
parameters, some of which can be controlled by public-policy measures and by
adjusting individualsâ€™ behaviors. Thus, the project can help in developing
efficient mechanisms for mitigating large-scale contagions including infectious-
disease pandemics and misinformation campaigns. The project can also have a
positive impact on national security by providing an improved understanding of
the role of social influence in shaping popular opinion and actions, and thereby
an improved capability to predict and control spread of antisocial behavior. The
team of researchers will incorporate project results in teaching and disseminate
them broadly in academic and industrial venues. The project will involve women
and minority students and will include extensive outreach to K-12 students and
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new approaches in
modeling, analysis, and control of simple (e.g., spread of information and
diseases) and complex contagions (e.g., spread of influence and opinions) over
networks. First, a novel complex contagion model will be used to study the
simultaneous spread of multiple correlated opinions. Utilizing this model, the
team of researchers will i) derive fundamental relations between the network
topology, the correlations among opinions, and the propagation dynamics
including final fraction of individuals supporting each opinion; ii) reveal the
impact of correlated opinion propagation on the polarization in the population;
and iii) develop algorithms to efficiently control the spread of an opinion with
constraints on other opinions and/or polarization. For simple contagions, the
team of researchers will analyze novel models of both information and viral
spread and reveal the impact of i) mutations in the spreading item; and ii) the
heterogeneity in the population, e.g., due to different mask-wearing behavior,
vaccination status, or socio-cultural diversity, on the contagion
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.