* 2225295
* Active Assessment Supported By Communities of Practice in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Simone Sisneros-Thiry, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2025
* USD 347,370.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by contributing to the
understanding of experiences of students and instructors of assessment
strategies aligned with active learning methods. Towards this goal the project
will seek to incorporate the student voice into professional development
experiences for collegiate mathematics instructors. In particular, this project
will focus on assessment strategies that are aligned with the values and
practices of active learning. The community of practice model for supporting
instructors in implementing active learning strategies has successfully impacted
student learning outcomes. This project will extend that work to examine
perceptions and impacts of active assessment. Much of previous literature around
assessment has isolated either instructor or student perspectives, but this
project will integrate student and instructor perspectives to build a more
holistic picture of the impacts of active assessment, and improve faculty
assessment practices by considering their impact on students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This capacity building project will use mixed methods in
mathematics education research to contribute to the body of knowledge around
assessment practices, integrating student and instructor perspectives, and
college mathematics instructor professional development. The research will
center the experiences of students from groups that have been historically
excluded from mathematics education. It will build knowledge in student
experience through qualitative methods that consider the intersection of
identities. The project will bring student perspectives into a direct feedback
loop for instructors in active assessment communities of practice, scaffolding
instructors to adjust practices in ways that are responsive to what is and is
not working for students. Additionally, the project will build our nation’s
capacity for high-quality STEM education research and practice through faculty
training. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity
in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.