* 2225740
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Pastoral Adaptation in Environmental Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sarah Baitzel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 27,231.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the adaptive strategies of
pastoralists in response to long-term drought and sociopolitical changes in the
past. Ethnographic accounts of pastoralists highlight culturally specific
traditional knowledge systems that incorporate animal diet and mobility and
environmental factors to shape decision-making in herding practices and resource
management strategies. Archaeological data, ethnographic literature, and
biogeochemical analyses of animal remains can provide insights into mitigation
strategies that have potential applications for informing the ecological
knowledge of contemporary herders. This project employs archaeological remains
to compare camelid dietary and mobility patterns across different ecological and
altitudinal settings to explain how ecological and social conditions shape
human-animal-environmental interactions. This project aims to provide
opportunities to train undergraduate students in stable isotope analysis, a tool
that has become a staple in archaeological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
examine the nature and variability of camelid herding practices, this project
assesses the temporal and spatial variability of herding strategies including
pasturing, foddering, and mobility. It will examine inter- and intra-community
variability in camelid herding strategies through stable isotope analysis of
camelid remains from two pastoral settlements. The two study sites span a period
characterized by changes in climate and environment, increasing conflict and
political fragmentation. Carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen isotope analyses of
camelid remains from residential compounds at both sites will provide insights
into the variability of herding practices at the local and regional scale. Using
multi-isotopic analyses of camelid bone and teeth samples, will be used to
answer the following directed questions involving diet and seasonal movement.
Examining forms of camelid herding strategies and their variability presents
insights into localized responses to changes in regional trade networks,
migration, and conflict in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.