* 2225012
* Collaborative Research: BoCP Implementation: Using the Past to Predict the Future: How Physiology and other Functional Traits Determine Survival/Extinction in W. Atlantic Mollusks
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Emily Rivest, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2027
* USD 573,942.00

Clams and snails, known as mollusks, are abundant and diverse along the eastern
seaboard of the United States. They are important indicators of ocean health and
provide substantial food sources for humans. Many of the species, or their close
relatives, are also known as fossils that extend back more than 3 million years.
Using analysis of the characteristics of modern and fossil mollusks, along with
experiments, the project will investigate which features of mollusks made them
most likely to survive as ocean conditions changed over the last several million
years. The information will be combined with computer modelling to predict which
species will survive and which will go extinct in the future. Outreach will be
provided to K-12 students, and students at several levels will receive
scientific training. A physical and online museum exhibit on mollusks will be
created, and data about them will be shared online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will use fossil and modern mollusks from the western Atlantic region to
develop a predictive framework for which species will survive and which will go
extinct in the next few centuries. This is important because several species
provide significant food resources to humans. The work will examine key
functional traits associated with long term species survival, including
physiological variables such as metabolic rate, which is strongly influenced by
ocean conditions, and a highly significant predictor of extinction probability
in marine mollusks over the last three million years. Experimental studies also
will be performed to determine the relationship between mollusk physiology and
ocean conditions. In addition, ecological niche modeling will be used to place
past and predicted future species distributions in the context of past and
forecasted future marine conditions. All this work will be done to develop a
predictive framework for understanding the past and quantifying the future of
this biota. Outreach and education will be provided to K-12 students in several
locations. Several undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral
scholars will receive research training. A physical and online museum exhibit on
mollusks will be created, and data on the stratigraphic and geographic
occurrence of mollusk species will be shared online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.