* 2225202
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral consortium at Student Research Workshop at the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Danqi Chen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2023
* USD 18,000.00

The North American Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) is the
primary international organization for computational linguistics and natural
language processing. This is one of the primary application areas for
researchers in machine learning and artificial intelligence. The proceedings of
the ACL's annual meeting provide the foundation of the field; it is the most
cited and most respected publication in computational linguistics. Thus, it is
also the most important gathering of researchers in computational linguistics
and natural language processing, and represents one of the most important
opportunities for young researchers to understand the field, build professional
connections, and gain exposure. ACL has a twenty-one-year history of supporting
these formative activities by holding a student research workshop. The workshops
have proven popular: attracting dozens of submissions from highly qualified
applicants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student research workshop will be a part of
the 2022 Meeting of the North American Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), to be held in conjunction with the main conference July 10th â€“July
15th, 2022 in Seattle, Washington. The workshop will subsidize travel and
conference registration for students who are selected to participate. The
workshop will solicit submissions in two categories: (1) *thesis proposals* for
advanced students who have decided on a thesis topic and wish to receive
feedback and (2) *research papers* describing completed work or work in progress
with significant preliminary results. Each accepted paper will be assigned an
established research mentor who will meet with the student during the conference
to provide individual feedback. Both paper types will be presented in the poster
session of the main conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.