* 2225925
* Optical Study of Electron Correlation in Graphene-Based Moire Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Long Ju, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 719,846.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Superlattices, stacks of multiple layers of
materials with different compositions, formed from two-dimensional (2D)
materials host incredible flexibilities in engineering material properties
through controlling the stacking order, the twist angle, and tuning of the
electron density. Such engineered materials have remarkable electrical and
optical properties that do not exist in individual 2D materials. This project
advances our understanding of carbon-based materials, thus enabling new design
principles of quantum materials and their device applications for quantum
science and technology. This project helps graduate and undergraduate students
from under-represented groups bridge the gap between textbook learning and
scientific research by providing interdisciplinary scientific experience. It
stimulates the interest of K-12 students in 2D materials and the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, training the future
workforce. This project also enriches the experimental capabilities of the user
facility at the NSF-funded National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and provides
technical support to users in the broad quantum materials research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This project
address fundamental questions regarding electron correlation in the moiré
superlattices involving few-layer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. The
research team uses this new material platform to engineer and study
superconductivity, Mott insulator, and magnetic ground states— physics that were
previously realized in conventional strongly correlated materials such as high-
Tc superconductors. The proposed research advances the field of 2D materials
through the following innovations. (1) It generates the first infrared
spectroscopy data of several graphene-based moiré superlattices and reveals
critical energy scales relevant to electron correlation. Such information forms
the basis of accurate theoretical modeling and better interpretation of already
discovered correlation phenomena. (2) It develops unique optical spectroscopy
and microscopy tools that help fabricate new device structures with widely
tunable twist angle, charge density and band structures. By performing electron
transport measurement on these devices, the research team explores the limit of
electron correlation such as the superconducting transition temperature Tc. (3)
It systematically studies the connection and difference between correlation
phenomena in moiré and non-moiré systems of 2D materials. This helps understand
the exact role of moiré superlattice for better engineering of electron
correlation in stacks of 2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.