* 2225882
* CNS Core:Small:A HW/SW Codesign Framework For Dynamic Composition of Disaggregated Hardware Systems Securely
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Venkatesh Akella, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,939.00

Traditionally datacenters and high performance computing (HPC) facilities
increase compute capacity by adding additional servers, which is increasingly
becoming inefficient since emerging workloads exhibit very high peak to average
memory requirements. Moreover, the fundamental building blocks of a modern data
centers and HPC facilities (the processors) are becoming increasingly
specialized with dedicated hardware for vector/tensor processing, deep learning,
different memory pools such as DRAM, SRAM, and NVRAM, and special-purpose
interconnect. Replicating such processors invariably results in hardware that is
neither required nor useful all the time by all the applications. A
disaggregated approach to computing system design can overcome these
inefficiencies by selecting and composing the required hardware resources (e.g.,
accelerators, memory) to meet the requirements of a specific workflow or
application. This project aims to make the design and implementation of such
systems practical by addressing system security and performance. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in developing a new hardware
software/codesign framework that is based on virtualized remote memory, object-
level tracking for efficient data tiering and coherence, and flexible mechanisms
to create and enforce hardware-based trusted execution environments. We will
evaluate our solutions using a rigorous evaluation plan based on system-level
modeling and simulation using the gem5 software
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence and machine
learning are expected to accelerate scientific discovery and play a very crucial
role in addressing the grand challenges of the 21st century such as climate
change, sustainability, and drug/vaccine discovery with broad societal impact.
This project will enable training large scale machine learning models and
perform large scale data analytics on disaggregated hardware systems which will
allow them to be more performant and cost-effective. In addition, the modeling
and simulation environment in gem5 broadly impacts computer architecture and
computer systems researchers beyond this project. The models created in this
project will be committed to the upstream gem5 project so that other researchers
can use these models and build off of our designs. These contributions will
impact the reproducibility and sustainability of this software infrastructure
and advance computer architecture research in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.