* 2225321
* Tailoring Personalized Mathematics Education for High School Students Using Dynamic Treatment Regimes
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Youmi Suk, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 12/31/2025
* USD 349,995.00

The current math course-taking plan for high school students across much of the
United States is not optimized for every student’s success in math, especially
in advanced mathematics. In particular, there has been disproportional
participation in advanced math courses among different racial/ethnic and income
groups. To this end, this research project develops data-driven, personalized
math course-taking plans by leveraging recent advances in personalized medicine.
In personalized medicine, clinicians, with the help of machine learning, use
past and current historical patient data to tailor patient-specific treatment
plans. In a similar vein, the proposed data-driven, personalized course-taking
plan recommends appropriate math courses for students at the opportune time by
using large-scale educational data from current and past students’ performances.
Additionally, the project incorporates algorithmic fairness constraints from
computer science and statistics to ensure that the recommendations reduce
existing disparities in course-taking patterns among racial/ethnic and income
groups. More broadly, with the proposed, data-driven personalized
recommendations, the project hopes to transform how students take math courses
(or more broadly, K-12 STEM courses) so that every student, especially students
from underrepresented or disadvantaged backgrounds, will opportunities to pursue
STEM majors and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop personalized math
course-taking plans, the project uses a set of statistical techniques known as
optimal dynamic treatment regimes (OTRs). A crucial step in using OTRs is
understanding treatment effect heterogeneity from the collected data.
Consequently, the first aim of the project is to leverage the existing work on
using machine learning to estimate heterogeneous effects of taking different
math courses in large-scale educational studies. Next, the project uses
Q-learning, A-learning, and value search methods to develop OTRs, specifically
sequential decisions for math course-taking. Finally, to mitigate fairness-
related harms in the proposed OTRs and to ensure that the OTRs do not produce
discriminatory recommendations, the project utilizes fairness constraints from
the algorithmic fairness literature. The project will translate the current
state-of-the-art OTR methods into K- 12 math education policies and will
constitute the first attempt to integrate algorithmic fairness and optimal
policy learning to design equitable policies for STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is
designed to build investigator's capacity to carry out high-quality STEM
education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.