* 2225630
* ICE-TI:  NICC's Baccalaureate in Indigenous Environmental Health
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Kristine Sudbeck, Nebraska Indian Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,841,829.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions increases the opportunities for their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project at
Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC) aligns with this goal through the
development and delivery of the institution’s first four-year STEM degree.
Designed to specifically address Indigenous community contexts, students who
complete the degree will possess a strong, multidisciplinary understanding of
environmental problems, their impacts on human health and well-being, and
solutions to manage those issues. Data compiled through a feasibility study
indicate that workforce demand for this expertise and skill set is strong in
NICC’s region, providing significant career opportunities for graduates and
contributing to the community’s economic stability. The new Bachelor of Science
in Indigenous Environmental Health will build on NICC’s existing Associate of
Science in General Science Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities for
developing and delivering this degree include curriculum design, hiring of
additional faculty, equipping and enhancing additional STEM laboratories, and
securing accreditations for the degree. The curriculum will include partnerships
with Tribal elders and STEM professionals as students investigate local place-
based environmental issues relevant to the Indigenous community. Core program
requirements include the successful completion of a set of upper-level courses
across health, environmental, and Indigenous science disciplines as well as the
design and completion of both senior capstone and senior research projects. The
delivery of this degree has the added significances of advancing NICC’s STEM
degree offerings to the baccalaureate level while providing culturally
responsive career opportunities that will benefit its graduates and the
community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.