* 2225863
* R11-BEC: Mitigating COVID-19 Career Challenges with Research and Professional Development Training for Undergraduate Students and Mentors in Field-based Environmental Sciences
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Amy Burgin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,835.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Bridging EPSCoR Communities (RII BEC) project at the University of
Kansas (KU) aims to serve the national interest by increasing the retention and
graduation rates of undergraduate students, particularly those who have been
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. With a focus on the
transition from undergraduate education to the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce or graduate school, a specific emphasis will be
on students who have been historically underrepresented in the STEM arena. The
investigators will implement and study the effectiveness of a sustainable model
on improving retention and graduation rates of STEM students. The overall
program will take an integrated approach by combining authentic and meaningful
research experiences, in-depth mentor training, and a professional development
curriculum. Research experiences will be primarily in earth and environmental
sciences. The mentoring program will be for faculty and non-academic scientists
who will be trained in cultural understanding and sensitivity as well as in
effective mentoring skills and techniques directed towards preparing students to
enter graduate school or the science workforce. The curriculum will be
comprehensive and will include professional development topics such as: aligning
expectations; the research process; communications (oral as well as writing
personal essays, proposals, resumes, and cover letters); understanding and
fostering work-life balance; and the art of interviewing. Project outcomes and
findings will be disseminated to local, regional, and national
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goals of this project are to: (1)
design and implement undergraduate mentored research training experiences to
help develop research skills and foster research and STEM identity for
undergraduate students; (2) create a professional development program for
students in their junior and senior years; (3) establish a sustainable mentor
training program with cultural understanding threaded throughout; (4) develop an
open-access fieldwork mentoring module which includes field safety,
accessibility, and best practice responses to hostile and/or exclusionary
behaviors in the field; and (5) disseminate a model resulting from project
components and assessment. Project goals will be assessed using a multi-
methodological approach that combines quantitative and qualitative data
collection and analysis processes to determine the effectiveness and impact on
mentors and diverse student participants. New results will emanate from the
project regarding how to combine research, mentoring, and professional
development curricula to mitigate the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on
students from traditionally underrepresented groups. In addition, the
development and dissemination of a fieldwork mentorship training module will
contribute to knowledge advancements in mentoring in the educational community.
Project findings and outcomes will be disseminated at internal and external
levels through myriad venues including peer-reviewed publications, conference
presentations, several social media outlets, a KU Emerging STEM Scholars
website, and vetted training resources developed for audiences ranging from
individuals to workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.