* 2225412
* EAGER: CRYO: Development of Novel Ce1-xLaxB6 Thermoelectric Nanocomposites for Cryogenic Cooling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Bao Yang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project is jointly supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems, the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation, and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Refrigerators that can function at ultra-low
temperatures, &lt;1 Kelvin, are required to operate quantum-enabled devices.
Thermoelectric refrigerators are solid-state heat pumps that use electrons as
heat carriers to extract heat from the cooling load, and they often provide
substantial advantages over alternative refrigeration technologies. Some of the
more significant features of thermoelectric refrigerators include no moving
parts, small size and weight, precise temperature control, electrically “quiet”
operation, and environmentally friendly. However, the existing thermoelectric
materials are not effective at cryogenic refrigeration. The thermoelectric
cooling in normal metals is weak at any temperature. Semiconductors are ideal
thermoelectric materials around room temperatures, but turn into electrical
insulator at ultra-low temperatures. The overarching vision of this EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to develop a
thermoelectric material that can enable refrigeration at ultra-low temperatures,
&lt;1 Kelvin. The broader impacts of this project include its integration into
educational activities at University of Maryland, broadening the participation
of under-represented groups in research to foster diversity, equity, and
inclusion, and K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks
to develop novel Ce1-xLaxB6 thermoelectric materials needed to enable ultra-low
temperature refrigeration (&lt;1 Kelvin). In this effort, the doping of non-
magnetic lanthanum (La) in CeB6 will be explored to lower the temperature of
transition from the Kondo effect region to Fermi liquid region in electron
transport, and therefore to shift its peak thermoelectric temperature &lt;1
Kelvin. In addition, the nanocomposite technology will be employed to enhance
the figure-of-merit of the single crystalline CeB6 by reducing its phonon
thermal conductivity while preserving its electron mobility. The rapid, high
temperature sintering method recently developed at the University of Maryland
will be adopted to manufacture the Ce1-xLaxB6 thermoelectric nanocomposites with
various doping. To achieve the technical objectives, a series of interrelated
tasks is formulated: 1) Manufacturing and optimization of Ce1-xLaxB6
nanocomposites; 2) Microstructure and composition characterization of Ce1-xLaxB6
nanocomposites; 3) Thermoelectric property characterization of Ce1-xLaxB6
nanocomposites; and 4) Thermoelectric property modeling of Ce1-xLaxB6
nanocomposites. The key elements in the thermoelectric materials are Cerium and
Lanthanum, which are as abundant on Earth as many familiar industrial metals,
such as copper and chromium. The research is a necessary first exploratory stage
in an overall ambitious high-risk-high-payoff agenda. The development of this
potential game-changing refrigeration technology at cryogenic temperatures is
critical for the advancement of quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.