* 2225211
* HSI Pilot Project: STEM Undergraduate, Retention, Graduation, and Engagement (SURGE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Christian Traba, Fairleigh Dickinson University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,834.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Pilot Project aims to transform how
STEM is delivered at Fairleigh Dickinson University (FDU) and change the STEM
culture. Despite the abundance of STEM literature on Hispanic students, their
persistence is alarmingly low. An internal self-assessment prepared by the SURGE
team identified four STEM deficiencies, along with four institutional strengths.
Based on this assessment, the team proposes three SURGE strategies that leverage
institutional strengths. The team recognizes the need for institutional change
to improve outcomes. As a result, SURGE will implement transformational and
reorganizational changes that include 1) a dedicated area conducive to STEM
learning, 2) academic support programs, 3) gateway courses that have been
revised to include evidence-based pedagogies and practices, 4) an advisor
network of faculty, staff, and peers, 5) paid research opportunities, 6)
workshops on “STEM awareness”, 7) peer tutors, and 8) virtual learning programs.
Through SURGE, students at FDU will experience a STEM environment more conducive
to learning. The data will benefit urban institutions with similar student
demographics, faculty teaching loads, and resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SURGE
will 1) launch a STEM Academic Center, 2) provide faculty with evidence-based,
pedagogical, and cultural awareness workshops, and 3) implement research
initiatives for STEM majors. These objectives will address three research
questions: 1) How does each facet of SURGE improve Hispanic STEM students’
learning, retention, graduation, desire to attend graduate school, and interest
in a STEM career? 2) Which activities are best aligned with increasing diversity
in STEM and foundational elements required to build and sustain institutional
capacity at FDU? And 3) Do non-cognitive and cultural barrier workshops improve
Hispanic STEM students’ relationship with their faculty advisors and “STEM
awareness”? Student interviews, experiences, surveys, and focus groups will be
used to construct an evolving data-driven model which identifies limitations,
and inefficiencies in SURGE. The team will ensure all data is thoroughly
analyzed and used to contribute new knowledge on which high-impact activities 1)
build institutional capacity to support STEM majors, 2) generate evidence to
support program success and replicability, and 3) transform FDU through
institutionalization of successful program components. SURGE will develop the
capacity to impact 500 students through STEM workshops, award stipends to 46
STEM majors, and provide 30 STEM faculty with evidence-based and cultural
barrier workshops. SURGE will improve the persistence of STEM majors through
STEM engagement, and these students who are positively impacted by SURGE will
disseminate “STEM awareness” to their peers. This “domino effect” design of
SURGE is deliberate and is intended to have a lasting impact on the STEM culture
at FDU. This data will benefit urban institutions with similar student
demographics, faculty teaching loads, and resources. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.