* 2225369
* Collaborative Research: Tailoring Electron and Spin Transport in Single Molecule Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/28/2026
* USD 165,439.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth of the information
economy and the rising importance of artificial intelligence are driving a need
for dramatically increased computing power. Such demands cannot be met at the
required pace using existing semiconductor technologies. In addition, energy
requirements to power the massive increase in computing and data storage may
present a serious limitation to how much and how fast information can be
processed. New energy-efficient technologies are therefore urgently needed. This
research project brings together a team with combined expertise in theory,
synthesis, and advanced characterization. The team will design and synthesize
novel molecules and develop new characterization methods in order to pave the
way to electronic devices that operate at the ultimate size limit of single
molecules. This research will enable efficient charge flow and switching in
single molecules and allow for the creation of high-density low-power
electronics. The investigators will further demonstrate how quantum phenomena
can be used in single molecule devices to encode information in new and
efficient ways, and to minimize power consumption in high-density molecular
arrays. The research team will train undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups, educate future scientific leaders from traditionally
underserved rural and urban communities, and involve veterans who transition
from the armed services into higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive research to understand
quantum transport in single molecule electronic devices, a predictive and
generalizable molecular-level understanding of how to systematically tailor
charge- and spin-transport through molecules is still missing. The emergence of
such an understanding is hampered by the complex many-body interactions at the
molecule-electrode interface and the wide variation of different molecular
constructs investigated. The proposed theory-driven research addresses this
challenge by i) systematically varying the organic semiconductor framework to
tailor the combined molecule/electrode system, to capture the outsized influence
of interfacial interactions on energy level alignment and hence conductance in
single molecule junctions; and ii) seeking to significantly enhance charge-
transport or to create pathways towards spin-polarized current using
systematically designed all-organic radicals. Insights from the proposed
research provide new design rules for controlling charge-flow in single
molecules and across molecule-electrode interfaces at will. Investigators will
also develop key principles that enable the flow of spin-current without the
need for ferromagnetic electrodes. These issues are fundamental themes in the
materials science of organic semiconductors that transcend the specific classes
of molecules and the specific challenges of quantum transport in single
molecules. They pertain to the field of organic electronics more broadly,
encompassing molecular and thin film organic electronics. The synergistic
research, combining synthesis of new materials, materials by design and
characterization at the single molecule limit, lays the foundation for improved
energy-efficiency in high-performance computing and data analysis, which
ultimately enables new information processing modalities with potentially
unprecedented impact on US manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.