* 2225298
* Expanding Applications of Network Analysis to STEM Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jennifer Cromley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 169,042.00

To better support college students in learning about science, it is important to
understand how they make connections among the concepts and ideas as they are
learning. Network Analysis (NA) has potential to enable new ways of analyzing
student learning data to reveal such connections. This project seeks to serve
the national interest by developing a researcher’s skills to apply the
statistical techniques of NA to real-time data about students’ science learning.
The principal investigator (PI) of the project will participate in professional
development to hone her skills in Network Analysis and apply them to analyze
data collected while college students learn about the immune system. The PI and
other members of the project team will subsequently share what they learn about
the use of this approach via workshops and publications, which will enable other
science education researchers to apply the techniques to real-time data to make
new discoveries about students’ knowledge and learning
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This capacity-building project at University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will develop the PI’s analytical skills in Network
Analysis while exploring how this approach can be applied to better understand
undergraduate students’ science learning. Statistical techniques of NA can be
applied to student knowledge structures, but this has rarely been done with
real-time data from individuals. These novel approaches to analyzing students’
knowledge structures have potential to advance knowledge regarding, for example,
which concepts are most central and how tightly linked individual pieces of
knowledge are within a knowledge network. The research findings are expected to
contribute fundamental understandings to both Information Processing Theory and
an emerging theories of multi-text multimedia comprehension. The PI will learn
about Network Analysis and apply it to two extant think-aloud/eye tracking
datasets collected from undergraduate biology students. To accomplish these
objectives, the PI will take a course in NA and receive coaching from mentors
and advisors with expertise in the subject. Subsequently, the project team will
design and implement two workshops on novel applications of Network Analysis to
real-time data. These applications are expected to be valuable to a wide range
of researchers in STEM education and related disciplines such as medical
education, cognitive psychology, and human-computer interaction. The project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.