* 2225314
* Understanding the Barriers that Contribute to the Gender Gap in Computing in Higher Education
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sara Hooshangi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 336,869.00

Participation in computer science by women is a significant goal for NSF and
benefits the nation’s workforce in emerging technologies. Academic and career
path decisions are made by individuals and understanding barriers that
contribute to student selection of computer science careers may reduce the
gender gap in this field. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
seeks to understand personal, social, and institutional constraints that
influence the decision-making of first-year non-computer science/non-engineering
female undergraduate students. The professional development plan will build
research capacity through developing skills in mixed methods approaches to STEM
education research. This project focuses on female students who are not in the
technology pathway and therefore can provide insights into experiences that lead
to academic and career selection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project
are to examine decision-making factors that influence the choice to stay or exit
the computer science pathway, identify stories of challenges and successes of
non-computer science female students in introductory computer science courses,
and derive lessons that can be applied towards best practices in designing a
welcoming and thriving environment to promote further engagement by women in
computer science. From a foundation of Bronfenbrenner’s ecological theory and
sociocultural self model of behavior, the project seeks to examine individual
contextualize choice in relation to institutional and course structure. The
project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.