* 2225577
* Collaborative Research: NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: Towards Scalable and Al-based Solutions for Beyond-5G Radio Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Taejoon Kim, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2025
* USD 285,000.00

Over the last few years, discussions oriented toward defining sixth generation
(6G) requirements and possible technologies have started to circulate within the
wireless community. One of the key ideas will likely be to take steps to remove
the conventional cell boundaries and facilitate enhanced joint uplink and
downlink processing using many dispersed access points (APs). These ideas fall
within the academic definition of cell-free massive multiple-input multiple-
output (CFmMIMO). It alleviates the existing cell-edge and handover problems and
improves energy efficiency. The primary limiting factor is achieving cell-free
operation in a practically feasible way, with computational complexity and
fronthaul requirements that are scalable to large networks with many users. This
poses many important research questions that must be explored systematically and
in-depth. This project firstly develops scalable artificial intelligence
(AI)-based solutions. Together with the appropriate (cost-efficient) AP
deployment planning tools (e.g., where to put the APs), these developments
constitute a significant step toward enabling the low-latency and uniformly
reliable wireless services at a lower cost. Given the international nature of
the project, the project contributes to the development of a diverse workforce
in AI and 6G wireless networks through the formation of international research
teams integrating undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Project research activities are organized into three thrusts. Thrust
1 develops scalable AI-based resource allocation solutions enabling the
implementation of large-scale CFmMIMO. The developed solutions are further
enhanced by exploring AI architectures applicable to large networks. This
includes the security aspects, especially in the context of AI algorithms and
architecture, and the cloud radio access network. Thrust 2 focuses on
establishing network planning and waveform constraints to address scalable
deployment solutions. This includes the development of infrastructure-aware
minimum-cost AP deployment methodologies by taking into account the QoS
requirements and available transport infrastructure. The developed methodologies
are further augmented by developing a network-wide user signal detection method,
accounting for the fronthaul capacity and the quantization resolution at each
AP. This task also investigates how CFmMIMO can address many of todayâ€™s most
challenging spectrum policy issues. Evaluation Thrust evaluates and analyzes the
methodologies developed in Thrusts 1&amp;2. This employs the existing US and
European experimental testbeds and provides a continuous feedback cycle between
theory and experimentation. The US team will build upon the prior experience
with Colosseum. On the European side, the team will experiment with the Open Air
Interface (OAI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.