* 2225858
* BRITE Future: Bioeconomy Relevant Innovation Through EASy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ellen Neidle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

It is a national priority to accelerate biomanufacturing and to reduce
dependence on refining petroleum to obtain commodity chemicals. This project
focuses on developing techniques and bacterial strains that will allow
industrially important compounds to be made from renewable resources rather than
from fossil fuels. Towards this goal, the ability of bacteria to synthesize
complex chemicals can be exploited. Among the petrochemicals in high demand are
aromatic compounds that can be made by bacteria. However, natural biosynthetic
pathways need to be modified to allow the accumulation of specific compounds at
high levels to be economically feasible. This project involves the modification
of a biosynthetic pathway in two kinds of soil bacteria, Acinetobacter baylyi
and Pseudomonas putida to produce aromatic compounds. The research is
accomplished through a collaboration with a team of scientists at Argonne
National Laboratory. This collaboration has both scientific and educational
components. Students learn about biomanufacturing and metabolic engineering, as
well as careers in these fields, through a seminar series featuring scientists
of the Agile BioFoundry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
research is to create a cost-effective biosynthetic route for the bacterial
conversion of plant-derived sugars to industrially needed aromatic compounds.
Such compounds are in high demand and are commercially available now as
petrochemicals. The bacteria employed in the research, Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1
and Pseudomonas putida KT2440, use the shikimate pathway to make aromatic
compounds. To increase carbon flux into biosynthesis, an enzyme that is not
typically part of the shikimate pathway is altered by novel mutagenesis and
adaptive laboratory evolution methods and investigated in A. baylyi. This
bacterium has an exceptionally high efficiency of natural transformation and
allelic replacement and serves as host to generate novel enzymes. A modified
shikimate pathway is engineered in P. putida using one of the novel enzymes
generated in A. baylyi. This strategy uses the two different kinds of bacteria
in a complementary approach that exploits unique features of each. The
engineered pathway in P. putida is predicted to redirect carbon from a renewable
biomass feedstock into high levels of desired end products. The collaboration
with researchers from the Agile BioFoundry employs high throughput techniques to
accomplish the project goals using advanced analytics and microfluidics-based
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering program in the Division of Chemical
Bioengineering Environmental and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.