* 2225445
* GEM: Suprathermal and Energetic Ion Heating by Electromagnetic Ion Cyclotron Waves and Magnetosonic Waves in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xiaochen Shen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 497,305.00

The focus of this project is to study the ion heating by plasma waves in the
Earth's magnetosphere. The electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) and magnetosonic
waves are plasma waves generated by ring current ions in the magnetosphere.
These plasma waves could scatter and heat the ions, transferring energy from the
ring current to other regions or populations. This project investigates the ion
heating process by combining simulations with Van Allen Probes observations. The
modeling efforts will reveal the source of ions from wave-particle interaction.
Understanding the ion dynamics will help future space missions traveling through
the magnetosphere and implementation of the ion-wave interaction effects in
space weather prediction. This project will help quantify the ion flux
variations in the inner magnetosphere, where many satellites are operating to
provide human's essential needs of communication, navigation, and security. This
project supports two early-career scientists, a female faculty and a graduate
student at Boston University. The Center for Space Physics at Boston University
provides an ideal environment for collaboration in space science research,
student training and teaching, community engagement, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to determine the conditions
and consequences of resonant ion heating by EMIC and magnetosonic waves through
comprehensive satellite observations and numerical modeling. Firstly, a survey
of ion heating events will be performed using the Van Allen Probes data. The ion
heating events will be categorized by different wave properties and background
plasma parameters, to reveal the critical conditions that cause evident ion
heating features in the inner magnetosphere. Secondly, a series of quasilinear
simulations of the ion heating and scattering effects will be performed during
the EMIC and magnetosonic wave events. The simulation inputs are provided by the
wave properties and background plasma parameters from the survey to demonstrate
the efficiency and energies of ion heating. Thirdly, since the amplitudes of
EMIC and magnetosonic waves could be large so that they can break the quasi-
linear approximation, the interaction between ions and large amplitude waves
will be evaluated using a test particle code. A series of test particle
simulations will be performed through varying wave amplitudes to find the
threshold beyond which nonlinear effects become important. The ion phase
trapping and bunching effects by strong EMIC and magnetosonic waves will also be
evaluated to quantify their contribution to ion acceleration at different
energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.