* 2225878
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven engineering of the thermotolerant yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Stefano Lonardi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 777,157.00

Metabolism involves a complex set of reactions and control mechanisms. This
makes microbial behavior difficult to understand and engineer. Machine learning
(ML) identifies patterns and relationships in complex sets of data. A yeast will
be subject to varied efforts to increase its yield of biochemicals and biofuels.
Machine learning will help identify synthetic biology approaches that maximize
production. Also, educational and training resources will be expanded for
students in K-6 afterschool programs, in K-12 summer camps, and in a Data
Science Academy for high school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
is to identify genes critical to driving high carbon flux to a desired central
metabolite and product. A deep learning approach – DeepGuide – will be used to
design optimized sgRNA libraries to generate genetic diversity. The build stage
of the cycle will leverage efficient CRISPR-Cas9 technologies for gene
disruption and regulation. A biosensor-driven approach to testing will enable
high throughput analysis of the effect of host genetics on the production of
malonyl-CoA, a key precursor to polyketides. The droplet microfluidics screening
and analysis capabilities of the Agile BioFoundry (ABF) at Argonne National
Laboratory will provide a wealth of additional information to link metabolite
production with host genetics. The large datasets generated in the testing stage
will be used as input for deep learning; a new algorithm linking genotypes to
phenotypes – DeepMetabolism – will be used to predict a minimal set of genetic
perturbations that maximize malonyl-CoA biosynthesis. This data-driven approach
will advance both deep learning and high throughput approaches for microbial
engineering and can be applied to other strategic
metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.