* 2225957
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing interactions between tropical deep convection and the environment using a buoyancy framework
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Brandon Wolding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 139,214.00

Tropical convective storms play a significant role in global weather and
climate. With current computing technology, it is impossible to directly model
all aspects of convection, so scientists rely on parameterizations, which are
approximations that are coded into the models. Simulations of Earth’s climate
are particularly sensitive to the parameterizations of tropical convection, so
it is incumbent on the scientific community to improve understanding of tropical
convection to improve the parameterizations that go into weather and climate
modeling. In this project, the research team plans to study how tropical
convection interacts with its surrounding environment using a new framework that
focuses on the entrainment of air near the Earth's surface into the storm. In
addition to the potential to improve numerical modeling, the research team will
organize a workshop to bring together the tropical convection research
community, including a diverse set of early-career scientists and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
continue work towards identifying a conceptual model for tropical deep
convection that can be used to explain precipitation variability across scales.
The research team will build upon the “precipitation-buoyancy (P-B) framework”
which relates precipitation and estimates of entraining plume buoyancy. The
research team will center their work around two main research questions: (1) to
what extent do “grid-scale” O(100 km) integrated measures of convective
instability accurately assess the capacity of the atmosphere to support deep
convection, and (2) how can we refine grid-scale average instability measures to
account for variability and dynamics across scales? The investigators will use
new mesoscale convective tracking databases, cold pool gradient feature
detection algorithms, long-standing radar data, field campaign data, and
satellite observations, combined with novel compositing techniques to address
the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterize how the
precipitation-buoyancy (“P-B”) relationship varies as a function of convective
variability across spatial scales. &lt;br/&gt;2. Examine how P-B thresholds
change as a function of mesoscale convective system evolution, estimating the
sensitivity of deep convection to its thermodynamic environment throughout
different lifecycle stages. &lt;br/&gt;3. Characterize how dynamical
interactions - mass flux/entrainment, wind shear, vorticity, cold pools - modify
thermodynamic controls on deep convective evolution. &lt;br/&gt;4. Apply the
refined P-B framework to study diurnal, regional, and intraseasonal
precipitation variability across the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.