* 2225542
* HSI Pilot Project: San Antonio College’s  Campeones de STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Deana Apple, San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 181,800.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Pilot Project aims to enhance college
student recruitment, participation, and course retention in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM)-focused courses through the development of
mentorship opportunities and scholarships. The project will be critical for
meeting and fulfilling exponential demands in high-demand, high paying STEM
related jobs in the greater San Antonio area and the national region.
Importantly, given that persistent racial and ethnic inequality in STEM degree
attainment, with lower persistence rates of Hispanic, and low-income STEM
majors, it is timely to address STEM-related awareness gaps in secondary-to-
higher education and transition to college. To solve these problems, our project
will provide leadership opportunities to first-year students, with training from
industry and academic experts on STEM-knowledge dissemination strategies to
focused target audiences namely, secondary school children from similar
socioeconomic backgrounds. Our project goals will include the establishment of a
San Antonio College (SAC) Campeones de STEM Academy, a two-day institute
designed to invigorate and enhance SAC’s existing STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of Campeones de STEM
initiative is to improve student participation and course retention in STEM
courses at SAC, while enriching secondary STEM education at a target middle
school. The project will provide scholarships to selected STEM major students
currently enrolled in their first year at the college. This opportunity will
pair these selected Campeones de STEM participants with selected general science
courses at an inner-city middle school in SAC’s service-area. Project activities
include on- and off-site events, such as visits with local and renowned STEM
leaders, hands-on science experiments, and field trips to local STEM centers and
museums as well as a tour of the SAC STEM departments, classrooms, and
laboratories. Expected outcomes include increased student retention in STEM
courses and significantly greater involvement of secondary school children in
STEM education. Our project aims will investigate the following research
questions: 1) Does SAC’s Campeones de STEM Academy significantly improve STEM
awareness, and thereby, course participation, persistence, and PGR in first-year
college students? 2) Is STEM outreach to secondary education students effective
in improving interest in the STEM fields? and 3) Do informal STEM-related
activities, including hands-on science experiments designed by college STEM
faculty, and mentoring improve role model-based peer-learning endeavors in STEM
and result in an incremental increase in STEM course participation and retention
in first-year college students? Research methodologies used to asses these
questions will include specified metrics compiled from quantitative and
qualitative data. Expected results include an increase in general awareness and
interest in the STEM fields for both secondary middle school students and first-
year college students, higher rates of persistence, productive grade rate (PGR),
and course completion for the SAC participants, and the development of the
secondary school students’ STEM-related skills through informal educational
activities and mentorship. Apart from improved academic merits, this project has
potential for broader impacts at a societal-level via its peer-to-peer learning
and leadership roles. This project is informed via intentional intervention
strategies, such as exposure to STEM-focused content, interactions with the
local area, STEM leaders, scholarship driven mentoring programs, and peer-to-
peer opportunities with resource-poor setting populations in their schools.
Importantly, Campeones de STEM project will also form the basis for a track 2
cross-institutional, community program to improve enrollment and retention rates
in the STEM fields. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education
and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.