* 2225057
* The relationship between tryptophan and pyridine nucleotide metabolism in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Adrian Hegeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 586,257.00

The essential cellular metabolites known as pyridine nucleotides play an
important role in regulating energy metabolism in all organisms, from single
cell life to mammals and plants. However, in plants, the question of how
pyridine nucleotides are made remains an unsettled area of research with several
historical contradictions even in this genomics era. Understanding pyridine
nucleotide biosynthesis is not only important for a general understanding of
their functions in plant biology but is critical for improvement of the
nutritional quality of food plants. Also, because recent research has elucidated
multiple roles of pyridine nucleotides in cell survival and cell communication,
understanding the details of pyridine nucleotide metabolism at the molecular and
genetic level is expected to be critically important for designing strategies
for plant survival under stress in a changing global environment. Early career
scientists will be introduced via this projectâ€™s workshop to modern methods for
metabolic pathway discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyridine nucleotides are
synthesized from simple metabolic precursors in all organisms. While the
specific steps of reactions differ among organisms, a common feature is the
generation of quinolinic acid from an amino acid, either tryptophan or
aspartate. Earlier studies suggested that monocotyledonous plants had the
genetic capacity to utilize either tryptophan or aspartate, but more recent
genomic analyses suggest that they lack the capacity to synthesize pyridine
nucleotides from tryptophan. Key intermediates in the kynurenine metabolic
pathway, however, can be found in maize and the origins of these intermediates
will be resolved by the proposed research. Advanced metabolic analysis based on
stable isotope methods and high-resolution mass spectrometry will be used to
elucidate the metabolic origins of pyridine nucleotides. The kynurenine
metabolic pathway to pyridine nucleotides in maize and other plants will be
measured to determine when in development and in what tissues the kynurenine
pathway is primary. Comparative metabolic transformations in normal wildtype
plants and mutants in tryptophan and indole biosynthesis will be studied. Small
molecule inhibitors coupled with stable isotope labeled precursors will be used
for targeted high-resolution mass spectrometry based metabolomic analysis of the
pyridine nucleotide metabolic network. Relative plant utilization of both the
aspartate and kynurenine pathways will be determined by measurement of the flux
from early precursors. Once pathways are determined by isotopic analysis, assay
guided fractionation will be employed to overcome the apparent evolutionary
divergence that has made genetic homology analysis difficult. Assay guided
fractionation and proteomics will be used to obtain amino acid sequence for two
key proteins in the kynurenine pathway. A summer and online workshop in plant
metabolomics for graduate students, postdoctoral scientists and others
interested in stable isotope methodology for metabolic measurement and pathway
discovery will broaden the appreciation of these approaches using modern
applications of high resolution mass spectrometry to stable isotope
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.