* 2225161
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Robust, Scalable, and Resilient Radio Fingerprinting
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Nirnimesh Ghose, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2026
* USD 299,997.00

Radio fingerprinting can distinguish wireless devices using radio frequency
signals, as unique device hardware imperfections are carried in such signals.
Radio fingerprinting is a physical-layer authentication technique and plays a
critical role in identifying individual devices (e.g., IoT devices) and mission-
critical targets (e.g., Unmanned Aerial Vehicles). This project develops new
methods to promote the robustness, scalability, and resilience of radio
fingerprinting by synergizing deep learning and signal processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three research questions,
specifically (1) how to improve the robustness of radio fingerprinting against
temporal variations of wireless channels; (2) how to mitigate nonlinear receiver
hardware imperfections; and (3) how to improve the resilience of radio
fingerprinting against white-box attackers. The research outcomes of this
project will be disseminated through publications and new course modules and
projects. These will promote cybersecurity workforce development as well as
broaden the participation of students from underrepresented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.