* 2225573
* ICE-TI: Thokatakiya (Towards the future)
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Charles Tinant, Oglala Lakota College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities for their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover seeks to increase the regional capacity for data
science through the development of innovative curriculum and service-based
experiential learning, providing context for science and engineering education
that is focused on active and collaborative learning. The project aims to build
an environmental data science STEM education model through the incorporation of
Traditional Ecological Knowledge to address complex environmental science and
engineering questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tȟokátakiya (“towards the
future”) project aims to strengthen environmental data science education and
undergraduate research at Oglala Lakota College. A research focus on advancing
understanding of groundwater and surface water flow in the region provides a
basis for faculty and student research experiences and community engagement.
Using advanced sensing tools, such as airborne and drone-acquired LiDAR and
multispectral imagery, the project aims to characterize and understand the
geometry, scale, and effects of structural features in complex hydrologic
systems. Curriculum designed around these themes and founded on Lakota Ways of
Knowing aims to train future leaders in the field of data science. Core
competencies will be built in courses in Environmental Science and Pre-
engineering degree programs. Community programming emphasizes food sovereignty,
aquifer health, and developing a self-paced GIS Certificate program for the
regional STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.