* 2225832
* RII-BEC: Boosting Retention, Interest, and Diversity through Guided Experiences in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sara Cooper, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 998,656.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM careers often require
practical training experiences in addition to academic preparation to transition
between career points successfully. The public health restrictions of the
COVID-19 pandemic caused most institutions of higher education (IHEs) to shift
to online instruction, making it impossible for students to have hands-on
experiences that develop laboratory and research skills. Underrepresented groups
were especially vulnerable because racial and ethnic minorities experienced
worse health, financial, and emotional impacts due to the pandemic. Through a
collaborative project involving minority-serving institutions (MSIs), a
nonprofit research and training institute, and for-profit companies in the
biotechnology sector, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology (HudsonAlpha) will
support a diverse group of students strongly affected by the pandemic at a
vulnerable point in their educational and career pathways through a project
titled Boosting Retention, Interest, and Diversity through Guided Experiences in
STEM (BRIDGES). BRIDGES will provide practical, laboratory-based training
through paid internships to help a diverse group of students bridge the gap
between undergraduate studies and graduate programs or the STEM workforce. The
project will also foster partnerships between academia, nonprofit research
endeavors, and industry in a field with high unmet demand for well-trained,
entry-level positions. The significance of the BRIDGES project is to help
fulfill NSF’s mission by promoting the progress of science and increasing access
for underrepresented groups to the nation’s STEM enterprise in EPSCoR
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the BRIDGES project is to
increase student retention and diversity in STEM by building a supportive,
holistic bridge between undergraduate and graduate school or industry
employment. Specifically, the project will recruit and train two cohorts of six
post-baccalaureates from MSIs in EPSCoR jurisdictions. Each intern will gain
valuable laboratory experience through a nearly year-long paid position in a
research laboratory or tenant company at HudsonAlpha. Students will also receive
professional development training, exposure to career opportunities, and
mentorship. Over each cohort year, the project will strengthen students’ STEM
identity through mentorship from career scientists and near-peers and the
innovative and entrepreneurial environment of HudsonAlpha’s campus. The project
will also develop and enhance partnerships between HudsonAlpha and Historically
Black Colleges and Universities in Alabama. Evaluation will measure the
project’s effectiveness in maintaining and strengthening partnerships with MSIs
and cultivating an experience that supports STEM engagement among minority
students. The project will advance understanding of experiences and partnerships
that support persistence in STEM and increase access for underrepresented groups
to the nation’s STEM enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.