* 2225947
* Elucidating the dynamic characteristics of antigen recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Shenshen Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2025
* USD 476,137.00

Cells use surface receptors to sense their surroundings. Sensing relies on
recognition of molecules by receptors. Effectiveness of recognition is routinely
measured at steady state between single receptors and their bound molecules.
However, new experiments showed that cells essential for the immune system may
probe the binding quality of their antigen receptors in a highly dynamic and
collective manner via tactile senses (i.e., neither at steady state nor using
independent receptors). Curiously, by forming transient cell-cell contact,
immune cells collect receptor-bound antigens into clusters and extract them
using pulling forces generated inside the cell. The PI aims to investigate the
functional impacts, design, and control of active, physical sensing of cells.
Through a close synergy between theory and experiment, the proposed research
will elucidate the physical principles behind the dynamic characteristics of
antigen recognition, advance our understanding of information transfer via cell-
cell interaction, and uncover adaptive benefit that active sensing might confer.
Broader impacts of the project lie in a close integration of education and
outreach activities with the research program, to engage students at all levels
with the role of physics in cellular dynamics, function, and adaptation. The PI
will develop web-based learning modules to deepen the understanding of membrane-
mediated interactions and the origin of molecular cooperativity and antagonism.
She will expand on a new course to teach the elements of information and control
theory with applications to sensing and dynamic adaptation in biology. The PI
will continue to provide authentic research experiences in her lab by serving as
a faculty mentor through the Computational and Systems Biology program at
UCLA.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Diverse lymphocytes expressing unique surface
receptors work collectively to recognize myriad and changing microscopic
entities invading a living organism. Potent protection relies on positive
selection of immune cells expressing high-affinity antigen receptors. However,
this process of selection appears surprisingly ineffective and hits a modest
ceiling of binding affinity much lower than expected. Experimental data have
started to reveal that immune recognition is far beyond equilibrium receptor-
antigen binding; instead, cells exert contractile forces to actively extract
antigen from antigen-presenting cells. The PI hypothesizes that the apparent
ineffectiveness of selection is not an artifact due to unavoidable randomness,
but rather, can be a direct consequence of the non-equilibrium nature of antigen
recognition. She proposes to explore an explanation by establishing a mapping
from molecular recognition to organismal responses via cellular dynamics and
active force usage. This project will focus on (a) determining how and why cells
create and maintain a multifocal contact pattern during antigen recognition; (b)
examining the capacity of physical extraction of antigen in achieving affinity
discrimination over a broad dynamic range; and (c) identifying information
bounds and discovering cellular strategies to optimize competing functions.
Mathematical and computational modeling will be combined with in vitro and in
vivo experiments to clarify the functional consequences of the nonequilibrium
nature and dynamic characteristics of antigen recognition, and to access whether
and how cells can utilize physically acquired information to guide adaptation.
While the role of biochemical circuitry in achieving the remarkable specificity
and sensitivity of immune recognition has been extensively explored, this
research on physical dynamics of immune cells in native environment is
complementary to most ongoing work in the field, and could uncover unexpected
functional objectives of active sensing by cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.