* 2225776
* Development of advanced biocatalyst tools and resources to enable biogas-based biomanufacturing.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ana Paula Alonso, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 716,898.00

Biological conversion of methane-rich gas streams, including anaerobic
digestion-derived biogas, by methanotrophic bacteria represents a promising
route to valorize these abundant, squandered carbon sources while simultaneously
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions. This project will develop genetic
engineering tools and metabolic models that will advance methanotroph-based
biotechnologies aimed at the sequestration/utilization of greenhouse gases as
feedstocks for the production of renewable fuels and chemicals. This project
will also facilitate the training of underrepresented students at University of
North Texas, a Hispanic-serving institution, to promote diversification of the
scientific workforce. Further, this project will establish an International
Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) team consisting of diverse high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students that will engage with the broader community
to promote synthetic biology and metabolic engineering via scientific outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to
develop methanotroph-based CH4 and CO2 greenhouse gas mitigation and conversion
biotechnologies. To this end, the goals of this project are to 1) onboard
Methylococcus capsulatus to the Department of Energyâ€™s Agile Biofoundry and
develop genetic tools that enable high-throughput metabolic engineering of this
bacterium; 2) map and compare M. capsulatus CH4 and CO2 carbon flux in wild-type
and genetically engineered bacteria via 13C fluxomics; and 3) iteratively
develop a predictive metabolic model to guide Design-Build-Test-Learn-based
metabolic engineering approaches of methanotrophic biocatalysts. Expansion of an
advanced genetic engineering toolbox and identification of the coordinated
metabolic pathways mediating dual CH4/CO2 utilization and conversion in M.
capsulatus will enable the rational metabolic engineering of these organisms for
biomanufacturing of green fuels and chemicals from single carbon greenhouse
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.