* 2225103
* BoCP-Design: Climate change and ecosystem functioning: reducing critical uncertainties about ecosystem acclimation
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* John Bradford, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 499,999.00

Ecosystems respond to changes in temperature and precipitation through many
diverse processes spanning time scales from minutes to centuries. The net effect
of these processes is known as “ecosystem acclimation.” However, it is unknown
how the effect of fast and slow changes will ultimately lead to combinations of
plants, animals, microbes, and soils never seen before. This project brings
together experts from many fields to understand the slow ecological processes
that make long-term predictions so difficult, and to provide new mathematical
and statistical tools for learning more about these processes. The goal of the
project is to improve long-term forecasts of ecosystem functioning. This is
accomplished by reducing the uncertainty from the poorly understood phenomena of
ecosystem acclimation. A postdoctoral researcher is receiving direct training
and mentorship as part of this project. The Resist-Accept-Direct framework is
used to provide options to land managers dealing with rapidly changing
conditions. This management framework complements existing climate adaptation
planning efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes three approaches.
First, a theoretical framework is developed to study the functional consequences
of lags in ecosystem acclimation. The framework was designed to study ecological
change across temporal scales and levels of biological organization. Second,
several researchers are bringing together knowledge from paleoecology, long-term
observational studies, experiments, and simulation models to synthesize our
understanding of ecosystem acclimation. This synthesis benefits the field of
ecology by catalyzing integration across biological subdisciplines and research
traditions. Processes such as physiological changes, trait plasticity, species
turnover, altered disturbance regimes, and long-term change in soil properties
are considered. Finally, long-term data sets are analyzed for evidence that
acclimation lags are already impacting ecosystem functioning. The analyses of
existing data sets demonstrates when, where, and why disequilibria between
climate and ecosystem structure are already impacting ecosystem
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.