* 2225675
* From Limited Data to the Deformation Field in Metals: A Machine Learning Driven Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tamer Zaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Having warning before a catastrophic failure of a material occurs can save lives
and reduce costs. Prior to failure a material may undergo internal changes which
generate high-frequency stress waves, referred to as acoustic emissions.
Measurements of acoustic emissions in metals provide a unique approach for
quantifying defects and their movements. However, interpreting acoustic
emissions is a longstanding challenge. This research will address this challenge
by identifying and decoding the distinct acoustic emission signatures of each
deformation mechanism with a combination of experiments and machine learning
tools. This research will result in a unique method that endows experiments with
a window into the fundamental deformation mechanisms that are not currently
accessible from surface measurements alone. This will enable new basic knowledge
of the behavior of metals during deformation. This research is also integrated
with education and outreach. Results from this work will be integrated into a
new course on machine learning for solid mechanics and materials engineering.
Maryland high-school students from under-served/under-represented groups will
also be engaged in research internship opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
will utilize integrated physics-based modeling, machine learning, and
experiments to: (1) develop a “digital twin’’ of acoustic emission experiments
to forward predict the acoustic emission surface waves associated with complex
slip avalanches during the deformation of single crystal Ni micropillars; (2)
definitively assess/scrutinize existing phenomenological acoustic emission
models in literature, and develop new physics-based theoretical models that
identify the interconnections between dislocation-based plasticity and acoustic
emission signals; (3) predict the true experimentally observed slip localization
in the 3D volume from the surface acoustic emission measurements; (4) train deep
operator networks (DeepONets) for forward predictions of acoustic emission and
inverse predictions of the underlying deformation mechanisms; and (5) validate
the forward and inverse predictions through coupled in situ scanning electron
microscopy microcompression experiments and acoustic emission measurements on
single-crystal Ni microcrystals. To close the loop between the developed models
and the experiments, we will also utilize the trained DeepONets on the
experimental results to gain fundamental understanding of the underlying
deformation mechanisms during dislocation avalanches in micro-compression
experiments, which are currently difficult to interpret based on surface
measurements and load-displacement measurements alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.