* 2225087
* Toward an Integrative Approach to Machine Learning for Traffic Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 547,447.00

This project will create and experiment with an integrative approach to applying
machine learning (ML) method in traffic management, in the new era where
ridesharing is seen as integral to Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS), in order to
improve mobility for all users. An integrative approach tailors the principles
of ML methods––rather than prepacked toolboxes––and immerse them with the domain
knowledge to create new, hybrid methods. The transportation sector is currently
experiencing monumental disruptions with the introduction and constant evolution
of new technologies and mobility services. The SEA—Sharing, Electrification, and
Automation—change is expected to transform how mobility is planned, provided,
and used by people and companies in cities and beyond. The importance of traffic
management will grow as the broad trends toward sharing continue in the next
decade. Ridesharing has long been considered a low-hanging fruit for traffic
management. Thanks to emerging technologies (e.g., transportation network
companies and autonomous driving), the popularity of ridesharing has grown
markedly in recent years. Fueling this renewed interest is the promise to make
ridesharing flexible, user friendly, efficient, and cheap. In the era of MaaS,
ridesharing would likely become a major, if not dominating, mode of travel. The
results from this project will help the public sector evaluate how ridesharing
can be leveraged to improve the efficiency, environmental sustainability, and
equity of our transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a novel methodology for a range of challenging transportation problems
involving sequential hierarchical optimization. By bringing together
transportation science, game theory, optimization, and ML, the framework
exemplifies an integrative approach to cross-disciplinary research. It also
opens new pathways toward harnessing the power of ML in the transportation
domain on the one hand and brings stimulating new challenges to the attention of
the ML community on the other. The project introduces and analyzes the problem
of managing traffic by ridesharing, which is born of recent technology advances
but has yet to receive much attention. This problem connects hierarchical
optimization, a traditional topic in transportation, to ridesharing, a rapidly
growing field of study in several disciplines (economics, computer science, and
transportation), and promises to push forward the frontiers of both. The
findings will deepen our understanding of ridesharing not only as a mode of
cooperative travel but also as a tool for traffic
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.