* 2225463
* GEM: Explorative Global-To Kinetic-Scale Modeling of Collisionless Shocks Using Physics-Informed Data Mining and Machine Learning
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Drew Turner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 597,105.00

Collisionless shock waves occur in space plasmas throughout the Universe and are
one of the leading mechanisms considered responsible for accelerating cosmic
rays. Understanding the physics at work in collisionless shocks in space plasmas
has broad impacts on a number of fundamental scientific fields, from solar and
space physics to planetary sciences and astrophysics. At Earth, a bow shock
forms from the deflection of solar wind plasma around the planet's magnetic
field, offering an ideal natural laboratory to explore the nature of such
collisionless shocks. This effort promises to use state-of-the-art machine
learning and artificial intelligence techniques and tools applied to &gt;10,000
satellite crossings of Earth's bow shock. The intent is to develop a series of
data-driven and physics-informed models of collisionless shocks that not only
well capture the microscopic to macroscopic nature of Earth's own bow shock but
may also be applied to a better understanding of shocks at other planetary
systems (including exo-planets in other stellar systems), solar and stellar
shocks, and other more extreme astrophysical shocks. If successful, these models
will prove transformative by enabling us to produce and explore simulated
examples of shocks in systems that we have no immediate access to, establishing
a new interdisciplinary connection spanning between solar and magnetospheric
space plasma physics and planetary and astrophysics. Furthermore, the effort
involves a diverse leadership team and will provide dedicated research
opportunities for underserved academic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research centers around the development of and exploration using a pair of
parameterized, empirical models of i) Earth's three-dimensional (3D), global bow
shock, and ii) general collisionless shocks at ion-kinetic scales. Models will
be developed using advanced data mining and state-of-the-art physics-informed
machine learning tools applied to NASA's Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) and
solar wind datasets. MMS' greater dataset is ideal for machine learning
applications since it is accompanied by a dataset of "scientist-in-the-loop"
(SITL) reports, which effectively serve as an expert-determined and easily
minable validation dataset. Once developed as part of the research, model i)
promises to be the first empirical (i.e., computationally inexpensive),
parameterized, global-3D model of Earth's bow shock to accurately capture the
critical quasi-parallel and quasi-perpendicular shock regimes and their
respective distortion of the global bow shock surface. Model ii) will be
developed by coupling machine learning applications to fundamental physical
principles of collisionless shocks in space plasmas, establishing a genuine
physics-informed machine learning model to ideally offer accurate predictions of
not only shocks like those used to train the model (i.e., Earth's bow shock
under a variety of driving conditions) but also extrapolative predictive
capabilities for other planetary (and exoplanetary) bow shocks, collisionless
solar shocks, interplanetary and heliospheric (and astrospheric) shocks, and
other collisionless astrophysical shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.