* 2225592
* Direct Interfacial Charge Separation in Plasmonic Heterostructures Revealed by Single-Particle Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephan Link, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,616.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing methods to
understand how metal nanoparticles, 1000 times smaller than the width of a hair,
capture and convert light into usable energy when contacting metal oxide
semiconductors. Although metal nanoparticles efficiently absorb light, most of
the absorbed energy is converted into heat. On the other hand, metal oxide
semiconductors can store light energy for much longer times than metals making
them useful for applications such as photodetection. However, metal oxide
semiconductors do not absorb as strongly or often only at specific wavelengths,
while metal nanoparticle can be designed to strongly interact with light of any
color. This project overcomes these limitations by combining the high absorption
of metal nanoparticles with the longer lifetimes of the absorbed light energy in
metal oxide semiconductors. The principal investigator uses techniques that
allow him to study how the light energy absorbed by a metal nanoparticle is
transferred to an adjacent metal oxide semiconductor layer. These experiments
are carried out for one nanoparticle at a time to resolve heterogeneities that
arise from materials synthesis. In addition, the PI is continuing his
longstanding participation in Rice University’s Civic Scientist Program and
Research Experience for Teachers, allowing him to educate K-12 students about
nanotechnology and inspire them to pursue scientific careers as well as to
provide teachers with experience to in turn help students in those
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to understand and maximize plasmon decay into charge separated states
between a metal nanoparticle and an adjacent metal oxide semiconductor via
direct charge transfer following plasmon excitation. The principal investigator
will accomplish this goal by addressing the following objectives: 1) Design and
fabricate plasmonic metal–semiconductor heterostructures and establish a
correlation with interface induced plasmon decay via changes to the homogeneous
plasmon linewidth; 2) Quantitatively determine charge injection into
semiconductors surrounding plasmonic nanostructures using single particle
ultrafast spectroscopy and correlate with efficiencies obtained from plasmon
damping; 3) Apply Stokes and anti-Stokes emission spectroscopy to independently
follow interfacial charge transfer through emission quenching under both one-
and multi-photon excitation conditions. These proposed studies will elucidate
the mechanism of interfacial charge transfer in plasmonic heterostructures and
the underlying material parameters that determine efficiencies with a focus on
excess energy as determined by the plasmon resonance and the relative band
alignment including Schottky barrier height. Such detailed mechanistic
information would be impossible to obtain without single-particle techniques due
to the heterogeneity of plasmonic nanoparticle sizes and local environments. The
proposed studies will potentially have a transformative impact on developing
efficient photovoltaic devices based on plasmonic metal-semiconductor
heterostructures taking advantage of a wide wavelength sensitivity, large
absorption cross section, and long hot carrier
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.