* 2225227
* EAGER: Cultivating Scientific Mindsets in the Machine Learning Era
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Raffaella Borasi, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 295,563.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is woven into the fabric of everyday life. There is
currently an enormous skills gap in AI for the future workforce. Limited AI
learning opportunities among K-12 students and professional development
opportunities for teachers may lead to AI inequity in the workforce and
education. This project addresses these challenges by introducing Machine
Learning (ML) as a discovery tool for data-driven scientific inquiry in K-12
STEM classroom. The project focuses on creating and studying a novel
programming-free and visual-based ML-powered learning environment. It aims to
enable high school students and teachers with limited mathematical, programming
and data skills to discover complex scientific phenomena and ask big questions
from thought-provoking patterns hidden in real-world data. Researchers will
include high school students from marginalized backgrounds in STEM throughout
the research activities and engage in outreach in collaboration with the David
T. Kearns Center for Diversity and Leadership at the University of Rochester.
This project will contribute to NSF’s missions on promoting inclusion in next-
generation STEM education, and advance K-12 AI literacy as a driving force of
national prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Researchers will carry out three
synergistic research activities: (1) creating a ML-powered visual learning
environment that utilizes a combination of novel glyph-based data visualization
and analogical learning process to mitigate the steep learning curve of ML and
multi-dimensional pattern discovery for high school learners; (2) adopting a co-
design approach to include K-12 STEM teachers and data science experts in
creating ML-powered scientific inquiry activities; and (3) iteratively
evaluating the effectiveness of the new learning environment in supporting three
key learning goals for high school students: multi-dimensional pattern
discovery, ML concepts and methods around clustering and classification, and
pattern-inspired scientific inquiry through question asking, hypothesis
generation, explanation and argument. Findings of this project will advance our
knowledge on the design and pedagogical guidelines of ML-powered visual learning
environments that minimize cognitive load for novice K-12 AI learners. The
resulting novel learning environment, and ML-powered scientific inquiry
activities will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.