* 2225900
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Nanomanufacturing Platform for Area-Selective Atomic Layer Deposition of Components for Ultra-Efficient Functional Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Andrew Teplyakov, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2026
* USD 415,804.00

The total energy consumption by opto-electronic devices is predicted to surpass
the global energy production by the year 2040 unless radical changes are made in
their design and manufacturing and large improvements in their performance. This
grant supports research that helps to alleviate this challenge by pioneering an
innovative manufacturing approach that enables novel and highly efficient three-
dimensional chip designs that do not rely on unsustainable miniaturization of
the traditional chip architectures. Such three-dimensional architectures are
only accessible via new bottom-up manufacturing processes that build and
assemble devices in an additive manner via atomically precise and self-aligned
positioning of the device components. Current top-down manufacturing does not
leverage energy-efficient chemical processes that can significantly reduce
manufacturing energy requirements, nor does it benefit from spontaneous
molecular and atomic self-organization phenomena that can reduce the size of the
chip components. The goal of this research is to develop a continuous, energy-
efficient manufacturing platform for bottom-up deposition and high-resolution
patterning of opto-electronic device components. The project impacts a broad
range of research fields, including electronics, sensing, catalysis, and optical
technology as well as training of the future manufacturing workforce. The
results of this research positively impact the U.S. economy and society,
delivering significant value and growth potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
technologies for enabling atomically precise, bottom-up manufacturing of ultra-
efficient electronic, photonic and quantum devices depend on area-selective
methods for atomic layer deposition and atomic layer etching. This research
addresses the main challenges that preclude widespread implementation of these
techniques by integrating universal resist materials, in-situ resist
regeneration, and universal photo-initiated resist patterning into a single and
continuous manufacturing process that is compatible with a variety of substrates
and chemistries without significant optimization. Current area-selective atomic
layer deposition relies on resist materials and patterning methods that are
highly substrate dependent. The hypothesis is that interactions between atomic
layer deposition reagents and resists can essentially be independent from the
substrate structure and chemistry. This paradigm fundamentally changes the
technological approach by generating the resists using universal small-molecule
meta-stable species, such as carbenes and nitrenes, instead of substrate-
specific resists that are currently being used. The high reactivity of these
species overcomes the diffusion problems with resist deposition and
regeneration, is applicable to a variety of materials, is useful within a wide
range of conditions, and is easily reproduced, as the chemical processes are
quantifiable and scalable. Moreover, such small molecule resists are amenable to
universal photo-initiated patterning steps that can be performed in-
situ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.