* 2225739
* I-Corps: Massively Parallel High-Resolution Optical Electrophysiology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Ahmet Yanik, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a system that could provide more cost-effective and easier-to-use
tools for scientists in electrophysiology, and possibly allow the improved
characterization of dense electrogenic cell cultures. The technology may allow
pharmaceutical companies the ability to better understand how cells respond to
new drugs and could provide more informed, data-driven decisions during clinical
trials. This innovation could also provide biologic manufacturers with more
information regarding the development of their cell cultures which may reduce
production costs associated with failed cell cultures. In addition, academic
scientists may utilize this technology to characterize information transfer in
large neural populations and which may unlock new insights in fields such as
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a novel system for phenotypic screening and monitoring in
electrophysiology. The system monitors the electrical activity of
cardiomyocytes, neurons, and other cells to characterize their behavior and
health with potentially more spatial resolution, throughput, and monitoring time
than other systems. This may allow drug development and biologics manufacturing
to gather more data and develop more robust assays for their product pipelines.
The current approach to monitoring cells for phenotypic screening involves the
use of microelectrode arrays, which can be limited in spatial resolution, are
comparatively low throughput, and may cost more for industries to utilize. This
technology uses a novel optical sensor that combines plasmonics with
electrochromics to possibly create a platform that would be wireless, high
resolution, and high throughput for long-term monitoring of electrophysiology.
This platform may enable the development of cheaper, more robust assays as well
as entirely new characterizations of cell health and information exchange in
cell populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.