* 2225128
* Bridging Institutions to Decrease Gaps in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2026
* USD 998,453.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Implementation and Evaluation (Track 2) project
will decrease the gaps in engineering education for transfer students and
increase their success by focusing on a “transfer-ready” curriculum with support
from a faculty learning community. The State of California, which has the
largest four-year public university system in the United States, does not have
an Associate Degree for Transfer (ADT) in Engineering. Therefore, the majority
of engineering students who transfer from community colleges do not take lower-
division engineering courses. This prolongs the time needed to complete an
engineering degree to an average of five-to-six years. At the California State
Polytechnic University at Pomona (CPP), the two-year graduation rate for
engineering transfer students in the Fall 2021 semester was 6.0%, which is much
lower than the university average (33.1%). The additional years needed to
graduate add to the financial burden for transfer students, as they must pay
additional tuition and expenses. The "Bridging Institutions to Decrease Gaps in
Engineering Education" team (or BRIDGE Education team) includes faculty at CPP
and three partnering institutions, Mt. San Antonio College (Mt. SAC), Citrus
College, and Victor Valley College who will collaborate on transfer student
success in the Department of Civil Engineering and the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at CPP. Because transfer students constitute a large percentage of
students entering engineering programs, it is important to foster their success
in obtaining baccalaureate degrees in a timely manner, which will prove a
significant step in mitigating equity gaps among engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific aims guide the execution of the
project. First is to identify the critical success factors (CSFs) that impact
transfer students’ success. Second is to create a framework to yield “transfer
ready” students by implementing the Transfer Pathway program. Third and finally,
is to offer more diverse lower-division engineering courses through course
development and a faculty learning community (FLC). The BRIDGE project will
minimize transfer students’ struggles and maximize their performance after
transferring. In addition, the BRIDGE project can be developed and incorporated
into other engineering disciplines and strengthen state-wide efforts to support
transfer students’ success by offering an Associate Degree for Transfer (ADT) in
Engineering. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.