* 2225585
* 2022 Vibrational Spectroscopy: Unravelling Chemical Heterogeneity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Aaron Massari, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 8,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the 2022
Vibrational Spectroscopy Gordon Research Seminar and Gordon Research Conference,
to be held July 30 through August 5, 2022. The conference will provide a forum
to highlight the unique role of vibrational spectroscopy in understanding
structure, dynamics, and function of materials in complex, anisotropic
environments. The unique format of a Gordon Research Conference will provide an
opportunity to define the core community and address evolving challenges that
are critical to current and future research efforts. The Gordon Research
Conference will facilitate concentrated and vibrant discussions between the
speakers and the audience. The Conference includes a diverse program of invited
speakers and will provide numerous opportunities for early career researchers to
build their networks and showcase their research. This award will provide
support for eight early career scientists from underrepresented groups,
including underrepresented minorities, women, and individuals with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference seeks to make a connection
between the fundamental behavior of matter at a molecular level with particular
emphasis on how complex, dynamic, and crowded environments alter and affect
molecular behavior. The unifying theme is cutting-edge spectroscopies that
exploit vibrational signatures to probe the structures, dynamics, reactivity,
and environments of molecules in gases, clusters, aerosols, liquids and solid
materials, and at the interfaces between different materials. This conference
will advance knowledge by emphasizing the use of established vibrational
spectroscopic techniques to study new and challenging heterogeneous systems of
interest. The conference will also advance knowledge by presenting emerging
topics in the field, such as vibrational microscopy and novel methods for
computing and simulating vibrational spectra. Advances in theory and simulations
of vibrational spectra will be interwoven with experimental presentations to
promote an open dialog between experimentalists and theoreticians. The program
includes a mechanism to assess the success of the conference in achieving its
goals and for improvements in future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.