* 2225092
* RCN: An International Network to Assess the Status of Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* David Wagner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2027
* USD 599,999.00

There is substantial evidence that insects are declining in both abundance and
diversity across many regions of the planet. These unsustainable rates of loss
will have manifold consequences for the functioning of the planet’s ecosystems.
Essential ecosystem services provided by insects—pollination, litter
decomposition and soil formation, pest control, and nutrient cycling — are
essential for the functioning of the biosphere, food production, and human
health. Estimates of global ecosystem services provided by insects and other
invertebrates exceed $1 trillion annually. This five-year Research Coordination
Network (RCN) will bring together scientists from around the world to study the
status and trajectories of insect populations and communities globally. This
network of international scientists will be tasked with determining the
magnitude and patterns of decline, identifying the primary causes and
consequences for ecosystem function and human welfare, and developing policy
recommendations to mitigate and reverse the losses. The research will develop
educational and outreach materials that will raise awareness for and
appreciation of insects — the little things that run the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will unite entomologists, conservation
biologists, community scientists, agriculture and forestry professionals,
policy-makers, data scientists, and other stakeholders to (a) develop a
community-driven approach to systematic data synthesis, (b) map and meta-analyze
current knowledge of insect population and diversity trends globally, and (c)
propose pathways to protect insect biodiversity. The multinational network will
compile global evidence, identify data gaps, develop community-endorsed data
standards for insect monitoring, assess geographic and taxonomic patterns of
population change, synthesize information on principal threats, advance
statistical methods to meta-analyze quantitative data relevant to insect
population trends, recommend immediate and long-term strategies to protect
insect biodiversity, and promote policy development to support these
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.