* 2225652
* Conference: Symposium - SICB 2023 - Visions for a Diverse, Inclusive, and Safe Future for Field Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Vanessa Young, St Mary's College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 15,954.00

This award supports a symposium, “Envisioning a Diverse, Inclusive, and Safe
Future for Field Biology,” at the 2023 annual meeting of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB). A total of 11 symposium speakers
will present on identifying barriers, advocacy, and promoting inclusivity and
safety in field settings. The award primarily offsets travel expenses for
symposium participants. The symposium will close with a discussion to generate
ideas for increasing inclusivity and access to field-based disciplines for
scientists with diverse identities. This symposium has three key aims toward
promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in field biology: (1) bringing
attention to current issues on the topic, (2) facilitating productive dialogue
between scholars and scientists, and (3) generating scholarly work on the
subject to further the exchange of knowledge in this area. By addressing current
issues and new frontiers in field biology safety and inclusivity, this symposium
challenges attendees to address their own behavior, find ways to improve
institutional policies, and shift the culture of field biology toward a more
diverse and inclusive future. Outcomes from this symposium will include a white
paper outlining best practices for advancing DEI efforts in field-based STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a symposium
focused on promoting DEI in field biology at the annual meeting of the Society
for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB), held in Austin, TX in January
2023. Symposium speakers include scientists from various backgrounds and
experiences in field work; speaker selection spotlights the challenges of field
work for diverse scholars and provides a place for facilitated discussion and
exploration of solutions to the challenges presented. Specifically, speaker
presentations address: (1) barriers to inclusion and access, (2) advocating for
accessibility and inclusion in the field, and (3) visions for a more accessible
future. The symposium structure will challenge attendees to address their own
behavior, find ways to improve institutional policies, and shift the culture of
field biology toward a more diverse and inclusive future. The symposium
concludes with a “gallery walk” and discussion, moderated by a trained DEI
facilitator, to generate ideas for improving field science safety, inclusivity,
and access. This project will generate a white paper report, coauthored by
symposium organizers and speakers, outlining best practices for advancing DEI
efforts in field-based STEM disciplines. Each symposium speaker has also
committed to submitting a manuscript for publication in the journal Integrative
and Comparative Biology to disseminate results of the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Animal Behavior
and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics programs in the BIO Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems and the Field Stations program in the BIO
Division of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.