* 2225729
* Engaging Community Colleges Students through a Residential, Pre-transfer Summer Research Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Rebecca Montes, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 375,540.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to develop a collaboration
between Sonoma State University (SSU), a four-year primarily undergraduate
institution, and two community colleges, Mendocino College and Santa Rosa Junior
College, to engage community college students in research experiences at SSU
prior to applying for transfer. Transfer students can face a number of
challenges as they move to 4-year institutions, which can hinder success in STEM
disciplines. The project will bring two cohorts of ten community college
students each year for a five-week residential research experience. Participants
will also take part in professional and social activities to build a strong
cohort and promote students’ sense of belonging. Existing connections between
the Mathematics, Science, and Engineering Achievement (MESA) programs at all
three institutions will allow the project to recruit diverse participants,
including first generation students and students from populations that have been
historically underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community colleges
generally serve more diverse populations than 4-year institutions, yet at many
institutions nationwide, students from minority populations often transfer at
lower rates than their peers. Undergraduate research is a high-impact practice
that has been shown to provide a rich, engaging experience for students that can
drive greater equity in student retention and overall success. This project will
generate new knowledge by exploring how a 5-week, pre-transfer research
experience that includes cohort building activities impacts the sense of
belonging and STEM self-efficacy of community college students. The project will
also collect data on how the project model contributes to students’ later
decision to transfer and pursue a 4-year degree. The core project model will be
disseminated to communities of interest as an example of how 2- and 4-year
institutions can collaborate to increase student engagement and persistence in
STEM. Project evaluation will use student and faculty data to assess the
effectiveness and implementation of project components while examining the
scalability of the project model with an eye towards future expansion. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity, more generally, at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.