* 2225195
* Collaborative Research:  Development of Novel Chitosan-Biochar-Bentonite Composite Barrier Resilient to Changing Climate: Synthesis, Characterization, and Containment Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Angelica Palomino, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 315,957.00

Climate change is linked to the steady increase in occurrence and severity of
flooding events world-wide, exposing those impacted to large volumes of
floodwaters and the contaminants they carry. Contaminant types vary widely,
which challenges the functionality of traditional contaminant barrier systems.
This research will develop novel composite materials derived from low-cost waste
materials – chitosan and biochar – and bentonite as sustainable, adaptive, and
resilient barrier materials. Chitosan, a biopolymer derived from crustacean
shells, and biochar, a carbonaceous byproduct produced from waste biomass, can
each remove different contaminant types from floodwater. The key innovation of
this work is the ability of the combined synthesized materials to remove a wide
range of contaminant molecules of varying size and charge, such as heavy metals,
nutrients, and organics, from floodwater while functioning as a containment
barrier. This work will address the need to develop sustainable engineered
barrier materials that effectively mitigate flooding and intercept the transport
of many contaminant types potentially found in floodwaters. This award will
support outreach to K-12 students and teachers, undergraduate and graduate
engineering students, academics, and public agencies through activities such as
organized field trips, workshops, and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this work is to develop composites synthesized from low-cost, waste materials –
chitosan and biochar – as sustainable, adaptive, and resilient barrier materials
in containment systems for simultaneous flood mitigation and contaminant
sequestration. The research objectives are: (1) develop repeatable methods for
chitosan-bentonite composite, chitosan-amended biochar, and chitosan-biochar-
bentonite composite synthesis, (2) investigate the physico-chemical and
electrical binding mechanisms of chitosan with bentonite and biochar through
characterization studies such as zeta potential measurement, (3) investigate
contaminant sequestration/degradation and chemical compatibility ranges of the
synthesized composites under changing climate conditions (pH, ionic strength,
dissolved organic content, and contaminant mixtures) through batch studies, and
(4) investigate the potential of chitosan-biochar-bentonite composites for
contaminant sequestration in containment applications and derive contaminant
transport parameters through column studies. The contributions expected from
this work are: (1) developing sustainable, adaptive, low-cost containment
barrier materials, (2) understanding the fundamental mechanisms governing the
physico-chemical interactions between the synthesized materials and the selected
contaminants, and (3) assessing chemical and environmental compatibility of the
synthesized materials for effective adsorption of the selected contaminants. The
synthesized materials have potential to be adapted for many containment
applications such as lined retention ponds and landfill
liners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.