* 2225990
* Fourier Light-Field Interrogation of Congenital Heart Disease in vivo
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Shuyi Nie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are the most common type of birth defect and
impact about 1% of the population worldwide. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
(HLHS) is the most dangerous form and the most common cause of death in infants
with CHDs. Improved imaging technologies are needed to understand HLHS
mechanisms and better achieve early diagnosis and intervention. This project
will develop a novel light-field imaging method capable of assessing heart size,
structure, and function in living animal models of HLHS. Results obtained
leveraging this method are expected to reveal the pathways leading to HLHS and
ultimately advance biotechnology for the benefit of patients with heart disease.
To broaden the educational impacts of the work, the investigators will (1)
prioritize and recruit women and minority undergraduate and graduate students to
work on this project through on-campus or online resources, (2) integrate
research and education by organizing an Atlanta international school on
biophotonics and advanced optical microscopy, (3) develop innovative teaching
and learning methods to enhance problem-based education and improve the public
scientific literacy, and (4) engage underrepresented and veteran groups in STEM
by enhancing school-lab interactions and through a summer camp on biophotonics.
These efforts will impact the training of next-generation imaging engineers and
professionals and promote the cross-fertilization of research and education from
diverse disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
and deploy an integrative light-field functional screen platform, termed instant
multi-color Fourier light-field microscopy (iFLFM), for simultaneous, all-
optical assessment of heart morphology and function in order to identify causal
genes of heart disease. The iFLFM system will be applied to monitor, in vivo,
HLHS development in novel frog models of the disease. The Research Plan is
developed under three aims: (1) Design, construct, and validate iFLFM to enable
fast, volumetric, and simultaneous multi-color structural and dynamic imaging at
the tissue and organ levels, which will form for basis for the instrumental
platform for the proposed interrogation of embryonic frog hearts in vivo; (2)
Validate iFLFM for in vivo observation of cardiac morphology and functions using
control and Ets1-knockdown frog embryos, which will enable snapshot 3D and
multi-parametric assessment and documentation of cardiac conditions and defects,
confirm the influence of Ets1 as a causal gene for HLHS, and ready the basic
architecture, assays, and processing for the proposed functional screen of other
candidate genes; and (3) Advance the iFLFM platform for the functional screen of
mutant embryonic frog hearts to identify causal genes for HLHS, which will
reveal and document anatomical and functional variations and defects upon
genetic mutations and identify mutations that lead to HLHS-like
phenotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.