* 2225174
* Experimental and Computational Investigation of Mechanisms Governing Soft Tissue Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Corinne Henak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2025
* USD 411,736.00

This grant will identify the mechanisms that govern mechanical behavior at soft
tissue interfaces. Soft tissue interfaces are where two soft biological
materials come together. These occur naturally, such as at the interface between
muscle and tendon. These also occur in surgical and healing contexts, such as in
focal cartilage repair. These interfaces are often spatially heterogeneous,
which means that the stiffness and softness of the material varies with specific
location. This has been shown using imaging techniques such as microscopy. How
this heterogeneity affects the mechanical behavior across the interface is not
known. When two soft tissues come together, their mechanical interactions can
arise from friction, adhesion, and from the growth of new tissue across the
interface. This work will first conduct experiments to measure spatial
heterogeneity of the mechanical behavior at soft tissue interfaces. The work
will then build computational models to identify the mechanisms governing this
behavior. The results of this research will provide new fundamental insight into
soft tissue interfaces. These insights can be used to improve surgical repair of
soft tissue damage and can be used to design bio-inspired soft robotics. The
results from this research will be shared with the broader public at outreach
events, and will be shared with undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft material interfaces are relevant to repair and
regeneration of soft tissues, and to the application of soft robotics. The
phenomena governing the mechanics at soft tissue interfaces is incompletely
understood. This project will use a model system of in vitro cartilage-cartilage
integration to experimentally and computationally probe those phenomena. The
research team will conduct experiments to quantify spatially variant
displacement at the cartilage-cartilage interface. In tandem, the research team
will conduct experiments to quantify the bulk behavior, frictional behavior,
adhesive behavior, swelling behavior and neocartilage material behavior.
Subsequently, finite element models will be generated using the quantified
behavior to interpret spatially variant displacement data. Models are expected
to reveal the fundamental phenomena governing soft tissue interfaces. Results
from this research will be integrated into K12, undergraduate, graduate, and
broader public education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.