* 2225399
* An Individual Investigator Development Plan for Building Capacity to Study Undergraduate Latinas Interest in Graduate School
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lizandra Godwin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Advancing participation in engineering is significant for meeting NSF’s goals
and benefits national priorities. The University of New Mexico aims to improve
understanding of the impacts of Latinas’ undergraduate experiences on their
graduate school and career aspirations in engineering. As a designated Hispanic-
serving Institution, the University of New Mexico is an ideal site for this
study. Through advancing knowledge of the impact of intersectional identities on
interest in graduate engineering, the project may inform institutional
transformation for enhancing diversity in engineering and influence national
STEM graduate training efforts for Latinas. The professional development plan
will build research capacity while piloting an integrated study which aims to
add to the knowledge base on barriers to graduate engineering education. This
project supports the development of a diverse and skilled workforce in
engineering and builds capacity for conducting engineering education research at
the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to engage
with Latinas to understand their perspectives, ideas, and decisions about
graduate school and to understand the intersectional context through which
Latinas consider graduate programs. Through this project, the PI will enhance
skills to advance knowledge on broadening participation research in STEM and
build research capacity at a minority-serving institution. Building upon the
community cultural wealth theoretical framework, which recognizes and values
cultural knowledge from communities of color, the project seeks to understand
Latinas’ experiences by building case studies of individual students. A strong
dissemination plan will share the outcomes of the project to a broad audience.
The project will be evaluated through formative and summative assessments
focusing on project alignment with the logic model, skill development in STEM
education research, and knowledge gained concerning Latinas’ graduate school
aspirations. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.