* 2225199
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: STEM Undergraduate Education through a Hispanic Student Success Framework
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Mark Appleford, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,136,029.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 ITP aims to develop an HSI Student
Success Servingness Framework that focuses on pedagogy development, through
evidence-based teaching approaches, combined with enhanced student peer
mentoring and professional development of graduate students and faculty with the
aim of improving student learning, student sense of belongingness and overall
success. Additional attention is needed in STEM disciplines to improve
graduation and retention rates of students by undertaking a range of curricular
and mentoring reforms which will result in systemic changes that support
Hispanic students. The proposed project builds on our dedication to increasing
diversity in the STEM workforce particularly Hispanic students. This plan is an
integrated approach to increase the number of undergraduate underrepresented
minorities who graduate from the UTSA Colleges of Engineering and Integrated
Design and Sciences. The opportunity for UTSA to harness the assets of our first
generation and Hispanic students’ experiences and employ these experiences as
resources could lead to innovation and discovery enterprises in STEM. It is
expected that the program will benefit STEM education by using the new
understandings of servingness to develop organizational change that best serves
Hispanic students at HSI and non-HSI institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will successfully complete the following tasks: 1) Development of an HSI
Student Servingness Framework; 2) Pedagogical development of engineering courses
focused on Computational Literacy which includes professional development of
graduate students and faculty; 3) Review of current policies, practices, and
structures for undergraduate students with a focus on diversity, equity, and
inclusion and 4) Development and subsequent expansion of Peer Mentoring Program
and TA Teaching Academy. Our innovative cross-disciplinary partnership between
STEM and Education faculty will improve student learning and self-efficacy by
(1) developing new methods of instruction and (2) implementing associated
curricular changes focused on computational literacy through evidence-based
teaching approaches and STEM faculty coaching. The HSI Student Servingness
Framework will allow for institutional change through curriculum changes, policy
review, and expanding peer mentoring and other activities. Expected outcomes
using the proposed multi-faceted approach are 1) increase the retention,
graduation and persistence rates of the students; 2) improve the students’ self-
efficacy and sense of belongingness; 3) give faculty opportunities to develop
innovative, equity-centered evidence-based best practice teaching approaches
that enhance student learning and equity in the classroom; and 4) provide
students with marketable skills to be successful in the professional world. The
results will be disseminated through a website, conference presentations and
peer reviewed publications, and university workshops. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.