* 2225575
* Collaborative Research: NSF-AoF: CIF: AF: Small: Energy-Efficient THz Communications Across Massive Dimensions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Due to the limited spectrum available in the frequency bands currently used for
cellular communications, beyond-5G wireless systems are expected to exploit the
large amount of bandwidth available in the THz band (0.3-3 THz). This will
require the use of very large arrays of antennas at both the transmitter and the
receiver to compensate for the strong attenuation and lack of penetration of
signals at these high frequencies. However, scaling up existing radio-frequency
technologies to operate over large bandwidths becomes exceedingly complex,
expensive, and demands high power consumption. Thus, radical simplifications in
the radio-frequency architecture are needed; for example, a sacrifice in the
resolution of the data converters will be inevitable when operating across
massive frequency and antenna dimensions. This collaborative project tackles the
theoretical and practical challenges associated with using very large arrays
with digital receivers attached to each antenna and that employ low-resolution
analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converters. It aims to realize this
technology's potential for revolutionizing the physical layer in THz
communications. The project adopts a holistic approach that encompasses
analytical studies, signal processing methods, and network protocols and
leverages rigorous tools from optimization, machine learning, and Bayesian
inference. Furthermore, it will foster the research collaboration between the
participating US and Finnish institutions and support the cross-disciplinary
development of a diverse cohort of Ph.D., Master's, and undergraduate students
in key technologies for beyond-5G/6G systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address the fundamental physical-layer challenges associated with energy-
efficient THz communications in beyond-5G systems and is organized into four
interconnected thrusts: i) Doubly massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO)
systems with low-resolution ADCs/DACs at both ends of the link, focusing on the
channel estimation, performance analysis, (symbol-level) precoding and decoding
design, and hardware non-linearities; ii) Spatial Sigma-Delta processing under
realistic array and radio-frequency models, incorporating two-dimensional
spatial sampling and carefully characterizing the mutual antenna coupling and
out-of-band emissions; iii) Initial access protocols to facilitate the practical
implementation of fully digital architectures, focusing on synchronization
signal design and signal-to-noise ratio tuning schemes; and iv) Variational
Bayesian inference applied to channel estimation and data detection with low-
resolution ADCs, to be used in lieu of traditional machine learning models in
rapidly time-varying environments. By demonstrating the potential and
feasibility of pushing the operating frequencies to the THz realm, the project
will stimulate cross-disciplinary research efforts, encourage technological
advancements in low-complexity and controllable antenna architectures, and
enable new wireless applications with high data rates and low
latencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.