* 2225424
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Hardware-assisted Self-repairing in Decentralized Cloud Storage against Malicious Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhenlin Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 614,416.00

A decentralized cloud storage system eliminates the need of dedicated computing
infrastructures by allowing peers which have spare storage space to join the
network and to provide storage services. Compared to a conventional centralized
cloud storage system, it can bring significant benefits including cheaper
storage cost, better fault tolerance, greater scalability, as well as more
efficient data storing and retrieval. While bringing immense benefits, the
decentralized cloud storage system also raises significant security concerns, as
storage peers are more likely to misbehave since they are hosted by individual
users who are less reputable and less skillful in security. This project thus
takes an essential step towards protecting the long-term integrity of the
critical data outsourced to the emerging decentralized cloud. The project's
novelties are 1) enabling a new self-repair concept in the decentralized cloud
and 2) developing a hardware-assisted secure decentralized cloud storage system
supporting the self-repair. The project's broader significance and importance
includes protecting critical digital assets outsourced to the untrusted cloud,
training graduate students, and reaching out to underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop the first hardware-
assisted self-repairing decentralized cloud storage system against malicious
attacks. It resolves a fundamental conflict between the requirement of long-term
integrity guarantee and the lack of trust in a decentralized setting, by
leveraging the trusted execution environment (TEE) and the flash translation
layer (FTL). Especially, the following research tasks are conducted: 1) enabling
secure self-repair in each storage peer by collaborating the TEE and the FTL; 2)
enabling secure self-repair across multiple untrusted storage peers by
leveraging the TEE; and 3) building a fully functioning secure decentralized
cloud storage system with self-repair support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.