* 2225427
* NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: CRUISE: A Cross-system Architecture Design for Autonomous Wireless Networks based on Lifelong Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bing Liu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 279,999.00

The next generation networking systems (6G and beyond) networks are expected to
be massively connected and complex, able to fulfill the requirements of
intelligent transportation, industrial automation, and augmented/virtual
reality, among others. The highly dynamic nature of these services requires an
advanced and autonomous network design that integrates communication,
information, and AI which will enable much richer applications. The outcomes of
the research will facilitate the integration of robust machine learning
solutions with value-added services, thus fostering the creation of new digital
ecosystems in other key sectors such as intelligent transportation systems,
smart cities, and the Industrial Internet. The results will be disseminated to
the scientific community as both individual and joint research publications of
the PIs and their Finnish collaborators, and in tutorials, seminars, and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the design of next-
generation networking systems (6G and beyond) by developing a cross-system
architecture design methodology that enables the optimal integration of
information, communication, and AI. This research will advance the state of the
knowledge through the following activities: (i) Development of “Time-Aware
Lifelong Learning” algorithms to address the dynamics in wireless networks. (ii)
Modeling the tradeoff between complexity and accuracy of the algorithms to
predict system parameters in real-time; (iii) Performing multitask learning for
real-time resource management; (iv) determination of the level of connectivity
reinforcement needed to compensate for the imperfections in the information to
meet the high reliability and low latency requirements; (v) development of the
methodology to perform the tasks above when processes are temporal in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.