* 2225756
* RII-BEC: Transcending Barriers to Success in Economics for Underrepresented Students: Preparing COVID-Affected Students for Their Climate-Resilient Future
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Denise Konan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2027
* USD 999,986.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Hawaii, the COVID-19 pandemic
is having a disproportionate impact on Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and
Filipino communities, and on women. These four groups are also extremely
underrepresented in the field of economics at the University of Hawai‘i at
Manoa. At the same time, environmental challenges that are further exacerbated
by climate change threaten these islands, wider Oceania, and coastal communities
in Asia and the Americas. This project creates a new economics bridge between
Kapiolani Community College (KCC) and the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) to
prepare and transfer 100 students from these disproportionately COVID-affected
groups into baccalaureate and graduate level economics degree programs. The
project weaves indigenous and western knowledge systems and community engagement
strategies to contextualize economics coursework to bridge associate,
baccalaureate, and master’s degree programs. Active learning, peer mentoring,
engaged research, and internship opportunities will enhance the urgency and
relevance of economics coursework so that students can embrace and ameliorate
the challenges of biocultural restoration and climate resilience in their
neighborhoods, communities, regions, and world. The project will promote the
progress of science by connecting key concepts and practices from indigenous
science with economics curricula, instruction, and research. Further, the
project will serve the national interest by amplifying indigenous voices and
values, promoting biodiversity conservation and mixed economy and community
enterprise models that contribute to nutrition, health, well-being, climate
resilience, income generation and prosperity for all American
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to develop, implement and
evaluate a bridge program in economics between KCC and UHM for 100 students from
disproportionately COVID-affected groups as they and their communities
transition from COVID-affected to climate-resilient and prosperous. The first
project objective is to make indigenous and western knowledge system connections
for redesigned curriculum and enhanced learning opportunities in first- and
second-year economics courses at KCC and five BA and MA leading summer bridge
courses at UHM. The Leadership Team will implement a 5-year faculty development
program to create new curricular materials, instructional methods, and active
learning opportunities, including service, research, and internships. Students
in the summer bridge courses will conduct research on the grand challenges of
biocultural restoration and climate change. This research can be further
developed and advanced in third- and fourth-year and graduate courses. As this
objective is met, the project will also develop student recruitment, mentoring,
retention and learning strategies that will help these students gain a strong
sense of belonging in college, becoming an economics major and a growing sense
of reciprocity and responsibility in community and careers. The project will
build authentic, durable intra- and inter-campus and campus-community
partnerships that increase student well-being and program health, and close
indigenous and female degree completion gaps in economics. The project has six
deliverables: 1) a KCC-UHM Transfer and Articulation Agreement; 2) an eight
course sequence in economics (with course syllabi) across 2-year, 4-year and
graduate programs; 3) a handbook on community-based active learning
opportunities for underrepresented students; 4) a handbook on integrating and
advancing research in urban and regional planning, sustainability and
resilience, and economic futures; 5) an “Indigenizing Economics” concept paper,
and 6) a network improvement communications plan for climate resilience and
economic prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.