* 2225180
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Co-Curricular Strategies to Support Academically Challenged Diverse Undergraduate STEM Majors
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gregory Simco, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,982.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP project aims to offer a
coordinated combination of evidence-based strategic co-curricular interventions
to support diverse STEM majors who are struggling early in their academic
pathways. Because many diverse students are underprepared both academically and
motivationally for degree success, the project will target diverse Computer
Science, Engineering, Biology, and Marine Biology majors who are placed on (or
who through early identification are deemed to be at risk of being placed on)
academic probation. An intersectional team of STEM faculty, industry, and near-
peer coaches/mentors/role models will work collectively to provide timely and
continuous asset-based coaching/mentoring, specialized STEM tutoring, and
research and industry-based experiential learning activities. Coaches/mentors
will be trained to serve as allies to facilitate a positive academic mindset,
providing guidance (and referrals as needed) to high-quality wrap-around
resources to address students’ individual academic and personal needs. The
project will contribute important findings to the body of knowledge in STEM
higher education regarding the relationship between academic success outcomes
(especially among underrepresented students at HSIs) and coordinated support
programs and services. The approach will benefit society by increasing
underrepresented student graduation leading to increased employment diversity in
high demand STEM occupational fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal
will be to better understand issues in the retention and degree attainment of
STEM undergraduates (especially those who are underrepresented) to pursue
careers in promising STEM fields and contribute to the American innovation
economy. The outcome will be a model of sound educational practices that
generate promising evidence in increasing success measures that indicate the
broadening participation of students who are historically underrepresented in
STEM. The research hypothesis will be: An intensive summer program that focuses
on providing meaningful, holistic support and developing individual
relationships with and between students, can reduce/minimize feelings of
frustration and a lack of self-confidence among academically challenged
underrepresented students in the STEM academic environment, and help those
students achieve their potential as demonstrated by retention and graduation
rates. The Early-Stage (Exploratory) Research plan will contribute to core
knowledge in education, examining correlations between project interventions and
participant retention and graduation rates; the research methodology will
involve identifying evidence of the potential of summer program activities to
improve retention and graduation. The case study will contribute to the
advancement of knowledge in high impact programs and services specific to
underrepresented/ intersectional STEM students, demonstrating effective,
practical ways to bring a new perspective to addressing cultural responsiveness.
Dissemination of best practices and case study results will be achieved through
presentations, publications, and establishment of a new website for use by other
educators, researchers, and policymakers. The body of knowledge shared will
advance opportunity equity, increasing US intellectual capital for
underrepresented students to succeed in greater numbers. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.