* 2225210
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Improving Professional Preparedness in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Helen Chun, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2027
* USD 499,857.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to increase the number of
students from California State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) who enter the
STEM field after graduating. Multiple groups, including those who identify as
Latinx, are underrepresented in STEM careers; while Latinx individuals comprise
17% of the working population, they are only 8% of STEM workers. CSUDH is poised
to help close this gap because CSUDH serves a student population that is
approximately 70% Latinx. Many STEM education initiatives have focused on
increasing the graduation rates of STEM students, particularly those from
historically marginalized groups. However, graduating with a STEM degree does
not necessarily mean students will enter STEM fields for their careers. For
example, currently, only 11% of students in the CSUDH Biology department
graduate with a job offer or acceptance to graduate or professional school. To
increase this number, the project will increase equitable access to and
participation in internships, integrate career-focused content throughout the
curriculum and add career development conversations to disciplinary-specific
advising. Through these initiatives, students will develop a professional
identity earlier in their academic careers and strengthen the skills needed to
enter a STEM career after graduation. Ultimately, the project will increase the
number of students from underrepresented groups entering STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate objective is to increase the
professional preparedness of these students in order to increase their return on
investment in college and to diversify the regional STEM workforce. The project
will use a multi-faceted approach to help students better realize their
professional goals by ensuring that more students engage deeply in internships
and/or research opportunities, include more career and professional skill
development in courses, implement inclusive advising, and increase participation
in student clubs. It is hypothesized that how students think about their career
pathways will affect whether they have concrete career plans when they graduate,
student retention, and time to graduation. To test these hypotheses, the project
will utilize mixed-model assessments and grounded theory to analyze data
collected throughout students’ academic careers to understand how students form
their career plans. This project will expand the metrics of student success to
not only include persistence to a degree or transition to graduate school, but
also to “path to career.” In doing so, the project will provide much-needed
research on one understudied aspect of underrepresented minority groups in STEM:
how students conceptualize their pathway to a career. More generally, the
biology department will serve as an incubator for best practices in developing
STEM career identity. Once it is better understood how students conceptualize
their career pathways, and which interventions positively affect career-focused
outcomes, the project results will be disseminated through on-campus forums and
peer-reviewed journal articles, and conference presentations. The HSI Program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.