* 2225145
* Symposium on Geometry and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Anar Ahmadov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The Yamabe Memorial Symposium will be held from Friday through Sunday, September
30 to October 2, 2022, at the School of Mathematics, on the Minneapolis campus
of the University of Minnesota. This year is the tenth anniversary of the Yamabe
program. Each biennium, the geometry group of the School of Mathematics decides
on a theme for the Symposium. The theme for this year is "Geometry and
Analysis". The principal speakers will be Ailana Fraser, University of British
Columbia (Canada), Pengfei Guan, McGill University (Canada), Fernando Marques,
Princeton University, Andre Neves, University of Chicago, Antoine Song,
University of California at Berkeley, Song Sun, University of California at
Berkeley, Brian White, Stanford University, and Sumio Yamada, Gakushuin
University (Japan). Together they represent a wide spectrum of topics in
geometric analysis. The purpose of this Symposium is to bring to our
participants a deeper understanding of some recent discoveries in Geometric
Analysis, and to bring to the fore new issues that have arisen in light of them.
This will help participants and researchers gain a wider perspective of these
new developments and bridge increasingly disparate research
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will cover topics including
construction and analysis of minimal submanifolds, singularity and stability for
mean curvature flow, Ricci flow and Einstein equation in general relativity.
These topics are of central importance in geometric analysis and have recently
experienced breakthroughs and significant progress. As the list of invited
speakers shows, all these areas will be well-covered by our Symposium and
leading experts in the world. The Yamabe Symposium webpage:
https://cse.umn.edu/math/yamabe-memorial-
symposium-2022&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.