* 2225088
* BoCP-Implementation: Eco-evolutionary dynamics of rewilding: Real-time genetic monitoring of large-mammal community reassembly
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Dmitri Petrov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,638,826.00

Large wild animals are ecologically and economically important, but their
populations are shrinking, and many species are threatened with extinction. A
growing number of initiatives seek to reverse these trends by restoring wildlife
populations, but the scientific foundation for guiding these efforts is weak.
One key obstacle to understanding how and why wildlife populations increase in
abundance (or not) is the difficulty of measuring the survival and reproduction
of individual animals. The two main aims of this research are to test new
methods for monitoring wildlife populations using DNA collected non-invasively
from fecal samples, and to apply these methods to understand the process of
wildlife recovery in Mozambique’s Gorongosa National Park. This project focuses
on Gorongosa because it is the world’s premiere example of large-scale wildlife
restoration. The park’s large mammals were nearly eliminated during a long civil
war, but most species are now rapidly recovering. This creates unique
opportunities to understand how a whole community of animals reassembles from
scratch. The research also has a range of broader benefits. First, the
techniques devised and validated during this project will be applicable for
basic research, wildlife monitoring, and environmental management elsewhere
throughout the world. Second, knowledge gained from the research will be
directly applied to conserve species that are at risk of extinction. Third, the
project will build capacity for cutting-edge genomic analyses in Mozambique,
where no such facilities currently exist. Fourth, a diverse group of early-
career scientists based in the United States will be trained on the project.
Results of the research will be communicated in non-specialist terms to a broad
audience, deepening public understanding of Gorongosa’s hopeful story of
environmental recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on rapidly
advancing genomic capabilities to address a fundamental challenge at the
interface of ecology and evolutionary biology: the ability to measure
reproductive success and its phenotypic, demographic, and environmental
correlates. By sequencing environmental DNA in fecal samples, the investigators
will attempt to construct pedigrees and use genomic mark-recapture methods to
estimate population sizes and key demographic parameters such as birth and death
rates. DNA from the same fecal samples will be sequenced to assess diet
composition, gut microbiomes, and gastrointestinal parasites. Based on these
data, the research team will answer a suite of questions about the ecological
and evolutionary dynamics of a recovering large-mammal community, including: How
does the loss and subsequent recovery of top predators affect prey fitness as a
function of individual behavior? Does a recovering community tend towards its
historical state, or instead follow alternative trajectories? Do behavioral
anomalies in small, reintroduced populations persist or dissipate as the
population grows? How does a collapsed food web reassemble, and what can this
tell us about the mechanisms by which biodiversity is
maintained?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.