* 2225559
* Collaborative Research: RECODE: On-line Feedback Control of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell Chondrogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lawrence Bonassar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Regenerating healthy cartilage from stem cells is challenging. In this
Reproducible Cells and Organoids via Directed-Differentiation Encoding (RECODE)
project a team of researchers from Washington State University and Cornell
University aim to provide a new tissue engineering strategy to make cartilage.
Adult stem cells will be stimulated to become mature chondrocytes, the cells
that make cartilage, to produce the type of tissue needed for repairing damaged
cartilage. The project's approaches seek to prevent cells from transitioning to
osteocytes, the cells that make bone. This will be done by using small molecules
that interfere with the genes that control the production of bone. Real time
imaging of fluorescing molecules will monitor whether the cells are likely to
make cartilage or bone. Feedback is used to change the cell growth conditions to
keep cells within an ideal range. The properties of the tissues created will be
tested for their flexibility and composition. Both Washington State and Cornell
will work with minority participation programs to include underrepresented
students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project aims to
enhance tissue engineering by driving mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) toward a
stable chondrogenic lineage. The goal is to move tissue constructs in the
direction of a functionally organized articular cartilage extracellular matrix
(ECM) and prevent osteogenesis. It is hypothesized that cell proliferation and
differentiation can be controlled by feedback bioprocess shear stresses, growth
factor concentration, oscillating hydrostatic pressure, and gene silencing. The
team will interrogate MSC maturation with a fiber optic bundle to sense, in
real-time, co-upregulation of Sox9 mRNA, critically involved in orchestrating
chondrogenesis, and Runx2 mRNA, which if overexpressed will promote unwanted
progression toward hypertrophic calcification and ossification. Process
variables will be tied to the cellular mRNA architecture and ECM manufacture
through an experimental design model that will further refine feedback control
rules. Spatial and temporal validation will be performed through bulk and single
cell mRNA transcriptomics, and confocal strain and Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy tissue mapping. The team will leverage Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) support and partnerships with Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation programs at Washington State University and Cornell
University to recruit underrepresented students with the goal to see these
students transition into tissue engineering related PhD
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project is jointly funded by the
Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems and the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.