* 2225490
* Converging Earth Science and Sustainability Education and Experience to Prepare Next-Generation Geoscientists
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Leslie Duram, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,333,328.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIUC). SIUC is a rural
university and the major research institution in Southern Illinois, one of
America’s most economically distressed regions. Over its five-year duration,
this project will fund scholarships to 40 unique full-time transfer students who
are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Geography &amp; Environmental Resources and
Geology. Transfer students will receive two-year scholarships. The proposed
project is an interdisciplinary STEM program, Earth-Sustainability Scholarship
(ESS), for academically talented students who demonstrate financial need to
pursue undergraduate environmental and earth science degrees. A sustainability-
minded STEM workforce is vital for the nation to strategically develop natural
resources, experience economic growth, and make informed decisions in a rapidly
changing world. The project will develop an educational pipeline from student
admission and training to graduation and professional development and advance
the understanding of the dominant factors that increase the academic and
professional success of low-income students. A mentoring system and a networked
supporting community that integrate campus resources and sustainability
activities will be established for improved curricular and co-curricular
experiences. The project is expected to broaden the participation of low-income
students in environmental and earth science by reducing financial pressure,
increasing learning opportunities and outcomes, and bridging overall career
success. It will also advance the mission of U.S. institutions of higher
education that train a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce in
sustainable environmental and earth science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific objectives
include: (1) increasing educational opportunities for academically talented
students with financial need, (2) improving educational support programs at
SIUC, (3) improving the retention of students in the SIUC School of Earth
Systems and Sustainability, and (4) enhancing the future STEM workforce with
skills in earth science and sustainability. To address the historic disconnect
between sustainability and earth science training, it is vital to integrate
sustainability into earth science education in institutes of higher education.
Advancing understanding of how supporting services and programs drive academic
success in geoscience majors, especially for transfer students, is also
critical. This project will establish an educational prototype that successfully
supports academically talented and low-income transfer students to become
sustainability-focused earth science degree graduates. Following the Theory of
Planned Behaviors, the supporting service and activities to enhance attitudes,
subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control will be framed as three
critical constructs that are expected to drive students’ positive intentions for
graduation. The project hopes to create an inclusive and diverse learning
community and infrastructure to advance the project goals and missions. It is
expected that 40 low-income academically talented transfer students will be
awarded $10,000 scholarships each year and that an overall 85% retention rate
and 80% graduation rate will be achieved. The project will utilize a management-
oriented formative and summative evaluation approach. Results will be
disseminated internally to the Office of the Provost and faculty members at SIUC
and shared externally to the STEM community through STEM Central, social media,
professional conferences, and publications in STEM education journals. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.