* 2225824
* Collaborative Research: RI: III: SHF: Small: Multi-Stakeholder Decision Making: Qualitative Preference Languages, Interactive Reasoning, and Explanation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,992.00

The ability to express and reason about preferences over a set of alternatives
is central to rational decision-making in a broad range of applications, such as
product design, public policy, health care, information security, and privacy,
among others. Because of the lack of quantitative preferences in many practical
settings, there is increasing interest in methods for representing and reasoning
with qualitative preferences. Furthermore, practical decision making scenarios
typically involve multiple stakeholders, with possibly conflicting preferences,
and the preferences of some stakeholders may sometimes override those of others,
e.g., because of the relative positions of the stakeholders within an
organization. However, existing preference languages and methods are limited to
the single stakeholder setting. Against this background, this project brings
together a team of researchers with complementary expertise in formal methods,
artificial intelligence, and preference reasoning to develop methods and tools
for representing and reasoning with multi-stakeholder preferences. The practical
open-source multi-stakeholder decision support tools resulting from the project
will significantly lower the barrier to the applications of AI and formal
methods for multi-stakeholder decision making in a number of domains. The
project enhances research-based training of graduate and undergraduate students,
including females and members of other under-represented groups, at ISU and PSU
in artificial intelligence, formal methods, and related areas of national
importance. Broad dissemination of research results (including publications,
open source software, data, tutorials, course materials), incorporation of
research results into undergraduate and graduate curricula in Computer Science,
Information Sciences and Technology, Data Sciences, and related disciplines, and
outreach to targeted application domains e.g., health, public policy, security
and privacy, that would benefit from advanced tools for multi-stakeholder
decision-making further enhance the broader impacts of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of the
project centers around substantial advances in the current state-of-the-art in
languages, algorithms, and software for multi-stakeholder representation and
reasoning with preferences. The researchers will develop Generalized Conditional
Relative Importance and Preference Theory (GCRIPT), an expressive language for
multi-stakeholder preference representation that subsumes existing preference
languages. The resulting preference reasoners will be able to (a) analyze
preferences expressed in GCRIPT, (b) reason with the preferences of multiple
stakeholders, taking into account not only their individual preferences, but
also hierarchies that give precedence to the preferences of some stakeholders
over those of others, and (c) offer easy-to-understand explanations of the
preferred choices as well as their impacts on the stakeholders. The project will
also enhance the underlying model checking techniques that form the core
technology for the preference reasoning framework; e.g., in the areas of
incremental model checking, counter-example analysis and justification. The
resulting advances in knowledge representation and formal methods contribute to
AI systems that substantially augment and extend human capabilities in multi-
stakeholder decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.