* 2225208
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Enhancing Student Success in Engineering Curriculum through Active e-Learning and High Impact Teaching Practices
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Hyoung Jin Cho, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to increase Hispanic/Latino
transfer student success through the implementation and evaluation of innovative
teaching/learning practices in engineering gateway courses. As a federally
designated Hispanic Serving Institution, the University of Central Florida (UCF)
is one of the leading transfer institutions in the nation. Based on admission
articulated agreements with six community colleges in the Central Florida
Region, transfer students are guaranteed access to high-quality bachelor’s
degree programs at UCF. This transfer pathway has been used as an attractive
conduit for many Hispanic/Latino students. However, the retention rates of
transfer students are significantly lower than those of first-time in college
students. In order to enhance Hispanic/Latino transfer students’ academic
perseverance and success, a team of faculty members will work together to
implement active learning and high-impact teaching practices in engineering
foundation courses such as Statics, Dynamics, and Thermodynamics, including
coordinated curriculum alignment efforts with partner community colleges.
Students will be allowed to make mistakes and learn from their mistakes through
multiple attempts, will be given opportunities to design, build, and test
physical models through mini-projects, and will be provided flexible learning
tools and an encouraging environment. As a result, this program will achieve a
significant gain in Hispanic/Latino transfer students’
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to increase Hispanic/Latino
transfer student success through the implementation and evaluation of innovative
teaching/learning practices. There is an almost equal distribution of students
arriving at the University of Central Florida as first-time in college versus
those transferring from another college. However, the retention rates between
these groups show a very significant achievement gap. This project will focus on
improving transfer students' initial experiences in engineering foundation
courses in two large enrollment engineering majors –Mechanical Engineering and
Aerospace Engineering. The project team will (1) embed self-regulated and shared
learning in foundation courses by incorporating multiple attempts to practice
tests and mini-projects at the early stage of engineering curricula, (2)
construct a blended learning environment in order to facilitate student progress
by providing flexibility, (3) guide students to tackle real-world engineering
problems and tasks, and (4) utilize group participation and social interactions
as an asset for their shared learning through team-based project activities.
This project will investigate the changing nature of regulated learning, self-
efficacy, and achievement goal orientation. This coordinated initiative will be
used as a template for student success and shared with partner community
colleges regionally via curriculum alignment meetings and other engineering
programs nationally via conferences and journal publications. The program
website will host exemplary mini-projects and make them available to students,
educators, and the general public. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.