* 2225441
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Verifying Hardware Security Modules with Information-Preserving Refinement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* M. Frans Kaashoek, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2026
* USD 363,051.00

Hardware security modules (HSMs) are widely used for protecting critical parts
of a system against powerful attacks, such as gaining complete control of the
host computer. For example, USB security keys used for logging into web
applications with two-factor authentication store a secret key that cannot be
obtained even by an adversary that compromises the user's computer. However,
mistakes in the implementation of HSMs can undermine their security; for
example, bugs in the software running on the HSM or bugs in the HSM hardware can
inadvertently disclose the HSM's secret key. The project's novelty is in
enabling the development of HSMs whose implementations are guaranteed to meet a
precise security specification, ruling out the possibility of bugs like the ones
mentioned above. The project aims to produce a prototype verified HSM similar to
an HSM used by certificate authorities to sign certificates for web sites, or a
cryptocurrency hardware wallet. The project's broader significance and
importance is in significantly increasing the trustworthiness of
HSMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach taken by this project is to
use formal verification to mathematically prove the correctness and security of
an HSM, including both its hardware and software. This project aims to ensure
security even against adversaries that may attempt to take advantage of timing
channels---that is, extracting information from an HSM based on how long it
takes to perform certain operations. A key challenge lies in coming up with a
way of precisely specifying the expected behavior of an HSM, and a corresponding
definition of security that relates an HSM implementation to such a
specification, in the presence of timing channels. Another challenge lies in
reducing the proof effort; this project uses symbolic execution to automate
significant parts of the proof, but also incorporate developer-provided hints to
handle complex steps that cannot be handled by automated
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.