* 2225849
* Bacterial stem cells for enhancing biodiesel production from lignocellulosic feedstocks
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Grant Bowman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 510,734.00

The goal of this project is to genetically program bacterial cells to make large
quantities of triacylglycerol (TAG), a commodity chemical that can be converted
to biodiesel and industrial solvents. The bacterial species that will be used to
make TAG, called Rhodococuus opacus, is particularly good at converting the
energy in woody and fibrous plant matter (i.e. lignocellulosic feedstocks) into
other molecules. However, a challenge is that the optimal conditions for TAG
synthesis are not conducive to cell growth, thus production is self-limiting.
This project seeks to solve this problem by transforming Rhodococcus strains
into multicellular systems, where the tasks of population growth and TAG
production are assigned to different cell types. If the strains produce more
TAG, they could be used to increase the efficiency of U.S. agriculture by
transforming wasted plant material into useful fuel. This project also
contributes to undergraduate biosciences education through the development of
augmented reality-based classroom technology. Here, holographic three-
dimensional video imagery is used in combination with pass- through
visualization to create a vibrant and highly interactive social learning
environment. Within shared, augmented reality learning spaces, students
collaborate in small teams to enhance learning through lessons in enzyme
pathways and enzyme kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological approach
centers on the idea of enhancing Rhodococcus by inserting a genetically
engineered system that enables two independently programmable cell types. With
independently controllable cell types, it is possible to carry out mutually
antagonistic tasks simultaneously. In this project, the two mutually
antagonistic tasks are high-level triacylglycerol (TAG) production, which
requires that cells undergo nitrogen deprivation and stop dividing, and
population growth, which requires nitrogen. For maximal production, one cell
type, called a “factory cell”, is programmed to stop incorporating nitrogen and
expend all available metabolic resources to make TAG. The other cell type,
called a “stem cell”, is programmed to import nitrogen and divide
asymmetrically. After each stem cell division, one daughter retains stem cell
fate while the other furthers TAG production by differentiating into a factory
cell. The continual generation of healthy new factory cells from the dividing
stem cell population is expected to prolong TAG synthesis and lead to higher
overall yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.