* 2225845
* RII-BEC: Grounding Science Education in Indigenous Knowledges, Food Systems, and Sustainability
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Meghann Jarchow, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,976.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project will serve the national interest by
increasing Native American student participation and success in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) arena and by improving STEM
education for all students. The project will incorporate the use of role models,
extensive mentoring interactions, and development of a culturally relevant
specialization in an undergraduate STEM major, namely the Sustainability major
in the Department of Sustainability and Environment at the University of South
Dakota (USD). Further, the project will be enhanced through the development,
implementation, and study of STEM faculty learning communities and training
built around innovative, culturally relevant, and evidence-based pedagogies.
Project components will provide academic, cultural, and social support for
students as they navigate critical transition points in their persistence to
graduation. Project findings and outcomes will provide important contributions
to the understanding and mitigation of the disproportionate impact of COVID-19
on students historically marginalized in STEM, especially students from
Indigenous populations. These findings and outcomes will be disseminated at
several levels, ranging from local to national.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
underlying goal of the project is to increase enrollment and persistence of
Native American students in sustainability-focused STEM education at USD. The
project will take a multi-faceted, multi-level approach by: (1) enhancing Native
American presence in the STEM faculty; (2) using a multiple-mentor model that
provides holistic cultural, academic, social, and financial support to Native
American students; (3) offering a new, culturally relevant specialization within
the undergraduate Sustainability major; (4) increasing institutional capacity
and infrastructure to improve retention and persistence of students who have
traditionally been marginalized in STEM education; (5) developing and expanding
partnerships with Tribal Colleges, and (6) adding to the knowledge base with
respect to the implementation and impact of cultural, academic, social, and
financial support systems for Native American students during critical
transitions in STEM education. The project will feature and investigate how
project activities impact student persistence and success at several critical
transition points that include entering first-year students, entering students
from tribal colleges, and beginning masters and doctoral students. Through an
extensive evaluation study led by an external evaluator, the impacts of project
components and resources will be assessed and new knowledge will be generated,
especially in connection with Native American student retention, success, and
persistence to graduation. In addition, new results will emanate from the
project regarding how to mitigate the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on
students from underrepresented groups. With the employment of interviews,
surveys, and pre- and post-questionnaires, the evaluator will implement project
evaluation through a developmental, iterative evaluation approach throughout the
project to support strategic learning and continuous adaptation and improvement.
Project stakeholders will disseminate results, outcomes, and the developed model
framework through publications, professional conferences, and professional
communities, including, for example, the American Indian Science and Engineering
Society (AISES) and the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.