* 2225745
* ICE-TI:  Expanding Tribal College Programming and Preparing the Next Generation of  Native Environmental Scientists and Tribal Leaders
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Victoria Walsey, Northwest Indian College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This Instructional Capacity
Excellence in TCUP Institutions (ICE-TI) project aligns directly with that goal,
and moreover seeks to strengthen STEM instructional capacity across the
Northwest region, build certificate programs designed to increase skills of
working professionals, and provide opportunities for advanced degree attainment
at Northwest Indian College (NWIC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
project is to design, implement, and assess comprehensive institutional
improvements at NWIC by focusing on three areas of STEM capacity building
including enhancing STEM instructional capacity at satellite campus sites,
building post-baccalaureate certificate programs for working STEM professionals,
and developing a Masterâ€™s degree in Native Environmental Science, the first
graduate program at the institution. The project has three main goals: (1)
increasing student access to culturally-grounded and place-based undergraduate
STEM programming through enhanced distance education, (2) providing working
professionals in the Natural Resources fields with opportunities for
professional development through certificate programs that enhance skills and
knowledge for workforce development in emerging fields, and (3) increasing
access to graduate programming in STEM fields through the development of a
Master of Science Degree. All activities are informed by a strong community
engagement process and applied research opportunities for students and faculty.
This project contributes to the workforce development, economic development, and
training of tribal college students and tribal citizens in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.