* 2225719
* RAPID: Exploring the high-frequency variability of air-sea CO2 fluxes in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific from an ecotourism ship
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Nicolas Cassar, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 57,000.00

This award will support the installation of a sensor on an ecotourism ship to
continuously measure surface water carbon dioxide concentrations while the ship
is underway among the Galapagos islands. Ecotourism ships are conducting
transects on an almost weekly basis in critical regions of the worldâ€™s oceans,
such as the Southern Ocean, the Arctic, and the Equatorial Pacific, far beyond
cost-effective reach of oceanographic research vessels. The long-term goal is
for the current proposed work to serve as a pilot or proof-of-concept study, and
to expand the deployment of automated underway sensors and scientific equipment
on other ships such as those of the Lindblad Expeditions-National Geographic
fleet (and other ecotourism companies) in other climate-important regions,
including the Arctic and Antarctica. In addition to collecting high-quality
data, the proposed work will educate ship guests on the central role of oceans
in global climate and stimulate their interest in hands-on citizen science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to complete
installation of a General Oceanics pCO2 sensor on the Galapagos ecotourism ship
of Lindblad Expeditions and to initiate a time series of high resolution, high
frequency observations. The overarching hypothesis guiding this work is that the
current sampling program in this hotspot of air-sea CO2 flux leads to large
uncertainties in estimates of the annual global carbon CO2 uptake by the ocean.
A corollary hypothesis is that pCO2 measured within the 3x3 degree Galapagos
Archipelago reflects broader-scale patterns in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific
(EEP), controlled by highly dynamic and highly variable currents, upwelling, and
biologic productivity. The investigators will utilize statistical modelling and
machine learning techniques to tie the Galapagos observations to those from less
frequent shipboard observations and to the MAPCO2 TAO moorings in the EEP some
20 degrees farther west. Continuous, multi-year, high-resolution study will
greatly improve estimates of the absolute value and the interannual variability
of the EEP and global air-sea CO2 flux. Data will be submitted to the Surface
Ocean CO2 Atlas (SOCAT) observational dataset for inclusion in their annual air-
sea CO2 flux budgets and incorporation into the Global Carbon
Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.