* 2225860
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: HCC: Small: Enabling Efficient Computer Systems for Augmented and Virtual Reality: A Perception-Guided Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Yuhao Zhu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 10/31/2025
* USD 299,920.00

This research project designs software-hardware collaborative mechanisms to
bridge the gap between human visual perception and augmented/virtual reality
(AR/VR) systems design and ultimately deliver an order of magnitude efficiency
gains. Achieving this goal requires first developing computational models to
quantitatively capture human visual perception, and then investigating new
techniques across the systems stack that leverage the perceptual models for
efficient processing. The intellectual merit of the project is the pursuit of
three classes of techniques pertaining to exploiting unique characteristics of
human perception to build efficient AR/VR systems: 1) identify key aspects of
visual stimuli that simultaneously influence viewing experience and system
efficiency and investigate lightweight modeling strategies through extensive
psychophysical experiments, 2) investigate enabling techniques across the entire
application pipeline (from algorithms and systems to the display) that leverage
the perceptual models for improving system efficiency, and 3) develop a data-
driven, learning-based approach to tune the entire system while satisfying
perceptual and efficiency requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda
is complemented by an educational/outreach agenda. The PIs will (1) offer summer
research and programming opportunities to high school students in Rochester and
New York, (2) introduce new courses/modules in both University of Rochester and
NYU on visual perception and its connection to computer systems design, (3)
reach out and collaboration with industry partners to explore technology
transfer possibilities, and (4) offer undergraduate students inclusive
opportunities for hands-on experience in emerging application domains and
hardware acceleration. Broadly, the integrated research and education activities
will lead the way to an explosion of new products and ideas, which in turn
addresses key technological and societal issues in areas such as healthcare,
education, remote communication and interaction, professional training, and
industrial design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.