* 2225607
* The 48th Northeast Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Qi Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 10/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports the 48th annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC),
a regional conference that is historically student-centered. The conference will
be held at Columbia University, New York City, New York, April 23-24, 2022. This
is the first in-person NEBEC conference after the COVID pandemic and provides an
opportunity to undergraduate and graduate student researchers in the field of
biomedical engineering to meet and present their research to their peers. The
conference has been impactful because it allows students in the Northeast region
who do not have the funding to attend a national biomedical engineering meeting
to present their work to a broad audience. This opportunity will encourage
students to pursue graduate school and pursue a STEM career. The award will
support a reduction in registration fees for undergraduate students and postdoc
fellows, thus making the conference even more affordable to early career
scientists, especially financially disadvantaged students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a conference with a strong tradition for educating the
next generation of undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows in biomedical engineering, the 48th Northeast Bioengineering Conference
at Columbia University will bring together a number of leaders in various
bioengineering fields to inform and inspire students about progress and research
opportunities in the biomedical engineering. The conference expects to attract
more than 450 attendees from around the Northeast region of the United States,
with 60% of which expected to be students. The Biomedical Engineering Society
and IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Student Chapters at
different universities in the Northeast region are reaching out and encouraging
participation by students, especially female and under-represented minority
students from the region. Young Scientist Awards and New Innovator Award will be
given to specifically support professional development of early career
scientists. Themes of the presentations will include the following: Neural
Engineering, Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, Biomechanics, Tissue
Engineering, Synthetic Biology, Computational Biology/Bioinformatics, Medical
Devices, and Biophotonics / Biomedical Imaging. Additional sessions planned
include a senior design competition, Future Bioengineer session, and a panel
discussion about biomedical engineering education and research after
COVID.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.