* 2225373
* Understanding and Mitigating the Impacts of Code Intelligence Systems in Introductory Programming Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mohammad Amin Alipour, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2025
* USD 349,987.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by understanding the impact on
computer science education of using artificial intelligence (AI) to generate
computer code. Artificial intelligence tools can generate computer code from the
description of a problem written in natural language, and it may lead to faster
and easier development of high-quality software programs. While these “code
intelligence” (CI) systems may positively improve workflow for professional
developers in industry, they also have potential to impact how students learn
computing. This research will investigate the impacts of the use of CI systems
to analyze students’ tinkering behaviors, which are associated with learning
gains, and students’ feelings of self-efficacy, which affect performance
outcomes. These systems may help struggling students learn, or they may shortcut
student learning if the students become too reliant on them. CI systems can pose
serious challenges for instructors in designing novel course assignments or
identifying plagiarism in the learning environment. In this research supported
by the BCSER program, the PI will develop proficiency in learning theories and
research methods to study the impacts of the adoption of CI systems on learning
in introductory college programming courses. The outcomes of this research will
benefit student retention and diversity in computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize extended concepts from
learning science knowledge to evaluate and characterize the impacts of code
generation tools on students' learning in introductory programming courses. The
first project goal is to develop the necessary infrastructure to use intelligent
code generation within a web development environment for students, so that
students have access to code-generating capabilities. The second project goal is
to understand the use of the code generation tool in introductory computer
science courses through engagement in pilot experiments examining effects on
tinkering and self-efficacy. A third project goal is to design and evaluate an
intervention to mitigate the potential negative impacts on students’ learning by
encouraging students to pay closer attention to the generated code. These will
create an extended knowledge base for positive use of CI systems. A fourth key
goal of this project involves engagement in professional development workshops
and online classes related to computer science education research as well as
holding formative assessment meetings with mentors. These will improve capacity
building and sustainability of computer science education research for the PI
and the institution. The computer science research community will gain access to
lessons learned, challenges faced and products developed, including
corresponding datasets and reproducibility packages, through publications and
presentations at computer science conferences. The project is supported by NSF's
EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER)
program, which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-
quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.