* 2225083
* BoCP-Implementation: US-China: Trait innovations in the fig mutualism and their contributions to increased patterns of biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Carlos Machado, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,097,690.00

Interacting species that depend on each other for their survival and
reproduction, like plants and their pollinators, have played major roles in the
diversification of life on Earth. A broad goal of this project is to understand
how those interacting species change and are being affected by the changing
climate. The researchers will study one of the most ecologically important and
highly diverse group of interacting species: figs, the small wasps that
pollinate them, and the diverse group of parasitic wasps that depend on figs for
survival but that in most cases do not provide benefits to them. They will study
how species interactions and adaptation to local conditions change
geographically, how those changes are influenced by different reproductive
characteristics of the figs, and how a group of novel and diverse morphological
and physiological wasp attributes that are necessary for the interaction with
figs have evolved. This research will have educational impacts in K-12 student
and teacher training via collaboration with public school teachers from local
minority-serving high schools. Moreover, the project will have important
implications for agriculture and food production because the same processes
influencing this systemâ€™s responses to global change also play a role in
agricultural crop-pollinator and crop-pest interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has four objectives: 1) Conduct large scale
geographic studies of monoecious and gynodioecious fig species to conduct
comparative genomic analyses of spatial genetic structure, local adaptation, and
the population genetics of species divergence on fig hosts and associated
pollinating and non-pollinating fig wasps; 2) Study mechanisms of host
attraction to understand their effects on fig diversification and spatial
genetic structure; 3) Test the effects of environmental changes and
fragmentation on the stability of mutualistic and antagonistic interactions; and
4) Study the genetic mechanisms underlying novel traits involved in synergistic
and antagonistic interactions in this system. The proposed research will not
only generate critical tests of theory about how host mating system constrains
coevolutionary divergence and responses to environmental degradation, but will
also help uncover the genetic architecture of traits involved in synergistic and
antagonistic interactions between figs and their pollinating and non-pollinating
wasps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.