* 2225805
* RII-BEC: Training Diverse Scholars in Data Science to Understand the Brain and Behavior
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jared Medina, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,881.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project aims to serve the
national interest by developing scholars skilled in data science and statistics
to understand behavior. Advances in behavioral and neuroscientific research over
the last decade have led to the production of large datasets ranging in scale
from activity in single neurons to social behavior in large groups. Processing
and distilling this data – to understand the mind and brain, and to develop ways
to address questions of societal importance – is of national importance and
requires individuals with interdisciplinary training in data science,
statistics, and psychology/neuroscience. The COVID-19 pandemic led to a decrease
in research opportunities that has disproportionately affected individuals from
underrepresented groups, making it more difficult for them to pursue STEM
careers in understanding behavior and the mind. To this effect, this project
aims to create a new, two-year post-baccalaureate program in data science and
psychology, designed to provide intensive training for careers in academia
and/or industry. This project intends to develop the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers with skills in both data science and
psychology/neuroscience, specifically targeting those from underrepresented
groups. The significance of this project is the production of a highly skilled
and diverse workforce in an increasingly important domain that spans basic
science and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a bridge program that provides individuals from underrepresented groups
with two years of training to prepare them for STEM careers in academia and/or
industry. The training scope will be in three domains. First, participants will
engage in active research mentored by a faculty member with expertise in
behavior and/or neuroscience. This research will culminate in multiple
deliverables, including a thesis-level peer-reviewed publication that will
bolster both doctoral and industrial career opportunities. Second, participants
will enroll in curriculum specific to this program, with courses focused on
developing skills in data science that can be applied to understanding behavior
and the brain. Third, participants will engage in professional development via a
group seminar along with clearly defined, accessible pathways to ensure progress
towards their chosen career. The outcome of this training will be a set of
tangible skills and experiences for the student, which will increase their
competitiveness in the workplace and provide economically important skills to
the academic and industrial marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.