* 2225511
* NSF-AoF: Vision-Guided Wireless Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 555,000.00

With the approach of the golden jubilee of the first mobile phone call made in
1973, it is astonishing to see how far wireless technology has come. More
recently, the confluence of computing and communications has transformed
wireless devices from merely communication devices into powerful computing and
sensing platforms. Enabled by these capabilities and equipped with state-of-the-
art sensors, cameras, and other non-radio frequency (non-RF) modalities, modern
wireless devices are able to simultaneously perform multiple functions including
communications, computing, and imaging. In order to exploit synergies across
these functions, this project brings together a synergistic US-Finland team with
the goal of laying the fundamental science needed to pioneer a novel paradigm of
vision-guided wireless system design using which wireless devices can "view" and
map their surrounding wireless environment and its features by fusing
heterogeneous multimodal information sensed through their RF and non-RF
capabilities. Under this new paradigm, wireless network devices can leverage
diverse, sensed information about their environment in order to more effectively
communicate and compute. This transformative concept contributes towards
boosting the performance of future wireless systems (e.g., 6G) thus paving the
way for new wireless applications with tangible societal impact, including
advanced extended reality, drones, and connected autonomy. The research is
coupled with a suite of collaborative education activities between the US and
Finnish partners that involve transfer of ideas, joint tutorials and workshops,
outreach events, joint mentoring of students, as well as broad dissemination
efforts that help train a workforce skilled in advanced wireless communications
and machine learning research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
novel holistic framework that merges tools from machine learning, distributed
optimization, communication theory, and wireless networking to yield key
contributions: 1) Systematic approach that merges signal processing techniques
with emerging machine learning frameworks in order to fuse heterogeneous
information from multiple RF and non-RF modalities for faithfully mapping
dynamic wireless environments, 2) New approaches for efficient wireless system
design with specific emphasis on new communication strategies for vision-guided
networking, 3) A novel framework that advances tools from distributed learning
to develop new self-organizing algorithms that can perform cross-layer
optimization of wireless functions and resources (e.g., spectrum, power, time)
with minimal information exchange, 4) Fundamental analysis of the various
properties and tradeoffs involved in the designed learning and optimization
algorithms, and 5) Realistic validation of the proposed solutions using a mix of
simulation and experimental tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.