* 2225444
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Material Reflections of Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Judith Habicht-Mauche, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 11,390.00

This project is a multi-sited and methodologically diverse archaeological
investigation into understanding colonial impact on the ability of indigenous
potters to create and maintain communities of practice, cultural perceptions of
place, and the ability to pass down sociotechnical knowledge from one generation
to the next, ultimately leading to the decision by potters to stop producing
Glaze Ware in the early eighteenth-century. Rio Grande Glaze Ware was a lead
glaze decorated pottery type regionally produced in late prehistoric and early
historic periods. The main component of the glaze is galena lead ore. Within
anthropology and archaeology, researchers have sought to answer questions about
post-contact technological change through problematic narratives of culture
contact, such as that of “quick replacement”— or the immediate abandonment of
Indigenous tools and technology in favor of European ones. However, not only
does this assumption ignore the fact that Colonialism often relied on Indigenous
technologies and knowledge (especially of valuable resources) to ensure the
success of its endeavors, it fails to consider how Indigenous technologies and
production materials are tied into larger systems of traditional ecological
knowledge (TEK) in which geology, geography, landscape, and the cosmos are not
separate concepts as they are viewed from a western perspective. Additionally,
TEK is not a static system, rather, communities can change their TEK through the
accumulation of experiences and adaptive responses to internal and external
economic, political, social, and ecological change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While
little is known about the extent of colonial mining operations in the US
Southwest due to the lack of archival and documentary evidence, archaeology is
well suited to answer such questions because indigenous knowledge and practice
intersected with colonial mineral acquisition and extraction. It is generally
accepted that colonialism contributed to the end of Glaze Ware production in
some manner but research on Glaze Ware has only scratched the surface on how/why
changes such as increased vitrification of lead paint, increase in paint color
variability, and an increase in runny/goopy glaze decoration, occurred. To build
upon previous research, Glaze Ware pottery from four different sites will be
analyzed, each representing a different settlement context and shifting status
of resident occupation. By placing mineral use within a broader socio-ecological
context and utilizing the analytical methods of lead isotope sourcing and
chemical characterization of lead glaze paints, ceramic petrography,
variation(s) in glaze paint appearance, along with basic attribute analysis of
pottery pastes, slips, and decoration, the researchers aim to reveal a more
encompassing and nuanced understanding of the varied histories, multiple truths,
and diverse indigenous experiences by people who continuously negotiated and
transformed their relationships to their ancestral lands in a world that was
constantly in flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.