* 2225648
* ICE-TI: An Innovative Framework for the Development and Implementation of a Culturally Responsive Fisheries and Wildlife (CuRFiW) Bachelor of Science Degree Program
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Mandy Guinn, United Tribes Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities for their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. The sustainability of gains
achieved in building capacity are significantly enhanced by retaining talented
and credentialed STEM faculty. This project aligns directly with that
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;United Tribes Technical College (UTTC) is
transforming its STEM programs through a comprehensive project focusing on
enhanced recruitment, retention, and completion of students in fisheries and
wildlife biology. By building upon tested STEM education models and innovating
new methods for integrating research and culture throughout degree programs, the
project will have significant impact institutionally and will provide models for
broad dissemination. The program fosters an inclusive and culturally congruent
environment that supports critical transition points from high school to college
and into the workforce. The goals of this project at UTTC's project are to 1)
increase interest in and readiness for postsecondary STEM studies at UTTC; 2)
establish a Fisheries and Wildlife Bachelor of Science Degree emphasizing
instructional transformation, research integration, cultural congruency, and
workforce pathway; and 3) increase STEM faculty development and community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.