* 2225986
* EAGER: Smart single-pixel quantum statistical imaging beyond the Abbe-Rayleigh criterion
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Omar Magana-Loaiza, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2023
* USD 75,451.00

The identification of the photon as a promising information resource has
triggered a variety of quantum photonic technologies for multiple purposes that
range from information processing to imaging. Recently, the possibility of using
the quantum properties of the light field to overcome diffraction has become one
of the main goals of quantum imaging. The interest in quantum optical
superresolution resides in its potential for improving the performance of
existing schemes for remote imaging and microscopy. Interestingly, seminal work
that established the foundations of classical superresolution imaging was
awarded with the Nobel Prize of Chemistry in 2014. These fundamental
contributions demonstrated the possibility of performing imaging beyond the
Abbe-Rayleigh resolution criterion. Recently, researchers from the quantum
optics community have conducted experiments that aim to boost spatial resolution
of classical schemes for imaging by projecting target objects onto spatial
modes. These conventional protocols rely on a series of spatial projective
measurements to pick up phase information that is then used to boost the spatial
resolution of optical systems. Unfortunately, these schemes require a priori
information regarding the coherence properties of the light beams, a well as
stringent alignment conditions. The purpose of this research program is to
demonstrate that the limited spatial resolution of optical instruments can be
overcome through measurements of the quantum statistical properties of photons,
which are insensitive to diffraction. The identification of the quantum
properties of light will be performed using artificial neural networks. The
successful completion of the program will enable transformative technology for
remote imaging and superresolving microscopy. The educational objectives of this
project are to contribute to the inclusive and fair diffusion of science by
engaging students to perform research on superresolving imaging, and by
developing a series of lectures and demonstrations for general audiences in the
Ascension Parish Library from Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
includes a series of theoretical and experimental milestones. The theoretical
component of this research program aims to develop new formalisms to model the
evolution of the properties of quantum coherence of multiparticle systems. These
physical systems lead to computationally hard problems scaling on the order of
O(2nn!), where n represents the number of photons in the imaging system. The
experimental part of the program will be carried out in table-top optical
setups. The investigators will prepare multiple light sources with tunable
coherence properties and degrees of indistinguishability, these beams will be
characterized through photon-number-resolving detection. These capabilities will
enable the team to 1) develop a general theory of quantum coherence to describe
the photon statistics produced by the combination of an arbitrary number of
light sources, 2) design artificial neural networks to demonstrate single-pixel
cameras with photon-number resolution, and 3) experimentally demonstrate single-
pixel superresolution imaging of an arbitrary number of photon emitters and
scatterers. The completion of these milestones will lead to the first family of
superresolving single-pixel cameras that exploit the self-learning features of
artificial intelligence to identify the statistical fluctuations of truly
unknown mixtures of light sources. The potential of these novel photonic devices
will be explored in the context of remote imaging and
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.