* 2225306
* Empowering Children of Migratory/Seasonal Farmworkers with Gamification and Culturally-Responsive Engineering Design Instruction
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Dina Verdin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 349,994.00

The project aims to build the investigator’s capacity to conduct robust
fundamental STEM education research by implementing a small-scale research
project and a professional development plan. The research investigates how
culturally responsive gamified activities impact STEM identity development and
promote STEM pathways among students of migratory families. The project extends
the efforts of the Migratory Student Summer Academy at Arizona State University
that provides summer enrichment activities for this student population. The
professional development plan aims to reinforce basic skill sets of qualitative
data analysis and equity-centered approaches to qualitative research. The
project could provide insight of migratory adolescents’ STEM trajectories and
expand knowledge of how gamification elements with culturally responsive
centered activities resonate with the targeted
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will implement a qualitative
study using a critical agency framework to collect and analyze data from pre-
and post- surveys, interviews, and tracking via an online platform. Participants
will include three cohorts of 10 students. The research questions are (1) How do
migratory students describe their home and community bodies of knowledge and
their potential ability in STEM? (2) How does participating in the culturally
responsive engineering design activity impact migratory students’ academic
profiles? (3) How do migratory students describe themselves and their critical
STEM agency after participating in the online activity? and (4) How are
migratory students engaging with gamification elements and, specifically, the
culturally responsive story line? The project could fill a void in the
literature about students of migratory farm workers and bridge the equity gap by
connecting engineering activities with migratory students’ lived experiences
through a culturally responsive approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (BCSER)
program. BCSER is designed to build the capacity of investigators to conduct
robust fundamental STEM education research that focuses on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.