* 2225637
* Building Capacity for Investigating the Use of Spatial Reasoning in Fluid-Earth Science Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Peggy McNeal, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2024
* USD 233,309.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a researcher’s
skills to conduct fundamental geosciences education research that investigates
how college students use spatial reasoning to think and learn about fluid-Earth
science concepts. In fluid-Earth science courses, topics such as atmosphere and
ocean dynamics are highly abstract and mathematical without a natural bridge to
everyday understanding of physical reality. The important leaps in thinking from
mathematical descriptions to visualizing fluids and understanding fluid flow are
challenging. Although the ocean and atmosphere are not easily accessible to
observe, they can be modeled in density and rotating tanks to support student
learning. This provides an opportunity to study how students process these
phenomena and use spatial reasoning to make sense of what they see. To advance
this research, the project will establish a Fluid-Earth Science Spatial Thinking
Laboratory at Towson University to be used for modeling fluid-Earth processes
and observing students as they reason about what they observe. Throughout the
project, the principal investigator (PI) will also develop her expertise and
capacity for conducting spatial thinking research through an intense study of
cognitive science theory and practice. With potential applications to the
development of curricula and pedagogies, the project team ultimately seeks to
make fluid-Earth science more accessible to diverse students with a broad range
of backgrounds, experiences, and abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will establish a Fluid-Earth Science Spatial Thinking Laboratory at Towson
University to model fluid-Earth processes in density and rotating tanks while
conducting investigations of undergraduate students’ use of spatial reasoning
during observations of geophysical fluid processes. To build her capacity to
conduct this work, the PI will participate in professional development in
cognitive psychology to learn how to make robust connections between human
behavior and theories of the mind. The professional development plan will
include coursework in cognitive psychology and coaching from mentors and
advisors. Current spatial thinking typologies and characterizations of spatial
reasoning will frame a qualitative study that addresses two questions: 1) How do
students use spatial reasoning to make sense of physical models of fluid-Earth
dynamics? and 2) What are students’ spatial conceptions about fluid flow in
these models? The project team will address these questions through interviews
of students who observe fluid behavior while making predictions, sketches, and
explanations of dynamic fluid phenomena. From analysis of student sense-making,
researchers seek to gain an improved understanding of the spatial reasoning
necessary for making mental models of fluid transformations in atmospheric
science and oceanography contexts. The project team will aim to describe how
spatial skills used to make mental fluid transformations are related to those
used in transforming rigid objects, such as when thinking about the solid-Earth.
The team will disseminate results through workshops to advance fluid-Earth
thinking research, apply insights from the project, and build tools designed to
enhance teaching. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.