* 2225809
* Development of a machine learning pipeline for assisting strain design of nonmodel yeasts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mattheos Koffas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 943,286.00

Some yeast strains produce relatively large amounts of oils and fats. These oils
and fats have similar structures to those for many pharmaceuticals and
chemicals. These strains are often also capable of high growth rates and can be
grown using waste plant biomass. These yeasts can also be genetically
engineered, so they could be a platform for low-cost biomanufacturing processes.
Before that can be achieved, additional details of their metabolic mechanisms
must be uncovered. The overall objective of this project is to develop a model
that can predict the yield of product from biomanufacturing processes using
genetically modified yeasts. This project also includes summer research programs
for high school and undergraduate students. One point of emphasis will involve a
partnership with Lincoln University, an HBCU. This partnership will help to
develop a diverse workforce well-trained in key aspects of the emerging
bioeconomy: artificial intelligence, bioinformatics, and synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology tools can engineer microbes to
produce many target products. Multiple Design-Build-Test-Learn (DBTL) cycles are
required to resolve bottlenecks that resulted from both pathway engineering and
stressed cultivation conditions. However, the effectiveness of DBTL often drops
after initial cycles and strain development may fall into “involutions” without
further technology breakthroughs. To overcome this hurdle, the Washington
University/RPI team will work with Sandia National Lab and Pacific Northwest
National Lab to develop an AI-enhanced biomanufacturing route. Firstly, they
will perform knowledge mining of oleaginous yeast literature and the ABF data
repository. The extracted information (including strain engineering,
fermentation conditions, and production metrics) will be converted into a
structured database. The database will be used to train machine learning (ML)
models to predict productivity from engineered constructs under various
bioreactor conditions. Then, the team will integrate ML and computational strain
design models to guide yeast strain development for biofuels (e.g., butanol) and
natural products (e.g., flavonoid) synthesis. Based on model predictions, the
RPI team and the national labs will perform novel enzyme engineering, promoter
tuning, and CRISPRi pathway modification to improve yeast fermentation titers.
The experimental tests will validate and further improve model applicability.
The objectives of this project are four fold: (1) Develop rules that extract and
standardize biomanufacturing information from different sources; (2) Advance AI
technology (such as meta-learning and ensemble learning) for the prediction of
non-model yeast fermentation outcomes; (3) Integrate genome scale modeling,
computational strain design, and ML to improve strain design under complex
bioreactor conditions, to minimize DBTL cycles, and to reduce the cost for
experimental trials; and (4) Engineer three non-model yeast species for
bioproduction with sustainable feedstock. The successes in this project could
greatly facilitate the translation of laboratory strains into industrial
producers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.