* 2225354
* CPS: Small: Informed Contextual Bandits to Support Decision-Making for Intelligent CPS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Travis Desell, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 515,899.00

This NSF project aims to develop a novel computational framework for informed
contextual multi-armed bandits (iCMABs) that will be capable of robustly
operating in complex, time-varying environments. The project will bring
transformative change to the way that intelligent decision-making agents are
designed for CPS, specifically those that utilize variants of multi-armed
bandits. The intellectual merits of the project include: I) designing novel
informed contextual bandits that maintain a generative model of their external
world/environment, II) designing neural architecture search processed based on
neuro-evolution to automatically design these generative models in an online
manner, III) providing mechanisms to identify and address corrupt contextual and
reward information, and IV) facilitating a process that enables the agent to
generate predictions over longer-term horizons by querying its internal
generative model. The broader impacts of the project include: I) advancing
intelligent CPS through the iCMAB framework, II) providing decision-making
modules and processes that readily integrate with many intelligent
CPS/operations, and III) making important contributions to the field of machine
learning and nature-inspired computing, specifically the automated design of
intelligent agents based on artificial neural networks (ANNs).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current challenges faced by intelligent CPS, such as those
used for tasks such as sensor validation and activity decisions, include being
required to robustly operate in the face of noise, coming from things such as
corrupted, fragmented, and uncertain reward values and context/state
information, as well as having to adapt and make predictions in real-time and
continually. Our proposed iCMAB framework will enable CPS to tackle these
problems by: I) jointly evolving, in an online fashion, a reward forecasting
model and a generative world model of contexts, II) providing a measure of
confidence in predictions of both reward and context signals, and III) utilizing
evolving recurrent neural networks (eRNNs) and brain-inspired neural
systems/mechanisms to predict both contextual and reward information in the
streaming data setting while mitigating catastrophic forgetting. This updated
information will serve as input to CPS that are driven by contextual-bandits,
enabling them to take more informed actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.