* 2225960
* RUI: Imaging and Spectra at the 2023 and 2024 Total Solar Eclipses
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jay Pasachoff, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 0.00

A thorough understanding of the solar corona remains one of the most important
areas in solar research. Studies of the solar corona during solar eclipses have
been a major part of the success of the Williams College astronomy department in
attracting and training students. This project continues solar eclipse studies
with unique, ground-based measurements in concert with space-based and ground-
based radio observations from NSF-funded telescopes. Undergraduate students,
including students from under-represented groups in STEM, will be trained and
participating in observations of two solar eclipses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
solar eclipse observations include exquisitely high-resolution observations with
a Fabry-Perot and with Lyot/Halle filters. Observations also include high-
frequency (&gt; 1 Hz) power spectra of narrow-band coronal loops to compare
mechanisms of coronal heating. Spectrographic observations continue to study
changes of the spectral-line ratios over the solar-activity cycle through the
predicted 2024 low maximum, comparing with previous solar-minimum observations
from this group. Additionally, radio observations will be make with the NSF-
funded Jansky Very Large Array, to provide the best-ever mapping of active
regions to pinpoint the different locations of radio and EUV eruption origins,
and Owens Valley Radio Observatory and a radiotelescope in the Apple Valley. The
aim is to study differences in the corona during solar minimum and solar
maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.