* 2225381
* Generational Family Patterns, and Engineering Entry and Persistence: A Bowen Family Systems Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Sona Gholizadeh, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2028
* USD 349,999.00

This project will investigate the influence of family on student interest and
persistence in engineering. The overarching goal of this project is to expand
the investigator’s expertise to conduct fundamental research on the influence of
family in engineering fields to better understand facilitators of student
persistence. The research findings have the potential to inform a larger
quantitative study through developing and testing a theory about impacts of
family relationships on STEM student persistence and choice of major. Findings
will contribute to STEM policymaking, and undergraduate recruitment and
retention programming efforts. This work has the potential to enhance academic
support services such as counseling and career centers so that may help identify
students before they leave the degree field and increase the persistence of
undergraduate students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will utilize the Bowen family systems theory as a conceptual framework in the
current project. Bowen family systems theory determines individual functionality
as a product of family interactions and relationship patterns that are passed
down through multiple generations. Such patterns and relationships can include
cultural influences or family attitudes, both of which may influence STEM
persistence. This project will investigate the following objectives: 1) Develop
an exploratory interview-based inquiry that examines exemplar students and any
multigenerational family influences to their persistence in STEM fields; 2)
Explore how intergenerational career patterns impact student mental health; 3)
Explore how intergenerational patterns impact student academic persistence; 4)
Examine how student mental health and academic persistence influence each other;
and 5) Evaluate the efforts through a critical lens of self-reflection. This
project will utilize a mixed methods approach, collecting interview-based
qualitative data from 15-20 exemplar engineering students. The study will
propose a multifaceted definition for exemplar that is beyond grades and
academic success. A genogram will be used to collect patterns of three
generations for each student as well as leading semi-structured interviews, and
a thematic analysis will be used to analyze the qualitative data. Built upon the
findings, a survey will be developed on student mental health, family academic
and career choices, using structural equation modeling (SEM) for data analysis.
The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.