* 2225185
* Teachers' Interpretation, Implementation, and Assessment of Chemistry Information Literacy in K-12 Students
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Christopher Randles, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 341,230.00

To meaningfully understand a discipline, students not only need to remember
concepts but also understand how those concepts connect to one another.
Understanding connections between concepts requires students to engage with
their discipline in ways such as using visual representations (e.g. diagrams and
graphs), experimental activities (e.g. testing hypotheses), societal influences
(e.g. the nature of science and society), and information literacy (e.g. how
information is presented and used). This project focuses specifically on
information literacy. The Next Generation Science Standards was a major step
towards a unified vision that guides reform-based teaching and learning of
science. Teachers also need a framework for implementing critical information
literacies. This project is designed to create resources that complement the
Next Generation Science Standards by examining information literacy practices
and beliefs during K-12 Chemistry content instruction. In the process, the
project is also designed to further develop the principal investigator’s STEM
education research expertise. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will adopt a threshold
concepts framework (Timmermans and Meyer, 2019) to capture perspectives from
multiple data sources informing the development of a survey instrument.
Threshold concepts are ideas that lead to a transformed way of understanding,
interpreting, or viewing something, such as "enthalpy" in Chemistry. A key
component of a threshold concepts framework is the inclusion of stakeholders
(e.g., K-12 teachers, instructors of higher education, policy advisors, and
education researchers) in the development and interpretations of threshold
concepts. More than 1,000 K-12 stakeholders will participate in survey
development and implementation process through focus groups, interviews,
classroom video observations, and survey responses that examine information
literacies in K-12 Chemistry content. The principal investigator (PI) will use
analytical techniques including multiple level analysis, Likert scale
validation, thematic analysis, computational test analysis, and network
analysis. The principal investigator will be mentored by an expert in K-12 STEM
education research and supported by an advisory board of K-12 STEM education and
disciplinary literacy experts. During this project, the PI will complete
coursework to develop proficiencies with survey design and education policy
evaluation. The study is designed to 1) increase clarity of information literacy
definitions held by K-12 stakeholders and how they are enacted in the classroom;
2) improve information literacy implementation in K-12 chemistry content; and 3)
foster continued collaborative networks and partnerships to increase the
effectiveness of information literacies in K-12 chemistry
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.