* 2225852
* RII-BEC: Individual Based Talent Bridge from Minority-Serving Institutions to Graduate School and Energy Industry
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Emmett Lodree, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 998,670.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Bridging EPSCoR Communities (RII BEC) project, centered at the
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa (UA), aims to serve the national interest by
creating a model for building sustainable partnerships between Predominantly
White Institutions (PWIs) and Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs). Such partnerships will help broaden the participation of students
historically underrepresented in graduate education in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). UA will partner with three HBCUs, including
Stillman College (SC) in Alabama, Jackson State University (JSU) in Mississippi,
and Fort Valley State University (FVSU) in the non-EPSCoR state of Georgia. This
project will help grow chemistry, physics, and engineering majors within HBCUs
by providing an interdisciplinary perspective of energy education and research.
In concert with this, the partnerships will create a blend of uniform and
individualized pathways for undergraduate HBCU students that lead to graduate
studies, careers, and entrepreneurial opportunities in renewable energy. This
will be accomplished by engaging student participants in diverse educational
experiences. Project components will include a summer boot camp at UA to help
fill gaps in students' learning caused by the pandemic. In addition, the project
will implement a summer research and development (R &amp; D) program to recruit
and prepare HBCU participants to transition to graduate programs. The R &amp; D
program will include weekly research seminars, entrepreneurial workshops, joint
academic advising via UA and the HBCUs, undergraduate research experiences that
address global challenges, summer research conferences, hands-on laboratory
experiences, and professional training in ethics and laboratory safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of the project are several fold and include: (1)
enhancing the competitiveness of HBCU student participants as applicants to
graduate programs; (2) preparing students for the STEM workforce; and (3)
providing students with content knowledge, skills, experiences, and confidence
to engage in entrepreneurial pursuits in the STEM arena. The project will engage
HBCU students in STEM research that will help create devices comprised of
advanced materials and structures for energy conversion and storage application.
In particular, students will develop molecular and solid catalytic and solid
thin film materials and their heterojunctions for efficient energy harvesting,
conversion, and storage. Students will receive mentoring and state-of-the-art
training in the fields of chemistry, physics, engineering, and materials
chemistry to address challenging issues of energy research and technology
relevant to solar cells, batteries, and light-emitting diodes and technologies
for CO2 reduction. A rigorous assessment process will be implemented to evaluate
the project’s progress and provide feedback to the investigators toward
achieving both short and long-term goals. Education and research activities and
results will be disseminated on a designated website as well as through journal
publications, conferences, and various social media platforms. Research,
education, and professional development activities of this project will
collectively enhance students’ learning experiences by fusing focused and
realigned pedagogical content and lab skills into real-world experiences. These
activities will provide transitory knowledge for students to begin connecting
the importance of research concepts for future academic and industrial careers.
This project will help economic development and the renewable energy industry by
producing talented next-generation scientists and engineers through a strategic
undergraduate and graduate partnership program between a non-HBCU university and
three HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.