* 2225816
* RII-BEC: Bridging Collaboration Across South Carolina Academic Institutions to Support Underserved and Underrepresented Community Needs
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Gang Li, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 999,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to serve the
national interest by addressing acute needs in academia and industry resulting
from the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In both academic
preparation and workforce development, individuals from underserved or
underrepresented communities who are pursuing STEM related education have had to
alter or end their professional pursuits for a variety of reasons. The
importance of supporting the needs of these individuals for restarting their
studies and revising their plans for their professional preparation is addressed
by providing financial support and personalized guidance to students in the
continuation of their education. This project is a collaboration across South
Carolina with Clemson University, two Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (Claflin University and South Carolina State University), a
technical college (Trident College), and a military college (The Citadel). The
project will focus on the recruitment, mentoring, retention, and graduation of
students from underserved and underrepresented communities who have been most
impacted by the pandemic. Providing academic and financial support would help
address current issues that forced students to change their plans and return
them to academic achievement and career success pathways, especially in the
engineering discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is
to broaden participation in STEM by incorporating individual, institutional, and
geographic diversity. Given the growth of automotive and advanced materials
manufacturing in South Carolina, especially in the region where Trident and
Citadel are located, the investigators will be able to address workforce
development needs by better-connecting students, institutions, and industries
with professional learning, workforce development, and employment opportunities
across the state. The project scope involves increasing and improving access to
education through online certificate courses that provide facilitated entry
points to industry and graduate study. Clemson University will offer the
Automotive and Mechanical Engineering certificate program and create new
opportunities with the Composites certificate to support students and help them
progress toward their intended professional goals. Intentional institutional
partnerships and connections to industry will also support student advancement.
Project interventions will be assessed for their immediate impact on students,
as well as evaluated over long-term metrics with a focus to address enrollment
and STEM retention and create new connections to local industries. Outcomes from
periodic evaluations will be essential to determine the impact across all
stakeholders, in order to better assess the needs of students impacted by
disruptive events, which inhibit progress in their academic and professional
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.