* 2225613
* GEM: Quantifying Radiation Belt Losses and Their Effects on the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jacob Bortnik, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 586,504.00

Energetic precipitation that rains down on the atmosphere from space is known to
cause a whole host of space weather effects, including damage to low-Earth
orbiting spacecraft, location signal disruptions, and danger to trans-polar
aircraft and passengers. Additionally, the atmospheric effects of nitric oxides
from particle precipitation play a role in our understanding of weather and
climate - a topic that is particularly relevant right now. The linkage between
space and climate is not well-known. This study aims to investigate this link
directly by analyzing data from spacecraft, ground-based instrumentation, and
using atmospheric modeling to uncover the cause and effect of particle
precipitation on the atmosphere and climate. This proposal involves graduate
student training and participation by several early- and mid-career researchers
who will benefit from the collaboration in a new direction. Furthermore, the
team plans to host a short, virtual seminar series to be advertised to the full
community that will illuminate this science topic, highlight the
interdisciplinary nature of the work, and discuss new
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energetic particle precipitation (EPP) is both a
cause and a consequence of a myriad different processes throughout geospace. It
is the result of loss mechanisms that occur throughout the inner magnetosphere,
contributing to global dynamics of the trapped radiation belt and ring current
particle populations. It is also the cause of several effects on the Earth's
upper and middle atmosphere, as the energy deposited to these regions create
changes in chemical constituents. As such, EPP is a process that crosses the
traditionally-defined boundaries between space science and earth science, and
has wide-ranging implications on both systems. The research project aims to
advance the frontiers of our knowledge on the drivers and effects of EPP on the
coupled magnetosphere-atmosphere system. In summary, this project is to quantify
the loss that occurs in the magnetospheric particle population through ground-
and space-based observations and use that information to assess the effects of
that precipitation on the Earth's atmosphere using whole atmosphere modeling.
This approach will allow us to advance understanding of this process within the
context of the space science and atmospheric science
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.