* 2225519
* Mechanics of Multilayered van der Waals Materials and Heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Kenneth Liechti, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 653,097.00

This award will develop theoretical and computational models, and experimental
methods to advance the fundamental understanding on the mechanics of
multilayered van der Waals materials and heterostructures. Such materials and
structures have promising applications such as novel detectors, sensors and
quantum emitters. The van der Waals materials are considered an important class
of quantum materials, critically important for the imminent second quantum
revolution (Quantum 2.0). It has been recognized that the presence of strain in
the van der Waals materials can profoundly influence their electronic and
optical properties, and the strain could be used to tune their physical
properties, thus presenting an opportunity for mechanics. To materialize these
applications, one must understand the van der Waals interactions between various
types of two-dimensional materials and the mechanics governing the strain
distributions. If successful, this research would advance the mechanics of
materials research to the forefront of the second quantum revolution, opening
new opportunities by controlling and manipulating individual quantum systems.
The project will provide excellent research and education opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, and promote diversity by recruiting and
mentoring students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the research include: (i) The development of a theoretical
framework for the mechanics of multilayered van der Waals (vdW) materials, based
on atomistically informed potential energy functions for the vdW interactions
between 2D materials, coupling adhesive normal interactions with periodic shear
interactions; (ii) The development of computational models for twisted and
strained bilayer vdW materials, including pressurized micro-blisters with
inhomogeneous deformation; (iii) The development of multiscale experimental
methods to characterize the vdW interactions between various 2D materials. The
intellectual merit of the research arises from the integration of theoretical
and computational modeling with novel experiments in order to investigate the
mechanics of multilayered vdW materials and heterostructures. The multiscale
modeling approach complements the first-principles based atomistic models and
has the advantage of scaling up for larger systems. Correspondingly, multiscale
experiments will be developed, from nanoribbons to micro-blisters, and to
centimeter-scale laminated beam specimens. The pressurized micro-blisters offer
a tunable approach for strain engineering in potential quantum
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.