* 2225583
* Conference on Complex Hyperbolic Geometry and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Julien Paupert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This NSF award provides support for US-based participants to attend the
conference “Complex hyperbolic geometry and related topics”, which will take
place at the Centre International de Rencontres Mathematiques (CIRM) in
Luminy/Marseilles (France) from July 4 to July 8, 2022. Funds will cover travel
and lodging expenses of ten to fifteen US-based participants, with priority
given to graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, other early-career
mathematicians, and members of underrepresented groups. The award will enhance
the education and training of US-based graduate students, postdocs and other
junior mathematicians, by allowing them to learn about the latest developments
in the field, meet members of the community from around the world, in particular
Europe and South America, and develop their network and potential
collaborations. To encourage this, the schedule of talks will leave plenty of
time for participants to meet and interact informally with each other.
Particular attention will be given to the diversity of supported participants,
specifically by encouraging women and underrepresented minorities to apply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex hyperbolic space, the symmetric space associated
with the Lie group PU(n,1), is the simplest example of a space with non-constant
negative curvature. It enjoys a rich geometric structure coming from the
interaction between real and complex geometry but is also less rigid than the
structure provided by flats in higher rank symmetric spaces. From this rich
structure arises a large variety of questions requiring techniques from complex
geometry, algebraic geometry, differential geometry, topology, group theory,
algebraic groups, etc. The conference will revolve around the following three
themes: discrete groups and lattices; CR and contact geometry; geometric
structures and character varieties. Leading experts as well as young researchers
in each of these themes will present their recent research results and engage
more informally with all participants throughout the conference. The conference
website is https://conferences.cirm-math.fr/2622.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.