* 2225590
* NSF-AoF: CISE Core: Small: Enabling Mobile Terahertz Communication for 6G Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michele Polese, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 456,593.00

Following the commercial deployment of the fifth generation (5G) of wireless
cellular networks, the wireless research community has started defining the
technologies that will be part of the next generation of mobile networks. Recent
evolution in device technologies has brought the sub-terahertz and terahertz
bands (broadly speaking the frequencies between 100 GHz and 3 THz of the
electromagnetic spectrum) into the spotlight as an enabler for terabit-per-
second communications (i.e., two orders of magnitude higher than current 5G
networks) in the sixth generation (6G) networks, allowing for the development of
new transformative use cases such as holographic telepresence in the metaverse.
Most of the research so far has focused on understanding the capabilities of THz
devices, the peculiarities of THz wave propagation, and how to engineer around
them. However, integrating the THz spectrum in truly mobile and complex cellular
networks requires a proper design of the full communication stack. To
investigate, conceive and test the solutions that will enable 6G mobile networks
in the terahertz band is the goal of this effort. The project contributes to the
scientific development of THz communications as well as to the early
standardization efforts of the same, all while training students from diverse
backgrounds at the high school, undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this effort is to create novel
solutions to provide consistent, ultra-high data rates in 6G mobile terahertz
networks by improving the reliability and efficiency of the physical and link
layers, and by introducing mechanisms for service continuity and management of
intermittent connectivity at the system level. To accomplish this ambitious
goal, the project has been organized in three intertwined thrusts. Thrust 1
develops channel modeling methodologies that constitute the foundation of the
modeling and evaluation activities of the rest of the project. Thrust 2 designs
protocols and algorithms for the mobile THz physical and link layers. Finally,
Thrust 3 builds system-level solutions to support application requirements, with
a multi-pronged approach that aims at improving the session continuity and
application performance with intermittent
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.