* 2225386
* I-Corps: Catheter-Based Device to Treat Chronic Heart Failure
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Ishan Kamat, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a catheter-based device that performs a targeted sympathetic
nerve ablation to treat heart failure. Chronic heart failure is characterized by
cardiac muscle weakening, which reduces the heart’s ability to pump blood to the
rest of the body. To compensate, the nervous system diverts blood volume from
the abdominal vasculature to help restore blood flow. While this mechanism is
safely activated during normal periods of exercise in patients with heart
failure, this mechanism over-stresses both the heart and lungs, causing fluid
accumulation in the lungs. This fluid makes it difficult to breathe or carry out
basic activities of daily living, forcing patients to the hospital multiple
times each year. Current medications afford some clinical benefit but, in many
cases, are ineffective at relieving symptoms or reducing hospital admissions.
Heart failure remains a major clinical and economic burden with limited
treatment options. The proposed technology leverages this neuro-cardiac
mechanism, removing the fluid from the heart and lungs, and restoring it to a
safer place — the abdominal capacitance vessels. This procedure may enable
improved patient symptoms, reduced hospitalizations, and potentially alter the
course of heart disease. By performing targeted ablation, the aim is to break
the cycle of rehospitalizations for patients with heart
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a device to perform an endovascular ablation that directs energy to tissues
previously accessible only by invasive surgery for the interventionalist
physician. Radiofrequency ablation has been employed to treat disease by
coagulating tissues, but there remain concerns surrounding accuracy, procedure
success, and collateral damage to surrounding tissues. The proposed technology
relies on two components: 1) an electro-stimulation feature that locates a
target nerve and confirms procedure completion and 2) a vein-puncture ablation
probe that improves accuracy, reduces collateral damage, and reduces procedure
times compared to conventional ablation catheters. The proposed device offers a
solution for neuromodulation and nerve ablation that specifically targets nerves
and avoids collateral damage. In addition, this minimally invasive device
targets a nerve located in the thoracic cavity that is not near the heart.
Therefore, cardiologists may consider this a low-risk procedure that may be
performed in an outpatient setting. By targeting the highest risk heart disease
patients, it may be possible to directly address the societal needs of patients
and the healthcare system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.