* 2225259
* AF: Small: New Directions for Simplicity versus Optimality in Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shuchi Chawla, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 460,041.00

This project aims to develop new algorithmic techniques for designing market
mechanisms that faithfully model consumer behavior and other real-world
constraints. This work lies within the purview of algorithmic mechanism design,
which deals with the optimization of economic systems wherein many parties with
conflicting objectives compete for possession of resources. Insights from this
area apply to the design of all kinds of markets – big or small, brick-and-
mortar or electronic – and play an increasingly important role in the rise of
new electronic marketplaces such as online advertising, the cloud market, the
rideshare industry, crowdsourcing marketplaces, etc. The project focuses on the
objectives of maximizing the seller's revenue or the economic efficiency of the
allocation. For each of these objectives, the goal is to develop solutions that
are simple to implement, broadly applicable, and near
optimal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project will focus on the
revenue-maximization objective under a so-called buy-many constraint. This
natural constraint requires that the seller cannot limit the number of times a
buyer can interact with the mechanism, and is satisfied in most real-world
contexts. Imposing this constraint imparts a nice structure to the optimal
mechanism, and should thereby allow for much better approximations in the
absence of any further assumptions than previously known. The second part of
this project will develop algorithms for efficient resource allocation in online
settings where buyers arrive in the market over time and allocation decisions
must be made without knowing future demand. The goal is to develop simple
pricing-based allocation mechanisms that nevertheless achieve near-optimal
performance. The third part of this project will consider settings where buyers
are uncertain about their current or future values, and will study the
effectiveness of pricing strategies such as refunds, free trials, and overuse
fees as vehicles for lessening the risk faced by the
buyer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.