* 2225568
* RECODE: Non-invasive cell patterning and monitoring to generate data-guided computational models that inform synthetic gene circuit-guided cartilage development
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Rhima Coleman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 10/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Efforts to develop stem-cell based regeneration strategies have yet to be
clinically usable especially for difficult to repair tissues like muscle and
cartilage. The goal of this Reproducible Cells and Organoids via Directed-
Differentiation Encoding (RECODE) project is to understand how adult human stem
cells transform into chondrocytes, the cells in cartilage. Ultimately, these
engineered cells could be used to repair traumatic and debilitating cartilage
injuries. This project will generate new knowledge about the regulators of stem
cell-based cartilage formation that can be used to develop new regeneration
strategies. The results will also be broadly applicable to the tissue
regeneration field in cases where tissue functionality requires long-term
stability. This work offers a unique opportunity to train teams of undergraduate
and graduate scientists and engineers in methods that enhance the translation of
fundamental studies of biology into sophisticated engineering
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project aims to employ innovative
methods that combine biophysical techniques, data-guided algorithms, and
synthetic gene circuit engineering for the cell stateâ€“specific perturbation of
the drivers controlling differentiation of adult human mesenchymal stem cells
(hMSCs) into chondrocytes. Specifically, this project focuses on conditions that
drive maturation of the hMSC derived chondrocyte (hMdCh) phenotype into either
stable articular cartilage chondrocytes or hypertrophic chondrocytes. The
influence of the biophysical conditions on long-term hMdCh phenotype will be
monitored using high-throughput methods to dynamically and non-destructively
measure the secretome and the evolving stiffness of the nascent tissues. The
regulatory pathways associated with transitions in phenotype will be identified
by correlating RNA- and microRNA-sequencing and genome-wide chromatin
architectural data with the secretomic markers of phenotype transitions. A
mathematical model of phenotype transitions will be generated to pinpoint
transcriptional and translational regulators that drive phenotype changes under
specific environmental conditions. A flexible synthetic gene circuit platform
will be used to engineer gene circuits that simultaneously activate and/or
repress the genomic regulators found to maintain articular or hypertrophic
chondrocyte phenotypes. Finally, the efficacy of these gene circuits to maintain
hMdCh phenotype and produce functional cartilage tissues will be tested. The
outcomes of this work will demonstrate the utility of data-driven models to
inform the design of synthetic gene circuits to improve tissue regeneration
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project is jointly funded by the
Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation, and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.