* 2225104
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC 2022)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Donald Lie, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,992.00

The 2022 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC'22) is an
annual international symposium that serves as a premier forum focused
exclusively on presenting the latest state-of-the-art research results in radio-
frequency (RF), millimeter-wave, and wireless integrated circuits (ICs). The
RFIC'22 will be held at the Colorado Convention Center, June 19-21. The
Symposium is part of Microwave Week 2022, the world's largest RF and microwave
technical convention. Participation at RFIC'22 will expose US-based students to
this critical research field of US national interests (e.g., 5G/6G wireless),
enhance the research experiences for students, and provide increased
opportunities for new collaborations to advance knowledge. However, attending
RFIC'22 is getting more expensive each year (transportation, lodging, and
registration fees all more costly), and not every researcher has the funds to
allow their students to travel to RFIC'22. Moreover, undergraduate students are
rarely getting the opportunity for funding as they are typically not engaging in
research in their early career. Yet, young students' attendance is important
because they represent the future of RFIC'22. Students also benefit tremendously
by attending presentations on the latest research, making new connections, and
participating in the various conference events. Thus, the NSF RFIC'22 travel
grant can help increase student attendance in a significant manner. It is
particularly useful to encourage student participation in RFIC'22 workshops,
dedicated students forums, panels, demos, tutorials, exhibition, and attending
papers presentations. The proposed activity may noticeably improve the
participation of US-based students who are female, persons with disabilities,
and underrepresented minorities in the STEM (science, technology, engineering
and math) fields to RFIC'22. It will help enhance the STEM education
proficiencies for US-based students. It can also help the development of a
diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce in the US, and increase
partnerships between academia, industry, and government to increase economic
competitiveness of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RFIC'22 offers a
number of events specifically beneficial to student researchers, which include
technical talks, focused student forums (1st time in the RFIC Symposium
history), interactive demo session, workshops, tutorials, technical lecture,
exhibition, the three-minute thesis (3MT) competition program, and other
targeted student activities. As IEEE RFIC Symposium is one of the world's
premier events to learn about RF IC design, technology and research, students
are able to obtain feedbacks on their work, talk with senior researchers from
government, industry, and academia, and get exposed to the latest research.
These activities provide the students the latest updates and direct interactions
with world experts from government, industry, and academia, and provide unique
training that is not possible from a typical university program. Over the last
three years before the COVID-19 pandemic, RFIC Symposium has been a three-day
event with over 900 registered attendees, including about 300 students annually
and keep growing. We will use this NSF travel fund to fully fund the
participation of 12 US-based students (i.e., covering the total cost). The NSF
student travel grant program will be publicized on the RFIC'22 website and
through special email blasts that will focus on students' activities; it will
also be posted on social media (e.g., Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.). We will also
reach out to faculty in US universities and ask them to publicize the grant and
encourage their past and current class students to apply for it. The funding
will be for full-time students from any U.S. university. RFIC'22 organizers seek
to increase student participants by targeting women, undergraduates, and under-
represented groups. The aim is to support young researchers who might not
otherwise be able to attend RFIC'22 due to financial difficulty, as well as to
encourage the diversity of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.