* 2225246
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Building a Problem-Solving Community of Scholars in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 525,610.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to improve student success,
retention, and degree persistence among underrepresented Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) majors at the University of Houston. While
transitioning from high school to college remains a challenge for students in
STEM, many institutions provide various programming for improving first-year
retention rates, including undergraduate research, active learning in the
classroom, living and learning communities, summer bridge programming, and peer-
led learning. However, sophomore year retention has become a great concern for
persistence since this is when STEM students typically enroll in key “gateway”
courses, and targeted programming for achieving success in these courses is
often times not available. For groups, who are underrepresented in STEM majors
and careers, this may be more challenging as they also work to establish a sense
of community and belonging in their major departments. The University of Houston
(UH) is a designated Hispanic and Asian, Native American and Pacific Islander
Serving institution and is ranked in the top ten by US News and World Report for
student ethnic diversity. This program at UH will provide support for STEM
majors beyond their freshmen year and foster a community of learners to promote
persistence to degree completion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this project is to improve STEM student retention by implementing evidence-based
interventions and best practices to enhance students’ content knowledge, develop
their sense of belonging, and strengthen their STEM identity to promote success
beyond the freshman year. This will be accomplished through a 5-week Problem-
Solving Community of Scholars bridge program (between freshmen and sophomore
year) that exposes students to sophomore-level “gateway” course content, a
problem-solving workshop for skills and community building, and support via the
Guaranteed 4.0 Learning System which will provide tailored guidance and feedback
on the process of learning for STEM student success. The results of this project
will provide knowledge on how support programming can be implemented, scaled,
and sustained for promoting underrepresented minority student success in STEM.
It will also contribute to the Community Cultural Wealth research literature by
uncovering knowledge related to factors that may inhibit and contribute to the
success of underrepresented STEM students in a HSI context. The HSI Program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.