* 2225109
* Transdisciplinary Research in Graduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jianhong Ren, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2025
* USD 487,251.00

Society faces burgeoning challenges to sustain and enhance life on earth. Smart
use and management of natural resources plus proactive responses to the
corresponding rapid changes within and beyond the energy and environmental
fields hold promise for society to act. But such action requires future
professionals equipped with transdisciplinary research abilities coupled to a
broad understanding of dynamic relationships across natural, social, and
engineering systems. This NSF Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to
Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMUK) will pilot and test transformative
approaches to develop and improve engineering graduate students’ ability to
conduct transdisciplinary research. This research is needed to reach sustainable
solutions respecting the interdependence of natural, social, and engineering
systems on local and trans-local scales that resonate globally. This project
brings researchers and graduate students from different fields of study to share
spaces, conversations, analyses, scholarship, research approaches, methods,
questions, and solutions through workshops and service learning projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, "Transdisciplinary Research in Graduate
Engineering Education (TREE)," will create and offer workshop-based thematic
modular units in three thrust competencies (intercultural competence, community-
engaged practice, and qualitative and quantitative mixed research methods) and
an operationalized service learning component. The TREE project will search for
multi-scalar answers to two primary research questions: 1) Are the thrust
competencies workshops and thematic modular units taught in the workshops able
to effectively and efficiently develop and improve engineering graduate
students’ ability to conduct transdisciplinary research? 2) Can the
operationalization of these principles through collaborative service learning
projects effectively and efficiently enhance engineering graduate students’
ability to conduct transdisciplinary research? The project will provide new
educational opportunities to graduate students engaged with local communities,
sketching and running simulations on initial, medial, and final stages of
dominant and subordinate processes in search of sustainable solutions. Such
collaborations will support transdisciplinary thinking and problem solving and
the co-construction and soft assembly of complex solutions that value the inputs
across disciplines and individuals who bring multicultural insight to the
decision-making table. It will impact students, communities, and how they think
about knowledge to achieve ecologically and humanly sustainable solutions.
Moreover, it will lead to the design of scalable and transformative approaches
based on thematic modular units and service learning, which will be shared via a
well-structured dissemination plan to be adopted and used to guide other STEM
graduate programs at TAMUK and across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.