* 2225122
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Energetic Electron Nonlinear Interactions with Oblique Whistler-Mode Chorus Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Homayon Aryan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 111,880.00

Whistler-mode "chorus" waves are naturally occurring radio emissions in Earth's
outer radiation belt. These waves can resonantly interact with trapped energetic
electrons (~10 keV to &gt;1 MeV), both accelerating them to high speeds and
scattering them into the atmosphere as "particle precipitation." Intense chorus
waves, propagating at oblique angles to the background magnetic field, invoke
such resonances in multiple harmonics and produce strong electron responses on
rapid timescales, within tens of seconds. However, the role of different
resonance harmonics in shaping the global state of the radiation belt remains
unknown. This investigation will study the interactions between electrons and
these intense oblique chorus waves to address this problem. Understanding the
properties and mechanisms of these processes is important for forecasting space
weather and its effects on sensitive systems, such as spacecraft surfaces and
electronics. This project will also support early-career scientists and a
graduate student, and the findings will be incorporated into public outreach
materials and undergraduate classes at the University of Texas at
Dallas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address three
specific scientific questions: 1) How does energetic electron phase space
density evolve under nonlinear wave-particle interactions with oblique whistler-
mode chorus waves? 2) Are there observable distinctions between different
electron harmonic resonances with magnetospheric chorus waves and, if so, what
are they? 3) What are the respective roles of Landau and cyclotron resonances in
shaping the outer radiation belt in events with intense oblique chorus waves? To
answer these questions, we will develop numerical models of both oblique chorus
wave packets and electron phase space density evolution, and quantitatively
compare model results with in-situ measurements made by NASA's Van Allen Probes.
Importantly, this research may lead to the discovery of direct observational
evidence of electron nonlinear resonances in distinctive harmonics, including
Landau resonance. These important processes have been theorized to occur in
outer space but have yet to be confirmed with experimental
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.