* 2225258
* Improving Undergraduate Mathematics Education with Interleaving
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Steve Bennoun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 10/31/2025
* USD 349,912.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing student learning
in calculus with a teaching method called interleaving. Unlike the common
practice of studying and practicing one topic at a time and them moving to the
next topic, interleaving consists in intermixing the study and practice of
different topics together. Research conducted in middle school mathematics
classrooms shows evidence that interleaving can help improve student learning.
Yet, it is currently unknown if similar results can be obtained in college
mathematics courses. This project will study how effective interleaving is at
improving student learning in the undergraduate calculus classroom. In parallel
to the research component, the principal investigator will take part in an
intensive professional development plan to expand his knowledge and skills in
fundamental theories in mathematics education, qualitative and quantitative
methods, and equity in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to determine to what extent interleaving helps students learn calculus. In
order to answer this question, blocked and interleaved problem sets will be
created for a calculus for life sciences course. Students will be divided into
two groups, one using interleaving homework sets and the other one using blocked
homework sets. Using a cross-over design, the groups will switch from one type
of homework to the other type half-way through the term. Learning will be
measured by scores on unannounced tests as well as scores on midterm and final
exams, and supported through interviews with students to ensure validity. The
scores will be analyzed for the class as a whole and also disaggregated by
demographic groups. This project will advance our understanding of the extent to
which interleaving can help students learn calculus. The project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:
BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out
high-quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.