* 2225567
* Research: Identifying intervention targets to increase mental health help seeking in undergraduate engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sherri Frizell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,591.00

National data show that engineering students experiencing mental health distress
are significantly less likely than their peers to seek professional mental
health help. While treatment gaps exist for cisgender men, persons of color, and
first-generation students, these group disparities are further pronounced among
engineering students. In this study, we aim to address these concerns about
mental health treatment underutilization in engineering through a theoretically
grounded, multi-institution study of the beliefs influencing professional help
seeking in diverse engineering student populations. This project will build on
results from an NSF Research Initiation in Engineering Formation grant which
focused on developing a survey instrument to measure the key beliefs that
influence mental health related help seeking in undergraduate engineering
students. Through this work, the instrument will be improved to ensure
representation of the beliefs held by students from diverse backgrounds,
studying in different institutional contexts. Once improved, the instrument will
be used to identify targets for future interventions to increase mental health
related help seeking in students at six different institutions across the United
States. This improvement in help seeking will improve the mental health and
academic outcomes of diverse engineering students, including those with mental
health disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a mixed-
methods approach to improve and refine the Engineering Mental Health Help-
seeking Instrument (EMHHI) based on the Integrated Behavioral Model (IBM) to
characterize key mental health help-seeking beliefs in diverse undergraduate
engineering students. Through this work, we aim to address three research
questions: 1) How can the original EMHHI be improved to enhance validity for
diverse students in different institutional contexts? 2) How can the improved
EMHHI be refined to maintain cross-cultural validity while maximizing
feasibility? 3) How can the refined EMHHI be used to create institutional
profiles that identify targets for future mental health interventions in diverse
student populations? The original EMHHI was designed to measure beliefs relevant
to engineering students with diverse identities at the University of Kentucky, a
research-focused predominantly White institution. Therefore, this project will
ensure that the instrument is inclusive of help-seeking beliefs of diverse
students at other institutions. Through collaborations at Prairie View A&amp;M
University (a Historically Black College or University) and University of
Houston (a Hispanic-serving Institution), we will use focus groups to identify
salient belief items to add to the EMHHI. Next, cognitive interviews will
enhance the clarity of the instrument. This improved EMHHI will be refined
through large-scale data collection at these three institutions, allowing for
removal of items that prove insignificant across select demographic subgroups
(e.g., race/ethnicity, gender, generational status). This will improve the
validity, clarity and feasibility of the EMHHI. Finally, the refined EMHHI will
be used to collect data at three additional institutions (e.g., private,
polytechnic, pre-engineering). We will develop a standardized data collection
and analysis protocol for identifying key help-seeking beliefs in a diverse
array of engineering students and institutional contexts. Development of
interventions based on key beliefs identified through this work could increase
help-seeking behavior and shift the mental health norms of the engineering
community to be more inclusive and supportive of those in mental health
distress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.