* 2225755
* RII-BEC: Enhancing the Transition of COVID-19 Disadvantaged Students from Undergraduate to Graduate Studies in STEM through Multi-Year Undergraduate Research Experiences
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Eduardo Robleto, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,595.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) aims to serve the national interest by increasing the
number of students completing undergraduate and graduate degrees and pursuing
careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields,
which is critical to United States global competitiveness. The project is
designed to mitigate challenges and barriers imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic on
students who have been the most affected in STEM disciplines, namely students
from groups who have been historically underrepresented in STEM. The
investigators will engage a cohort of twenty students who will be guided for
four years from undergraduate studies to graduate school. The project will
provide these students with onboarding, academic preparation, advising and
educational planning, social and networking opportunities, and financial support
to increase student retention, progression, and graduation rates. The project
aims to use these interventions to improve the students' preparation as
undergraduates for transition to graduate school and STEM careers. In this
direction, the project will introduce a structured undergraduate research
program that provides academic preparation and authentic mentored research
engagement that spans across four years of study. The project will highlight the
scientific process and its significance, and will study the project's
effectiveness on building students' STEM identity and sense of belonging.
Project activities will help lead to a more diverse and competitive STEM
workforce in Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goal of the project is
to employ best practices coupled with creative approaches to provide students
with a knowledge base and training for entering and succeeding in graduate
school. To support this goal, additional goals include providing students with:
(1) an improved perspective and sense of belonging for students in STEM fields;
(2) an understanding of, and experience with, research and the scientific
process; and (3) opportunities to participate in mentored research experiences.
The project will achieve these goals through sustainable intra-partnership
collaborations among UNLV’s Office of Undergraduate Research, College of
Engineering, College of Sciences, Graduate College, advising community, and STEM
departments and faculty to provide mentoring, academic support and social
support, professional opportunities, and funding. Each student participant will
receive individualized as well as cohort support, and the project will unfold in
four phases: Year/Phase 1 - retention, placement, advising, mentoring, and STEM
identity formation; Year/Phase 2 - research readiness and self-efficacy
building; Year/Phase 3 - mentored authentic research experiences; and Year/Phase
4 - graduate school readiness. The project’s scope is to investigate and advance
understanding of the impacts of the global pandemic on student success and
transition to graduate school in a STEM discipline. Through mixed-methods
evaluation, the project will develop and disseminate a model on how to mitigate
the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups, while improving students' STEM identity and self-
efficacy and preparing them for graduate school and, later, for the STEM
workforce. The award is co-funded by the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.