* 2225395
* Track 1: Center for Collective Impact in Earthquake Science (C-CIES): Building Inclusive Excellence, Diversity, Equity, and Community into Earthquake Science
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop the Center for Collective Impact in Earthquake
Science, which has the vision to become a leading-edge earthquake research
center dedicated to improving resiliency from seismic hazards in an equitable,
accessible, and sustainable manner. The mission will be to advance earthquake
science with the aim of meeting the natural hazard mitigation needs of all
communities in regions of low probability, high impact earthquake risk. Low
probability disasters tend to have an oversized impact on local communities.
Additionally, even small- to moderate-magnitude human-made (induced) earthquakes
induced by anthropogenetic activities have resulted in heightened public
awareness, damages to the built environment, and the shutting-down of economic
and energy infrastructure. Low probability, high impact earthquakes sometimes
occur in places not easily identified by the theory of plate tectonics and
typically present unique challenges to understanding how communities respond to
risks from these earthquakes. By studying low probability, high impact
earthquakes, including induced events, the project will develop strategies for
better identifying and potentially quantifying seismic hazards, plus inform many
aspects of fundamental earthquake science of broad importance. The goals of the
center will be to: 1) Advance basic earthquake science and engineering; 2)
Establish a foundation for sharing, value-driven understanding of science; 3) Be
responsive to the needs of all kinds of communities through use-inspired
research; 4) Recruit, retain, and train the next generation of diverse earth
scientists; and 5) Develop a framework for impactful geoscience that translates
results of scientific discovery into actions that can improve resilience and
reduce risk from seismic hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals
requires an innovative and robust research plan that incorporates community
engagement. The project will adopt the collective impact model for establishing
this center, which develops a network of community members, organizations, and
institutions through the development of a common agenda, centralized support,
continuous communication, mutually reinforcing activities, and shared
measurement. The center will emphasize research with potential to respond to the
needs of vulnerable populations that have been historically underserved by
current earthquake science, engineering, and public policy. The investigators
will solicit pilot projects and use them these pilot projects to establish
mechanisms for increasing partnership and for evaluation of the proposals. Using
these pilot projects as case studies, a strategic plan we will be developed on
how to structure the center. All projects will begin as pilot projects, be
evaluated and given feedback, and then transition to a full project when the
center is fully funded. In this fashion, the project can guarantee that the
full-scale projects meet the goals of the center prior to implementation. Each
project must include four elements: 1) the basic science question that must
align with the research themes discussed above, 2) the use-inspired research
where results may lead to implementation of practical solutions for the
community, 3) the social impact of the project, and 4) the community engagement.
The pilot projects will be designed to address key science challenges and reach
deep into the communities that they will impact. Our initial projects may
include projects on 1) investigating earthquake risk in under-resourced
communities, 2) using citizen science to understand the earthquake hazard in New
England, 3) developing new techniques to get more information out of seismic
data, 4) refining the earthquake hazard in a vulnerable, bi-national, multi-
lingual community (El Paso, TX), and 5) using crowdsourcing to help with
cataloging vulnerable buildings. Priority will be given to projects that engage
low-resourced communities (such as small rural towns) or historically
marginalized populations (such as low-income or immigrant populations). Second,
pilot projects will be asked to include an element of workforce development,
particularly of those who are historically under-represented in geosciences.
Third, pilot projects will be asked to articulate their contributions towards
promoting interdisciplinary research or practice. Fourth, full center projects
will be asked to fund graduate and/or undergraduate students and provide
opportunities for students to be cross trained between projects. By adopting
collective impact as a guiding principle for the center along with funding pilot
projects, the center will, by necessity, make Inclusive Excellence, Diversity,
Equity, and Community a fundamental principle of the center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Division of Earth Sciences
and the Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity (GOLD-EN) in the
Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.