* 2225207
* Supporting Persistence by Increasing the Relevance of Algebra to Learning: A Competency-based Curriculum for College Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Stephen Salako, Our Lady of the Lake University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 12/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Implementation and Evaluation (Track 2) project
aims to develop an empirically defensible model for how HSIs and liberal arts
institutions can empower students who are underrepresented in their
participation in STEM fields of study, to succeed in their early STEM coursework
and graduate in a timely manner. The project will improve STEM outcomes at Our
Lady of the Lake University by establishing connections between students’ early
coursework and future classes through the redesign of the first-year College
Algebra course combined with the development of a robust learning support
system. While it is required across a range of disciplines, the traditional
College Algebra curriculum often lacks relevance to students' majors and
cultural knowledge, or obvious connections to its applications in non-
mathematical fields. By realigning the curriculum to reflect competencies
required for students’ future studies, tapping into students’ cultural
knowledge, and employing those students as learning assistants and tutors, this
project will extend the research on the efficacy of high-impact pedagogical
strategies, the importance of socio-cultural knowledge on learning, and the
effects of both on student persistence. This project will benefit students by
introducing major-specific course content early, thus improving math literacy
and promoting a growth mindset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine the effects of
increasing academic and cultural relevance in early STEM coursework, mathematics
and non-mathematics faculty will collaborate to redesign a lab-supported College
Algebra course into three discipline-specific course sections. Concurrently, the
project will develop a two-tiered learning support system to aid students in
developing and contextualizing their algebra skills. Undergraduate learning
assistants will provide support in the classroom, while specialized peer tutors
will assist students as they progress through their upper-level courses. The
project will study the effects of these activities across demographic levels, in
relation to students’ psycho-social characteristics (sense of belonging,
mathematical self-efficacy, mindset, mathematical self-concept, and perceptions
of relevance), faculty beliefs (about culturally responsive teaching and
students’ prior knowledge and mindsets), and academic outcomes. In addition to
significantly increasing completion rates for College Algebra and algebra-
requisite courses, STEM retention rates, and STEM graduation rates among a
predominantly Latinx and female student body, this project will contribute to
knowledge about conditions that lead to improved STEM teaching and learning.
Results will be made available to institutions who wish to implement similar
approaches through a dedicated website and relevant publications. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) on diversifying and increasing participation
in STEM effectively, and (iii) on understanding ways to improve institutional
capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.