* 2225284
* RAPID: Food webs of 10 lakes before and after a mega-wildfire
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Steven Sadro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,042.00

Wildfires have grown in size and intensity across the forested mountains of the
western USA in the last two decades. While there is much investigation of their
impacts of forests themselves, almost no studies evaluate their impacts on the
mountain lakes that are embedded in these ecosystems. After wildfires burn
through a watershed, large quantities of organic debris can wash into lakes.
Little is known about the extent to which fires-related effects such as these
organic inputs, alter freshwater species and ecosystems, even though freshwater
taxa may be notably sensitive to fire impacts. During summer 2021, the Dixie
Fire burned ~1 million acres of forest in Northern California. This research
project takes advantage of unique pre-wildfire (2020) data collected on the fish
and food webs of 10 glacial lakes within the burn scar, and aims to resample
these same ecosystems post-fire to understand how severity of fire in watershed
impacts lake ecology. In particular, researchers will investigate whether this
large wildfire kills fish populations in lakes and whether this depends on lake
size or basin characteristics. Additionally they will evaluate how reductions in
fish populations cascade through the food webs to affect the overall health of
lake ecosystems. Insights gained through this study will enable better
management of lake fisheries and heritage species (e.g., native frogs) following
severe wildfire. Further, data collected from this study will inform decision
makers on how to manage these systems into the future, including when and
whether to stock lakes, and how fires impact freshwater ecosystems more
generally. Researchers will engage in a science communication strategy aimed at
calling public attention to this work, and will recruit students from
historically-excluded backgrounds to participate in the full life-cycle of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the effects of a
mega-wildfire (the Dixie Fire) on 10 lake ecosystems in the Lassen National
Forest, Caribou Wilderness, California, USA. Specifically, we will examine 1)
whether fishes are eradicated in some or all lakes following mega-wildfires,2)
whether fish removal changes a trophic cascade, 3) if trophic cascade strength
varies with ecosystem size, and 4) how lake food web structure and function
shifts following watershed burning. This project uses both on the ground
measurements of fish, invertebrates and lake chemical features, and uses stable
isotopes to evaluate changing food webs. These assessments will be used to test
ecological theory, namely the role of disturbance-mediated trophic cascades, and
their control over lake food web structure and function. Results from this work
will be useful to diverse ecologists interested in effects of climate change
mediated disturbances, but especially limnologists and freshwater scientists
struggling to manage these taxa in human dominated landscapes. Undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds will be included in the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.