* 2225707
* Conference: The 6th World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME)
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The grant provides funds to broaden participation of early career researchers
who may not otherwise participate in the 6th World Conference on Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, April 24-28, 2022. The
conference will provide a forum for presentations, discussions, and hands-on
workshops centered on the integration of computational approaches to accelerate
the discovery, development, and manufacture of materials for structural and
other applications. The funding will be used primarily for registration and
travel support for early career professionals and students as well as
recognition for highly meritorious student posters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this effort is to broaden participation of early career researchers who may
not otherwise participate in the 6th World Conference on Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, April 24-28, 2022. The
conference will provide a forum for presentations, discussions, and hands-on
workshops centered on the integration of computational approaches to support the
advancement of MGI principles â€“ to accelerate the discovery, development, and
manufacture of materials for structural and other applications. Topical areas
include advanced manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning,
design, databases and platforms, multi-scale simulations, microstructural
evolution, and workforce education. Materials classes include metals, ceramics,
and structural composites. The funding will be used primarily for registration
and travel support for early career professionals and students as well as
recognition for highly meritorious student posters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.