* 2225972
* GEM: Resolving the Unique Characteristics of Substorms that Precede Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement (STEVE) Events
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gareth Perry, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 392,140.00

A Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement (STEVE) is a latitudinally narrow
and longitudinally elongated optical emission that appears in the night sky
before midnight, equatorward of the auroral oval. Importantly, STEVE is not an
aurora in the classic sense - as far as we can tell STEVE's emissions are not
generated by charged particles streaming down magnetic field lines and colliding
with the neutral atmosphere to produce optical emissions. In fact, the exact
mechanism for STEVE's optical emissions have yet to be identified. However,
STEVEs are correlated with events called substorms which involve energy releases
in the Earth's nightside magnetic field, which often manifest as dynamic auroral
displays. This research focuses on the observation that most substorms do not
result in a STEVE event (approximately only 3% do), indicating that substorms
that occur with STEVE events are unique. To better understand STEVE associated
substorms and the conditions under which STEVEs occur, we will use data from
all-sky imagers, spacecraft, radars, magnetometers, and citizen scientists â€“ who
were the ones who initially discovered STEVE. Using these datasets, the
evolution from substorm to STEVE (or no STEVE) will be monitored. Additionally,
we will investigate and specify the geomagnetic conditions unique to STEVE
events. This work will strengthen our understanding of the upper atmosphere and
the near-Earth geospace environment, allowing us to better mitigate space
weather effects. Furthermore, given the team and collaborations this project
will support, this research will promote education and diversity, and strengthen
collaborations within the solar-terrestrial science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement
(STEVE) events are bright mauve optical emissions that periodically occur
between dusk and midnight in subauroral regions after a substorm onset. It has
been established that STEVE is correlated with substorms, and more specifically
the recovery phase of a substorm. Importantly, not all substorms are associated
with a STEVE event, but all STEVE events are associated with a substorm. The
motivation of this work is to determine how the substorms associated with STEVE
events are unique compared to other substorms. This will be done by addressing
three science questions: 1) What is the temporal response of the magnetosphere-
ionosphere system to substorm onset in associated STEVE events? 2) What are the
conditions of the magnetosphere-ionosphere system prior to a STEVE event; can
preconditioning be identified? and 3) How are the auroral and sub-auroral
mesoscale flow patterns associated with STEVE events different from those
associated with substorm events in general? We will use all-sky imagers,
spacecraft, radars, magnetometers, and citizen science data to address the
aforementioned questions. A novel and compelling component of this research
effort will be the incorporation of radar data, in particular Incoherent Scatter
Radar (ISR) data. This will allow us to complement existing measurements
provided by imagers and spacecraft and also enhance our ability to identify
undiscovered STEVE events. The ionospheric signature of a STEVE event in ISR
data has recently been identified and will be used to find and characterize
additional STEVE events in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.