* 2225890
* SCC-IRG Track 1 Reducing Loneliness for Long Term Care Older Adults through Collaborative Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,250,000.00

This project seeks to reduce loneliness in older adults who reside in long term
care (LTC) communities through new augmented reality (AR) technology. Loneliness
is a serious condition that is related to increases in heart disease,
depression, suicide, mental and physical decline, and reduced quality of life
and death. Two out of five older adults in the U.S. report being lonely. Even
more alarming, three out of four LTC older adults experience loneliness. The
COVID-19 pandemic, with its accompanying safety protocols, has intensified
loneliness across the LTCs. The project will discover how augmented reality can
reduce loneliness in LTC older adults by linking them with family members who
reside elsewhere. This project will allow older adults and family members to see
each other’s 3-dimensional realistic images, eat meals together, and interact
with one another in various activities, such as playing cards. Investigators of
this project are experts in engineering, computer science, gerontology, nursing,
medicine and social health science. Working with older adults and family members
in the design and testing of the AR technology, the team will compare AR to 2D
interactive communication technologies, such as Zoom or Facetime. Initial
understanding of the feasibility and acceptability of this enhanced AR
technology among older adults, families and LTC staff will guide future studies
targeting loneliness, ultimately improving quality of life for older adults. The
community focus for this project will be older adults residing in LTC
communities in Middle Tennessee with the potential to scaling the solution
across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will fundamentally advance
the scientific and the technological methodologies of collaborative Augmented
Reality to enhance social presence and thus social connectedness, to create
realistic and socially appropriate interactions. It will make several
fundamental contributions in both technology and social science during the
course of this research: 1) create a novel multi-objective optimization based
framework that minimizes positional errors of the hand of the avatar while
preserving its nonverbal behavior with respect to the human it represents; such
an ability will allow shared activities (e.g., drinking tea together) with
appropriate social nonverbal behavior (e.g., gaze and postures), a critical
component of communication; 2) create a new methodology of a user’s motions onto
its avatar to generate naturalistic, socially appropriate motion that respects
dissimilarities between the user’s and its avatar’s environments (e.g.,
differences in room geometries) through novel motion mapping and optimization
that ensures natural walking patterns; 3) develop a greater understanding of the
feasibility, acceptability and social presence in the use of varying
collaborative AR activities and environments for older adults with different
levels of cognitive impairment and their family members; 4) develop a greater
understanding of the impact of collaborative AR on loneliness based on level of
cognitive impairment; 5) gain a greater understanding of the logistics and
deployment of this technology in LTCs and family homes to inform scalability;
and 6) create activity design guidelines for reduction of loneliness in older
adults. The research will be conducted through participatory design using key
stakeholders (e.g., older adults, activity directors, LTC management) and
evaluated using a two-arm experimental design comparing collaborative AR to
current state-of-the-art 2D interactive communication
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.