* 2225368
* High Efficiency Distributed Beamforming RF Energy Transfer using a Closed-loop Energy Receiver
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aatmesh Shrivastava, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The amount of ambient radio frequency (RF) energy, such as those from Wi-Fi and
Bluetooth transmitters, is continuing to increase due to the proliferation of
internet-of-things (IoT) devices in our environment. However, the underlying
technological challenges have hindered the effective combination of energy from
multiple transmitters by using distributed beamforming to harvest useful RF
energy for a remote IoT device. This project aims to overcome these
technological challenges to develop a high-efficiency distributed beamforming
technique to combine energy from multiple RF transmitters and direct it to a
remote IoT energy receiver. The project also aims to develop a high-efficiency
RF-to-DC converter circuit. It will enable a new technique for harvesting RF
energy which will be useful for IoT, biomedical, and remote sensing
applications. These techniques are transformative for harvesting RF energy with
beamforming capability at ultra-low power levels. The research outcomes from
this project will be integrated with a graduate-level curriculum offering, a
power management integrated circuits (PMIC) course. All designs and results of
this project will be made public on the project website. This project will also
engage undergraduate and high school students through a high school summer
internship program and the Northeastern Universityâ€™s Undergraduate Program for
Leaders In Future Transformation (UPLIFT) program. The project team will work
with the College of Engineering Multi-Cultural Engineering program to increase
the diversity of students engaged in NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program. The graduate and undergraduate students participating in this
project will be trained on semiconductor chip design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a high-efficiency distributed beamforming-based RF
energy harvesting technique that combines energy from multiple RF energy
transmitters and directs it toward a remotely located energy receiver. Effective
distributed beamforming requires closed-loop optimization between energy
transmitters and the energy receiver. However, the overhead power consumption of
sensing and communication needed to realize closed-loop optimization render
conventional distributed beamforming techniques inefficient. To overcome the
overhead power consumption of communication, this project will develop a new
backscatter communication method. The backscatter communication system will
enable an ultra-low-power feedback technique for closed-loop optimization. For
sensing phase and frequency offset among energy transmitters, a new ultra-low-
power energy detection-based sensing platform will also be developed. The
project also aims to develop a new RF-to-DC rectifier topology to enable high-
efficiency RF energy harvesting across a wide range of received power levels.
Accompanying the RF-to-DC converter design will be a maximum power tracking
scheme that will provide output impedance matching to realize maximum efficiency
operating point for the rectifier. The combination of beamforming, high-
efficiency RF-to-DC conversion, ultra-low-power sensing, and backscattering
communication will enable a significant increase in RF energy harvesting. The
project also includes development of an RF energy transfer protocol to be
implemented in wireless networks. A hardware demonstration of the proposed
solutions will be carried out using test chips of the energy harvesting
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.