* 2225837
* Using Mentored Research Relationships to Empower Underserved Students and Improve Early Retention in STEM Majors
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Kristi Montooth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,125.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
establishing and disseminating best practices for using mentored research
experiences and relationships to improve retention rates of underserved and
underrepresented students in the first two years of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors. A diverse STEM workforce that brings
multiple perspectives and experiences is urgently needed to tackle grand
societal challenges. The project aims to empower and encourage students from
underserved and underrepresented groups to stay in STEM fields. The project will
build a research community and provide paid mentored research experiences for
students from underserved and underrepresented groups, including first-
generation, low-income, and ethnic/racial minorities that have been historically
marginalized in STEM. A research internship in the summer before matriculation
will embed scholars in a community on campus, jumpstart them into their major,
and provide them with mentored experiences that support their transition from
incoming student to upper-division student and researcher. The projectâ€™s
innovative research experiences for students in the first two years of their
majors are anticipated to significantly improve the students' experiences and
encourage them as they develop their STEM identities. The expected outcome is an
evaluated model that can be implemented at other universities with the goal of
decreasing significant equity gaps that exist in first- and second-year
retention rates between represented and underrepresented students in STEM. Novel
research outcomes are expected to improve the understanding of the
disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on students from underrepresented groups and
inform effective interventions for increased STEM-major retention. The
anticipated long-term outcomes are broadened participation in the STEM workforce
and more inclusive and equitable science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to empower scholars from groups historically marginalized in
STEM by using mentored research experiences as both entry point to campus life
and purposeful progression through the foundational level STEM curriculum. The
program will create an intentional, continuous research path for students from
first-generation, low-income, or racial/ethnic minority groups. The project will
support over 36 student scholars to participate in activities that include team-
based mentoring, engagement in research relationships and experiential learning,
community building, professional and academic development workshops, reflection
and scientific presentations, and travel to conferences. Participants will be
recruited using existing partnerships with university offices that support high
school and college preparatory programming for students from underserved and
underrepresented groups who are interested in life sciences and related STEM
majors. The two project components will be assessed through partnership with an
external evaluator using frequent surveys and interviews to ensure that the
components meet overall objectives. The project will also conduct social science
research using in-depth interviews that follow students through their first two
years in STEM majors to study the effectiveness of project interventions. In
doing so, the project will investigate how students develop an understanding of
the research process, science self-efficacy, science identity, and a sense of
belonging. In particular, the project will study the extent to which students
tie their research experiences to a sense of social agency and whether that
contributes to future career trajectories. Results and developed framework on
project activities will be disseminated at numerous conferences and journals to
ensure broader STEM outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.