* 2225949
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Edge AI with Streaming Data: Algorithmic Foundations for Online Learning and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lei Jiao, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,920.00

Many emerging applications, such as smart healthcare, autonomous driving, and
augmented reality, rely on applying real-time Artificial Intelligence (AI) to
streaming data that are constantly generated online. Edge AI, which moves AI
services to the network edge close to the end users and devices where data
streams are generated, is crucial for reducing latency and communication
bottlenecks and enabling fast and accurate inference decisions. However, edge AI
for online streaming data poses significant challenges due to the unpredictable
dynamics of the streaming data and the limited computation/communication
capability at the network edge. This project addresses these challenges by
developing both new theoretic models that integrate sophisticated learning
methods with advanced edge-network control, and practical algorithms that
significantly improve the accuracy and timeliness of edge AI services for
streaming data. Specifically, the project will focus on three closely-related
thrusts: (i) online learning policies for model selection will be developed to
quickly identify which machine-learning models should be dynamically deployed at
the edge servers for best inference accuracy, while accounting for the
heterogeneous switching and feedback costs; (ii) distributed online transfer
learning methods will be developed to quickly retrain new machine learning
models at the edge upon new streaming data; and (iii) partial-index based edge-
network control policies will be developed to optimize the timeliness of
interactive edge-AI services under tight resource
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both edge networks and AI are considered
crucial elements of next-generation wireless networks. This project will
directly benefit network operators and service providers that deploy and operate
edge-AI systems. Specifically, the results will help them automate the complex
decision-making process required for the end-to-end orchestration of such
systems, and improve the accuracy and timeliness of the edge-AI services despite
the constantly-changing environments. This project will also benefit the end
users of emerging applications powered by edge AI, improving their user
experience and well-being. More broadly, the theories and algorithms developed
in this project for learning/control co-design will not only transform edge AI,
but also benefit other disciplines with similar requirements for optimization
under significant dynamism and uncertainty. Finally, this project will
contribute teaching and training materials to multiple undergraduate and
graduate courses, and will engage women and underrepresented minority students
by reaching out to local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.