* 2225226
* Improving STEM Student Fundamental Math Skills with Tailored Activity-Based Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jacimaria Batista, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,815.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Implementation and Evaluation (Track 2) project
aims to increase mathematics preparation for STEM undergraduate students. The
need for a stronger foundation of mathematical skills is a major contributing
factor to STEM attrition. Therefore, interventions that bridge the math gap
between high school preparation and STEM degrees within the first years of
college are critical. Faculty of mathematics, engineering, education, and
computer science from the University of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) and the College
of Southern Nevada (CSN) seek to develop motivating and conceptually rich
mathematics exercises for students enrolled in pre-STEM and engineering. The
exercises will target mathematical concepts that have been shown to be
persistently misunderstood by students. The anticipated outcomes of this project
are: decreased time to graduation, higher achievement, less STEM attrition,
lower degree cost to students, and expanded opportunities for students who are
underrepresented in STEM fields of study to pursue advanced degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop math exercises and
associated Canvas applications through: (a) building on co-requisite models
which compress enrollment time; (b) reinforcing math concepts as modularized
exercises specialized with engineering content; and (c) enhancing student
motivation using culturally-relevant pedagogy. The project's STEM education
research component will provide formative evaluation for activity improvement
and demonstrate how the exercises work to improve STEM outcomes. The initial
evaluation of the exercises will use a cluster randomized trial design featuring
hierarchical linear modeling to examine learning motivation and mathematical
knowledge of students who use them. It is hypothesized that this will lead to
improved STEM outcomes especially for students whose participation in STEM is
underrepresented. The exercises will be made available online for general public
use. The UNLV Center for Mathematics, Science, and Engineering Education will
disseminate them among secondary school math teachers in Nevada. The exercise-
enhanced remediation strategy will be shared campus-wide at UNLV and CSN through
the Faculty Development centers and nation-wide through research- and
practitioner-focused conferences and journals. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.