* 2225735
* EAGER: The role of native and nonnative plants in structuring food webs in urban ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Eric Wood, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Cities contain a mixture of native and nonnative plants that are often unusually
diverse when compared with nearby natural areas. The high diversity of plants in
cities suggests urban areas can potentially support a diverse mixture of feeding
insects as well as birds that eat those insects. However, given that many plants
in cities are not native to the region, it is unclear whether they provide the
same conditions and benefits to local insects and wildlife. In this study, a
team of researchers from California State University Los Angeles will assess the
role of native and nonnative trees in supporting food webs composed of insects
and birds. The research will focus on oak trees (genus, Quercus) as oaks are
renowned for harboring high levels of insect diversity and supporting bird
populations. It is not known if birds, which generally are abundant in oaks, can
control the insects on those oak trees. Both native and nonnative oaks are
planted throughout the Los Angeles study area thus offering an opportunity to
compare the accumulation of insects on trees and the use of trees by birds. This
project, which involves planting 200 oak trees in sets that include native and
non-native species across a range of urban settings, is designed to provide
clues about whether native versus nonnative trees support the most diverse and
abundant collection of insects, and in turn, whether birds are attracted to
feeding on those insects or to using native versus non-native oak trees
differentially. The field locations for this project will be set in highly
visible areas throughout Los Angeles, and thus public outreach and education
will happen organically throughout the project. Further, the study will engage
and employ students from underrepresented groups, with a focus on students from
East Los Angeles, where California State University Los Angeles is located.
Overall, this research will provide novel and unique outcomes for discerning how
to better landscape and design cities to promote native
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to critically
evaluate the role of native and nonnative trees, in structuring urban food webs,
composed of plants, insects, and birds, in Los Angeles, CA (L.A), USA. While
these questions have been addressed in non-urban settings, almost no work has
experimentally evaluated the potential influence of tree species on birds and
insects in an urban setting. This research will address the question, are
nonnative oak trees functionally similar to native trees in structuring urban
food webs. The influence of birds will be inferred by surveys of bird usage and
time spent in the different trees. The project will erect a large-scale field
experiment, involving the planting of 200 native and nonnative oak trees
(Quercus spp.) and a reference species, the Southern Magnolia, Magnolia
grandiflora, at 10 locations throughout L.A. The study will include
undergraduate students and a graduate student, plus project collaborators, to
collect field data on plant growth, herbivory, insect and avian communities, and
bird feeding behavior, on the native and nonnative trees at experimental sites.
Further, the study will use sophisticated statistical analyses and laboratory
methodologies, including leaf-trait analyses and DNA metabarcoding of insect
communities on plants to elucidate food web networks/connections among trophic
levels. The work will engage the broader community of Los Angeles through
outreach displays and scheduled activities at experimental sites (ten
institutions with high visitation rates of students and the public). Outreach
events will focus on the importance of native plants, local biodiversity, and
urban food webs. Further, the project will influence the ecology of the city as
the research team will work to integrate research findings with the management
of biodiversity in the urbanized region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.