* 2225337
* Towards Real-Time Fine-Grained Tracking in Distributed Large-Scale RF Tag Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Huacheng Zeng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

A scalable wireless system that can continuously, accurately, and simultaneously
track multiple people's movements and detect their fine-grained body motions
will enable the development of many novel real-life applications, such as
diagnosing movement disorders, continuously monitoring children's behaviors, and
alerting caregivers of elderly falls in real time. The objective of this project
is to design and implement such a wireless tracking system by employing radio
frequency (RF) tag based wireless sensing technology. A team of researchers from
Michigan State University will address the fundamental challenges in both theory
and experiments through innovations in signal processing, mathematical modeling,
algorithm and protocol design, machine learning, optimization, radar design, and
harmonic tag fabrication. The wireless tracking system will make it possible to
monitor the activities of elderly residents in nursing homes while preserving
their privacy, predict and prevent their possible falls, and guide them to
perform doctor-suggested exercises. It will also enable the continuous
monitoring of children’s behaviors and activities in a non-invasive manner,
making it possible to conduct data-driven studies of children’s physical and
mental development. The research findings will be broadly disseminated to
research community for reproducibility of results, and educational materials
will be created to enrich students’ learning experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design and implement a scalable
wireless tag tracking system that features large coverage area, distributed
sensing, inter-reader coordination, simultaneous multi-tag tracking, and high
resolution in time. It comprises three complementary research thrusts. The first
thrust will develop fine-grained tracking solutions for a large-scale tag
tracking system by coordinating and synchronizing location-distributed radio
frequency (RF) readers for precise localization. It will develop new techniques
to maximize the time resolution of tag tracking through optimizing signal
processing algorithms, inter-reader communication and coordination protocols,
tag scheduling, and resource allocation. The second thrust will develop
techniques to enable simultaneous multi-tag tracking similar to the idea of
multi-user MIMO (multiple-input and multiple-output) in cellular networks. It
will significantly improve the time resolution of tag tracking, especially in
tag-dense scenarios. The third thrust will focus on motion tracking using
narrowband harmonic tags and micro-Doppler radar. It will advance the design and
fabrication of harmonic RF tags and radars for frequency-selective multi-tag
operations, and explore the performance limits of harmonic tags in tracking
applications. In addition, this project includes a strong component of system
implementation and experimental evaluation, with the ultimate goal of
demonstrating its real-life applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.