* 2225775
* A New Machine Learning Framework for Single-Cell Multi-Omics Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2025
* USD 788,711.00

Recent developments of single-cell omics technologies enable multi-modality
measurements at genome, transcriptome, epigenome, or proteome scale, which will
lead to unprecedented insight and resolution to fundamental biological
processes. The project will construct a novel bioinformatics framework with
advanced machine learning models, efficient computational tools, and user-
friendly software for single-cell multi-omics data analysis. The outputs will be
available online to the public and are expected to impact biological research
community and empower scientists working on single-cell data to effectively test
biological hypothesis, especially knowledge extraction from massive high-
dimensional and complex datasets. The project will facilitate the development of
novel educational tools to enhance curriculum design. Minority students and
under-served populations will be engaged in cutting-edge research
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on designing principled
machine learning and bioinformatics algorithms for analyzing large-scale single-
cell multi-omics data to create toolkits to facilitate biological research.
Specially, the research team will investigate 1) new cross-modal deep canonical
correlation self-supervised autoencoder for multi-modal single-cell data
integration, 2) new computational methods to study the associations of single-
cell RNA-seq data and protein markers via semi-supervised deep neural networks,
3) interpretation algorithms to enhance predictive model via utilizing structure
semantic information and identified biomarkers, 4) statistical inference
framework for identifying and inferring conditional dependence from single-cell
data, 5) novel transformer based variational autoencoder model for super-
resolution spatial transcriptomics, 6) tool portal development for single-cell
data analysis to advance biology research, and 7) validations of the proposed
methods and system using real large-scale single-cell data. The project is
innovative in integrating large-scale machine learning and data-intensive
computing for single-cell bioinformatics and will hold great promise for
biological mechanism understanding and biomedicine development. The results of
the project can be found at:
https://sites.pitt.edu/~heh45/NSF2225775.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.