* 2225157
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Building Paths to Civil Engineering Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Noel Hennessey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 12/31/2026
* USD 499,730.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to develop and document successful
approaches to broaden access to academic success in civil engineering and
improve persistence for underserved students. Appropriate support must be
provided to help capable students as they transition to and move through an
engineering program. A range of interventions have shown to have positive
impacts individually but a comprehensive evaluation on their relative value from
a programmatic perspective is lacking. These academic support and mentoring
activities are expected to heighten studentsâ€™ sense of belonging at a large
university and build their identity as engineers. This research will
quantitatively evaluate the impact of a holistic set of evidence based
activities on persistence, retention, advancement rate and overall academic
performance to identify the most promising interventions for inclusion and
diversity in engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess effectiveness,
an intersectional study will identify the interventions that provide the most
meaningful support services for underserved groups in engineering including URM,
women, and Pell recipients. Cohorts will include engineering students admitted
under new admission criteria, with and without support interventions. Impacts
will be assessed by quantitative measures (retention, advancement toward degree,
probation status, GPA, etc.) and qualitative themes from personal narratives
collected from individual interviews and focus groups. The interventions are
guided by three objectives. First is to promote a sense of belonging within the
academic program through focused peer and faculty mentoring and participation in
student activities as individuals and in a student cohort. Second is to improve
academic performance through academic support courses, tutoring and a summer
academic advancement program. Third is to develop their engineering identity
through internships, practitioner mentoring, career development/professionalism
content, and involvement in engineering clubs. Finally, inclusive mentoring
training will be provided to faculty, practitioners, and peers. Results will be
shared through journal publications and professional presentations. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.