* 2225025
* Mapping Epistemologies that Shape College Chemistry Instructors' Assessment Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ryan Stowe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 346,505.00

To prepare learners to productively use scientific knowledge as they navigate
life, science courses must develop students’ understandings of what it means to
know and learn science (i.e., their epistemologies). This project aims to serve
the national interest by developing a researcher’s skills to conduct fundamental
chemistry education research that investigates both instructors’ and students’
epistemologies in the context of organic chemistry courses. Studies indicates
that instructors can send tacit messages about knowledge and knowing that shape
the epistemologies students adopt. Thus, we need to better understand how
science instructors can communicate the value of epistemologies useful in school
and in life. This project assumes that epistemologies prevalent in science
research laboratories (“doing science” epistemologies) have the potential to be
more useful in life than epistemologies that are typical of science courses
(“doing school”, such as memorizing facts and seeking a single correct answer to
a problem). Thus, supporting instructors in activating "doing science"
epistemologies in chemistry course examination contexts would be expected to
lead to productive changes in learning environments. This project will map the
epistemologies that shape instructors’ testing practices in organic chemistry
courses. The project team will also explore ways to encourage instructors to
adopt "doing science" epistemologies in course assessment scenarios. In the
process of this work, the principal investigator will cultivate expertise in
inferring tacit epistemological ideas from behavior via coursework and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research and
professional development objectives to support the principal investigator in
developing the qualitative methods skills needed to achieve his long-term goals.
The project is directed toward modeling the epistemologies that shape how and
why organic chemistry instructors prompt for and respond to knowledge products
in research and teaching settings. Across three years, the research team will
explore the enacted epistemologies of three organic chemistry instructors who
represent different roles and epistemologies in a chemistry department. The team
will conduct semi-structured interviews focused on how and why instructors
prompt for and respond to students’ knowledge products on exams, record research
group meetings, and attempt to tip instructors into adopting "doing science"
epistemologies in the context of teaching tasks in an interview setting. Both
thematic and case-study analysis of epistemologies enacted while "doing science"
and "doing school" will be used to support claims about productive
epistemological ideas instructors have for attending to student thinking as well
as when and how these ideas are activated. Throughout the process of eliciting,
interpreting, and drawing implications from qualitative data, the project team
will be mentored by an expert on epistemology from the University of Wisconsin –
Madison. The project team will have frequent meetings with the mentor to discuss
targeted readings as well as progress and plans for the project. The PI will
also complete coursework on qualitative methods. Project outcomes are expected
to include rich descriptions of tacit epistemologies activated while prompting
for and responding to knowledge products in different contexts, analytic methods
for inferring instructors’ epistemologies from behavior, and development of the
project team’s qualitative methods skills. The principal investigator will share
findings via workshops, presentations, and research publications. The mentor and
three- member advisory board of experts in epistemological learning will assess
the success of the project. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is
designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM
education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.