* 2225167
* Dynamical Ion Correlations in Polymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Venkat Ganesan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2025
* USD 392,642.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Because batteries play an ever-
increasing role as mobile energy storage devices, our society demands the design
of more powerful and yet operationally safe batteries. One pathway toward this
demand is the search for new types of battery materials, highly conductive and
yet resistant to heat and other stress factors that can cause safety issues. An
attractive emerging candidate are thin sheets of charged polymeric
material—known as polymer electrolytes—with plastic-like properties and yet
allowing for the passage of lithium and other ions. Unfortunately, currently
available polymer electrolytes still lack the conductivity required for the fast
charging and discharging needs of present-day batteries. A key missing
ingredient for designing better batteries is a predictive understanding of how
ions move in charged polymeric materials. This project will seek to develop such
an understanding by using computer simulations that precisely account for the
chemical details of a class of polymers pursued for lithium-ion batteries. Based
on the findings of these simulations, new polymeric designs for faster charging
and reduced safety concerns will be identified and communicated to experimental
researchers. The outcomes of this work will also be useful for proposing polymer
materials that facilitate water purification from contaminating salts and
extract elements such as lithium, a scarce domestic resource, from waste
streams. The computer simulations and findings of this project will be
integrated into course work and communicated to the next generation scientists
and leaders. Furthermore, the project will engage high school and undergraduate
researchers by making research experiences a part of their education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recently, considerable
interest has arisen in the use of polymer electrolytes as materials for use in
energy storage and water purification, separation applications. In many of these
applications, a key performance metric relates to the selective optimization of
the transport of a specific ion relative to the other ions present. In such
contexts, many of the materials recently explored involve concentrated solution
of ions, in which novel physics arises from the influence of (i.e. correlations
between) dynamics of one or more of the ions on the motion of a different ion.
In this project, the PI proposes a hypothesis driven plan which builds on novel
experimental results reported by other groups and the research team’s
preliminary simulation results, to shed light on the microscopic origins and the
influence of dynamical ion correlations in two broad classes of problems: (a)
Counterion transport in polymeric ionic liquids; and (b) Lithium ion transport
in salt-doped polymeric ionic liquids. The PI proposes to use a combination of
atomistic and coarse-grained simulations to validate the hypotheses regarding
the mechanistic origin of dynamical ion correlations in such materials. The
research team will use newly gained understanding to identify physicochemical
parameters which exploit the dynamical correlations between ions to enable
higher conductivities and/or transference numbers.&lt;br/&gt;The project will
impact the development of battery electrolytes based on polymeric materials.
Such advances are of relevance for building sustainable energy sources and
economic independence from depleting oil and gas resources. The PI’s computer
simulations and fundamental advances will be integrated within new course
materials and outreach modules for undergraduate and graduate students to
illustrate the physics of dry and hydrated polymer electrolytes. The PI will
also organize a special focus session at the APS March meeting which will bring
together researchers working on different aspects of this diverse field.
Further, the research project will be used as a means to recruit and train
undergraduate and high school researchers, with a special focus towards
enhancing the diversity among computational materials science
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.