* 2225096
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design: US-Sao Paulo: The roles of stochasticity and spatial context in dynamics of functional diversity under global change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Bryan Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,243.00

In the race to understand, anticipate, and counter the effects of global change,
no systems are more at-risk than freshwater ecosystems. However, managing or
mitigating the effects of global change requires three elements: 1) a basic
understanding of how an ecosystem functions; 2) a method for estimating how
changes in climate can translate to changes in an ecosystem; and 3) a method for
extrapolating to future climate scenarios. This research contains those elements
with respect to stream ecosystems. Previous research has highlighted the
importance of the physical structure of a stream network on a stream’s function.
The current project extends that work to incorporate an additional element: the
size of an aquatic community. Smaller communities of species are composed of
smaller populations. Also, those small populations tend to have higher variation
in important vital rates like births, deaths, and local extinctions. Ultimately,
that variation can translate into variation in ecosystem functioning. However,
the size of a community is not random with respect to the structure of stream
networks. Larger streams provide more area for habitat, and thus generally
larger population sizes. This research investigates how the relationship between
community size and stream network structure affect the functioning of stream
ecosystems. Finally, the project will use modeling to extrapolate the results of
these investigations into predictions of how stream ecosystems will respond to
future global change. This project creates unique opportunities for ecology
education at the graduate and undergraduate levels, including from under-
represented groups, and allows students to participate in the international
relationships that are inherent in the work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will explicitly address the following hypotheses. First, owing to temperature-
dependent differences in population growth rates and densities, the degree of
demographic stochasticity in shaping community assembly is higher in tropical
streams compared to temperate ones. Second, the balance between demographic
stochasticity and environmental selection as drivers of community assembly
depends on the interaction between network position, community size, and
dispersal. Third, higher stochastic community assembly in tropical streams and
dispersal-limited headwaters result in higher variability in functional
composition. To understand how the community size by network position
interaction functions in diverse climates, we will conduct intensive surveys of
both resident and dispersing macroinvertebrates at multiple positions in a river
network. These surveys will be performed in parallel in both the US and Brazil.
This North versus South comparison will ultimately allow for extrapolation to
future-climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.