* 2225414
* 2022 APS Intersociety Meeting - Comparative Physiology: From Organisms to Omics in an Uncertain World
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Daniel Warren, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 22,250.00

This award funds travel expenses for undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career investigators, in particular individuals
from underrepresented groups, so they may present research results and
participate in the American Physiological Society (APS) Intersociety Meeting,
Comparative Physiology: From Organisms to Omics in an Uncertain World, in San
Diego, California, October 28-31, 2022. The meeting provides a venue for the
presentation of significant advances in understanding the integrative physiology
of organisms, including humans and other animals. This meeting is an opportunity
for comparative physiologists to report their newest research discoveries and to
develop collaborations that spark scientific innovation. Broader impacts of the
meeting include significant advancement of knowledge about organismal
physiology, greater participation of individuals from underrepresented groups in
comparative physiology research, and development of a globally diverse and more
collaborative research workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 APS
Intersociety Meeting, Comparative Physiology: From Organisms to Omics in an
Uncertain World, seeks to promote the exchange of ideas and development of
future collaborations of comparative and evolutionary physiologists
internationally, and to encourage trainees, early career investigators, and
individuals from underrepresented groups to pursue research careers in this
discipline. The conference includes plenary lectures, symposia, contributed oral
and poster presentations, presentations on technological/educational advances in
the field, and a workshop on the use of open electronics in comparative
physiology. In order to achieve the conference objectives, APS will administer a
travel grant program offering travel awards to trainees (undergraduate/graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows) and early career investigators, in particular
individuals from underrepresented groups (women, racial/ethnic minorities, and
disabled persons), who submit abstracts to be presented at the meeting. It is
expected that travel for at least 21 individuals will be supported. The project
will contribute to broadening the participation of young scientists, with an
emphasis on members of under-represented groups, exposing them to cutting edge
physiological research and providing unique opportunities for professional
development and networking. A “perspectives” report that summarizes and
synthesizes the content and discussions, to advance the study of organismal
responses to a changing world, will be prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is co-funded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology (IEP) and Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics (PMB) Programs in the BIO Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.