* 2225363
* Investigation of the Causes and Effects of the Storm-Time Ion Ring Current Decay
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Cristian Ferradas, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 518,072.00

The terrestrial ring current is an electric current flowing around the Earth,
thousands of miles above the atmosphere. The ring current is one of the
principal current systems that control conditions in the space above the
atmosphere where orbiting satellites operate. Abrupt changes of several orders
of magnitude in this current may occur, responsible for global decreases in the
Earth's surface magnetic field, known as geomagnetic storms. The storm-time ring
current is thus associated with harmful space weather effects, which motivates
the study of its formation, dynamics, and decay. As the ring current decays on
time scales of hours to several days, its energy is released into space and the
atmosphere by loss processes, whose contribution to this decay remains one of
the outstanding questions related to the ring current. This project aims to
study the causes and effects of the storm-time decay of the ring current ions,
which are the main carriers in the ring current. The proposed work can
significantly advance our knowledge of the dynamics of the Earth's ring current,
including its space weather effects and the coupled space environment. Moreover,
as part of the proposed activities, high school students will benefit from
state-of-the-art science research by participating in the NASA summer internship
program at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the ring
current decays on time scales of hours to several days during the storm recovery
phase, its energy is released into space, the atmosphere, and the plasmasphere
by means of loss processes such as charge exchange, Coulomb collisions, field
line curvature scattering, resonant interactions with plasma waves, and drift
out loss to the dayside magnetopause. This project addresses unresolved science
questions regarding the decay of the ring current. The methodology will consist
of numerical simulations and validation with observational data. The primary
modeling tool in this investigation will be the Comprehensive Inner
Magnetosphere-Ionosphere (CIMI) model. This state-of-the-art kinetic model
considers necessary couplings between the ring current and the other plasma
populations in the inner magnetosphere. Simulation studies of actual storm
events will be performed to quantify how individual processes result in ring
current losses and how the associated ion precipitation affects the ionospheric
conductance and its feedback to the magnetosphere. The expected result from this
modeling work is a systematic quantification of the roles of the different loss
mechanisms. Achieving this quantification requires an investigation that models
the storm-time ring current, accounting for all the identified loss mechanisms.
Furthermore, it is known that the inner magnetosphere responds distinctively to
storms produced by different solar wind drivers, i.e., driven by coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) or by co-rotating interaction regions (CIRs). The proposed
research will thus perform a systematic analysis of the relative roles of the
different ion loss processes during storms of CME and CIR drivers and the
impacts on the magnetosphere-ionosphere coupled system. Consequently, this study
will advance our current knowledge by providing a comprehensive view of the
physical processes during, and leading to, the decay of the ring current in
different contexts of solar wind driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.