* 2225830
* Collaborative Research: Tracing Pacific Ocean circulation and ventilation during the warm Pliocene Epoch
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Diane Thompson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 544,815.00

A large portion of human-induced carbon dioxide emissions, and the heat that
they trap within Earth’s climate system, are being absorbed by the global ocean.
The long-term impacts of this absorption on climate and ocean circulation are
poorly understood. Forecasts of 21st-century climate change suggest that global
warming will lead to a more stratified ocean and weaker global ocean
circulation, which would have major ramifications for regional and global
climate. However, recent studies suggest that ocean circulation was stronger,
not more sluggish, during warm intervals earlier in Earth’s history. This
potential discrepancy warrants a better characterization of ocean conditions
during warmer-than-present climates of the past. To do so, the study will focus
on intervals in the geologic past during which atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations were similar to today, and temperatures were several degrees
warmer. The most recent geologic interval that meets this criterion is the
Pliocene Epoch (5.33 to 2.58 million years ago). The primary goal of this
project is to generate paleoceanographic records to test models suggesting that
there was a strong overturning circulation in the North Pacific Ocean during the
Pliocene Epoch. This award will support the careers and training of five early-
career scientists, and train and mentor high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are to: 1) test the
recent hypothesis that there was North Pacific deep-water formation and an
active Pacific Meridional Overturning Circulation present at times during the
warm Pliocene; 2) trace the regional distribution of ocean ventilation; and 3)
refine the use of redox, temperature, and productivity proxies in bulk sediments
and foraminifera for reconstructing Pliocene North Pacific Ocean ventilation,
nutrient availability, and water mixing. A multi-proxy approach will examine
intermediate to deep ocean circulation patterns across two key geologic
intervals: the mid-Pliocene warm period through the intensification of Northern
Hemisphere glaciation (~2.5 to 3.3 Ma) and the early Pliocene (~4.9 to 5.1 Ma).
This project will generate new records of i) redox and productivity proxies from
bulk sediments, ii) redox, productivity, and water mass mixing proxies from
benthic foraminifera, and iii) productivity and temperature proxies from
planktic foraminifera, at four sites (IODP 882, 883, 887, and 1208) that cover a
range of depths and locations across the North Pacific Ocean. In parallel, the
study will analyze a series of coupled climate model simulations with active
biogeochemical and d13C cycling. The model tracer, circulation, isotope, and
ventilation age results will aid in the interpretation of the newly generated
data. This multi-proxy approach, underpinned by climate model analysis, will
help ensure the feasibility of the proxy-inferred
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.