* 2225448
* CNS Core:Small: Optimizing IP Anycast Performance at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bruce Maggs, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 625,380.00

Whether it is for online banking, shopping, teleconferencing or gaming, users
notice if there is significant delay with an application on the Internet. The
networking research community and Service Providers have spent significant time
and effort to minimize this interaction latency, and have come a long way in
reducing them. One key technique that has been devised is IP anycast. IP anycast
allows Internet users to access replicated web content stored at a server close
in network distance to them. In theory, a service provider that deploys many
replica servers in diverse geographic locations expect to achieve low user
latencies. However, in practice, this is often not the case: more replica
servers sometimes lead to prolonged latencies. This project aims to provide the
research and network operations community with the knowledge and tools to
optimize the design of large-scale IP anycast systems such that these systems
could achieve low Internet latencies with a minimal number of replica servers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will develop techniques and
tools to enable anycast optimization at scale. It will explore using randomized
algorithms to reduce the number of BGP experiments needed for anycast catchment
prediction and investigate whether incorporating Internet topology information
is effective in further reducing the number of BGP experiments. It plans to
study how multi-path routing and non-common BGP policies introduce errors into
catchment prediction and whether these practices might improve the accuracy of
catchment prediction. It will also examine whether heuristic knowledge such as
the number of sites and the site locations and techniques such as divide-and-
conquer to further scale anycast can be effective for performance optimization.
Finally, the project will look at performance metrics other than latency such as
load balancing and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.