* 2225405
* GEM: Diffuse and Discrete Auroral Electron Precipitation Effects On Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Hecht, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 186,000.00

The aurora, also commonly known as the Northern lights, display dynamic,
brilliant lights in the Earthâ€™s sky during magnetic disturbances that emanate
from the sun. The aurora is an important space weather phenomenon that links
what is happening much farther away from the Earth in space to our atmosphere.
During magnetically disturbed conditions, electrons that precipitate or rain
down into the sky cause these brilliant lights. The precipitating electrons are
a source of energy to the atmosphere and can cause space weather effects that
are of concern to society and national space security. For example, the
redistribution of energy from the precipitating electrons can affect predictions
of orbits of satellites in the atmosphere and/or predictions of the location of
re-entry of spacecraft back to Earth. The proposed research activities will lead
to improved scientific understanding and modeling of the very complex auroral
electron precipitation effects. The research outcomes will contribute to a
broader NSF-supported community effort of Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM)
for advancing space weather models. It enables two underrepresented female
scientists to engage in fundamental research that will positively impact
national space security concerns. The project will involve career mentoring of
an early career female scientist and research training of diverse undergraduate
student interns at The Aerospace Corporation that are vital for supporting
diversity, equity, and inclusion in the next generation of space scientists and
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to understand
better the role of diffuse and discrete auroral electron precipitation on
magnetosphere-ionosphere (MI) electrodynamic coupling. The science questions are
(SQ1) How does diffuse auroral electron precipitation affect the auroral
ionospheric conductivity, height-integrated conductance, field-aligned currents,
and the ionospheric and inner magnetospheric electric field through the
electrodynamic MI coupling during magnetic storms? Can a magnetically and
electrically self-consistent treatment of the particle transport and loss,
including diffuse auroral precipitation, account for observed conductance
(PFISR), field-aligned currents (AMPERE), and electric fields (PFISR, DMSP, Van
Allen Probes) during storms? (SQ2) What are the ionospheric conductivity and
height-integrated conductance associated with representative discrete auroral
electron precipitation in localized regions during magnetic disturbances? What
are the effects of the superimposed diffuse and localized discrete auroral
electron precipitation on the inner magnetospheric electric field and particle
transport? To address SQ1, a coupling of three models will be used: (1) the
magnetically and electrically self-consistent Rice Convection Model-Equilibrium
(RCM-E) that calculates inner magnetospheric particle transport and
precipitation due to the effect of wave-particle interactions, (2) the
Superthermal Electron Transport (STET) model that will modify the RCM-E
precipitating electron fluxes to include the effects of backscatter and multiple
reflections between conjugate hemispheres, and (3) results from the B3C auroral
transport model that computes altitudinal profiles of conductivity. To address
SQ2, parameterized representative Gaussian auroral electron distributions will
be used with STET and the B3C model to compute ionospheric conductivity.
Observations such as ground-based photometers and All Sky Imaging data will be
used to constrain the integrated electron energy flux, and the average energy of
the discrete auroral precipitation will be parameterized. Simulations will be
performed to include the conductance and potential drops associated with the
discrete aurora in a localized region overlapping the broader diffuse aurora to
investigate the effects on the inner magnetospheric particle
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.