* 2225762
* PFI (Conference): Supporting Undergraduate Institutions in Technology and Entrepreneurship Development (SUITED)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Mary Carroll, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 130,153.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) â€“ Conference project is to develop communities of educators and
administrators from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to foster and
improve their institutional ecosystems for technology development and
commercialization activities. Faculty at PUIs are, at present, significantly
underrepresented in the entrepreneurial activities, even though the institutions
may be capable of providing innovation and entrepreneurship experiences and
training to students early in their careers. The lack of technology transfer
resources at PUIs may hinder involvement in moving products and services from
the laboratory to the marketplace or society. Workshop participants will include
faculty members and administrators from a diverse body of primarily
undergraduate colleges and universities, including minority-serving institutions
and groups underrepresented in science and engineering. The workshop reports
will be disseminated broadly in order to enhance the overall
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference series seeks to stimulate
technology development, entrepreneurship, and commercialization activities at
primarily undergraduate institutions. The workshop will provide participants
with a forum to: (1) learn about technology transfer opportunities, (2) develop
supportive communities in the innovation arena, (3) address barriers to
commercialization and partnerships, and (4) develop plans to improve
infrastructure around innovation and translation. Basic research activities at
undergraduate institutions will be highlighted and linked to potential
commercialization and entrepreneurship opportunities. The increased
participation by primarily undergraduate institutions in these activities will
provide enhanced disciplinary (technical) and entrepreneurial education
opportunities for faculty members and their undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.