* 2225178
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Retention and Achievement for Introductory STEM English Learners (RAISE)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Michael Chao, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,450,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 Institutional Transformation Project
(ITP) aims to improve retention in science, technology, engineering, mathematics
(STEM) programs with a language and culture-focused approach in introductory
STEM courses, in which there are substantial bottlenecks to student retention in
STEM disciplines nation-wide. All STEM students face challenges in discipline-
specific academic language, which is defined as unique language used by
practitioners to communicate in an academic discipline and is different from
everyday usage of language. Academic language is also an added challenge to
English learners. Language-conscious teaching is a culturally responsive way to
support student success and is common in K-12 education but not in higher
education. This work will contribute to understanding the role of academic
language and language-centric pedagogy in STEM student success at the university
level. The Nationâ€™s demographics indicate that the number of multilingual and
English learner students is ever-increasing, and preliminary inquiry suggests
that English learners represent 15-30% of incoming freshmen. Thus, the broader
impact of this project is that it will help develop a STEM workforce that
reflects this diversity and leverages its multilingual assets. This will be
essential for the United States to stay competitive in an increasingly
multicultural world. Upon successful implementation of the project, the expected
outcomes are: (1) student success and retention will improve in introductory
STEM courses; (2) cultural and pedagogical shifts will occur among faculty to
account for and celebrate the unique language skills of our students; (3)
institutions will be more cognizant of supporting and planning for the success
of English learners and multilingual students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of the project are to (1) establish a faculty and staff learning community
around STEM academic language challenges and evidence-based interventions. The
culture and contexts of the incoming class will be explored through partnerships
with local high schools that are major feeder campuses to the university; (2)
develop and implement best practices for collecting institutional data on
English learners; (3) design and implement interventions targeting STEM academic
language challenges. It is expected that some STEM-focused English learner
interventions designed for K-12 programs can be effectively adapted and adopted
for university-level introductory STEM courses to benefit all students,
including English learners. Promising interventions will undergo more formal
evaluation and investigation for efficacy; (4) research student and faculty
engagement in STEM academic language. How students engage with STEM disciplinary
language, what STEM faculty attitudes towards teaching and engaging in academic
language are, and how those attitudes affect student learning will be examined.
Results will be broadly disseminated through publication, professional
organizations, and networks through the large California State University
system. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.