* 2225203
* Promoting Student Engagement and Success through Assistive Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Andy Lin, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,979.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-¬Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Pilot (Track 1) project aims to engage students
at California State University Northridge in project-based learning centered on
assistive technologies (ATs). Approximately 25% of adults in the United States
live with a disability, and ATs play an important role accommodating people with
disabilities in different environments, including in education, employment and
independent living. Research has shown that people with disabilities from
minority populations are less likely to have access to AT and are more likely to
report unmet AT needs. Additionally, students are often unaware of the many
rewarding career opportunities in this field. Through a new undergraduate senior
design track this project will support students’ development of a strong
professional identity and motivation to pursue a STEM career, particularly in
careers at the human-technology frontier. Students will have multiple
opportunities to learn from professionals in AT careers and will build empathy
through several experiences designed to help them understand the realities,
strengths, and challenges of disabled citizens. Faculty will engage in
professional development throughout the project, which will allow them to
incorporate project-based learning in their classrooms and enrich the
experiences of their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assistive technology is
highly interdisciplinary and requires experience working with a team of
professionals. The project provides student-centered, project-based, and
personalized experiential learning and interdisciplinary-based professional
development to improve the success of minority students in STEM. Specifically,
this project will: 1) build a support system for underrepresented students in
STEM; 2) provide an authentic learning experience through tailored activities;
3) increase institutional capacity to create a culturally-sensitive learning
environment and interdisciplinary STEM curriculum; 4) forge connections between
students and employers; and 5) advance students who are underrepresented in
their participation in STEM toward higher levels of academic achievement. The
project’s impact is broadened by involving service providers and industry
representatives in education activities. Project evaluation will draw from
surveys and focus groups to explore impacts on students and teachers, including
how participation influences students’ sense of belonging, STEM identity, and
technical knowledge. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.