* 2225187
* Increasing Participation and Persistence in STEM by Incorporating Field-Based Experiences in an Urban Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Elizabeth Torres, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2027
* USD 815,523.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Implementation and Evaluation (Track 2) project
aims to engage undergraduate students in field-based activities at two urban
institutions: California State University Los Angeles and Mt. San Antonio
College. These institutions are located in the greater Los Angeles area, and
they serve a commuter-student population. Financial and logistical challenges
have made it difficult to augment science courses with field-based activities,
despite their documented benefits. The field-based activities will take place in
lower-division biology, chemistry and earth science courses and are expected to
increase participation and retention of minoritized students in these
disciplines. Outcomes from this project should reduce barriers to participation
in field-based activities by training instructors in safe field-based practices,
and lowering costs associated with field activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
set of proposed activities will increase persistence rates across the four
majors (Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Geology and Natural Sciences) at the two
institutions due to the introduction of engaging field-course experiences that
allow students to work in a group setting and connect to environmental issues in
their local communities. This work will also increase fieldwork participation
rates in the selected majors, which currently have low numbers of minoritized
students at both campuses. This is critical to increasing representation,
especially Latinx students, in the environmental workforce. Program success will
be tracked through pre- and post-course surveys where new field-based activities
are implemented. In addition, student and faculty focus groups will be used to
assess outcomes at various levels as well as track any related institutional
changes. The student population at both participating campuses includes a high
proportion of Latinx and other students similarly underrepresented in their
participation in STEM fields of study, which should broaden participation in the
introductory courses of these majors. This project seeks to increase
participation and persistence rates among minoritized students in field-based
disciplines in which they are highly underrepresented, which should result in a
more diverse workforce and an increase in minority role models for future
students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.