* 2225635
* SBIR Phase I:  College Bound Video Game
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Laura Hayes, LEARNING NETWORK, LLC, THE
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
project will result from the production of a useful game, called College Bound,
that will entice youth to use their gaming time to learn how to navigate the
college preparation, college-admissions, and financial-aid processes. This
assistance could help in addressing the problem of an inadequate number of
counselors in high schools that serve large minority populations. Studies have
shown that underserved high school students see a counselor for less than 20
minutes a year. Since is also known that young people between the ages of 8-18
spend 7.5 hours a day engaged with media- either playing video games or watching
television a game platform may enable minority students, who make up less than
4% of undergraduate enrollees in the national four-year colleges, to prepare for
college attendence. The College Bound game seeks to recoup some of this screen
time for positive benefits such as improving preparedness of the minority
students to access higher education, and meeting future workforce demands in
Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics, and Medicine
(STEMM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project focuses on assisting underrepresented students in learning about what it
takes to get college admission, how to prepare for it, and what financial aid is
available to afford the education using a gaming environment. The project will
focus on measuring students' knowledge about the college application process as
the player navigates through different levels of the game. Knowledge about the
college application process includes a) information about admission criteria and
deadlines, b) the college acceptance and enrollment processes, and c) the
ability to pay for college through scholarships, loans, work programs, and/or
personal savings. Throughout the pilot phase, the project will develop reliable
and valid evaluation tools to measure student learning in the game setting at
each level of the College Bound game. These evaluation tools might reflect not
only student learning performance but also boost college enrollment outcomes.
These measures may also enable the school and other stakeholders to understand
students' gaps and help strengthen studentsâ€™ pathways into
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.