* 2225300
* RECODE:  Single Cell-Level Programming of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Directed Differentiation to Chamber-Specific Cardiomyocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Sean Palecek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Stem cells have the potential to generate any cell type found in the body. They
are a potential source of cells to study human development and disease, test
drugs for safety and efficacy, and replace damaged tissue in patients. A
roadblock to realizing the promise of stem cells is the difficulty of turning
them into a uniform, specialized cell type. Existing methods generally use
external factors such as drugs, proteins, material scaffolds and mechanical
forces. However, this approach is often plagued by cells in the population
responding to the signals differently. This results in inefficient conversion to
the desired specialized cell type. Programming their genetic code to guide them
through normal heart muscle development is proposed as a strategy to direct stem
cell differentiation. In this scenario, every cell in the mixture can progress
independently and still achieve the desired differentiation. This project will
create new methods to generate cells from each chamber of the heart. If
successful, this will advance efforts to study various human heart diseases.
Innovative education and outreach modules in synthetic biology and stem cell
biomanufacturing will also be developed. Outreach to high school students and
teachers, providing undergraduate research opportunities, and training graduate
students at both institutions will support biomanufacturing workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In prior work, the team developed defined,
small molecule-mediated approaches to regulate canonical Wnt signaling. This
resulted in the direction of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to a variety
of cardiovascular cell types, including cardiomyocytes (CMs). These efforts
helped elucidate the fundamental mechanistic basis of Wnt signaling and
generated a collection of non-natural transcription factors and cognate genetic
architectures to enable transcriptional programming in cells. The expertise
gained in that work will be used to attempt to regulate Wnt and retinoic acid
(RA) signaling in iPSCs through controlled feedback, cued variation in
expression levels, and timing of signal production. The project will test the
hypothesis that precise and specific single cell-level control of Wnt signaling
via the development and integration of engineered programable superstructures
will enable single-cell level control over CM differentiation while control over
RA signaling will facilitate differentiation to chamber-specific (atrial and
ventricular) CMs. This project will leverage advances in CM differentiation by
constructing disease models of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias for disease
modeling and drug testing applications. If successful, this approach for single
cell-level synthetic biology control of differentiation might establish a
blueprint for differentiation of iPSCs to other cell and tissue
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project is jointly funded by the
Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems and the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.