* 2225967
* Collaborative Research: Combinatorial solution processing of optical phase change materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Kathleen Cerqua-Richardson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase change materials (PCMs) are a
class of compounds whose optical properties undergo dramatic changes upon micro-
structural transformation. This unique property allows novel PCM-based
reconfigurable or programmable optical systems to be created. Unlike
conventional optics whose characteristics are fixed, the functions of such
programmable optics can be dynamically configured on-the-fly to adapt to
changing application needs. This project, supported by the Ceramics program in
the Division of Materials Research, pioneers a transformative synthesis paradigm
for expedited discovery of PCM alloys, specifically tailored for optical
applications. Instead of relying on traditional costly vacuum systems to prepare
PCMs, the program explores solution-based printing – similar to color printing
of photos – as a scalable synthetic route of PCMs. The researchers also develop
new methods to enable high-throughput screening and down-selection of PCMs to
achieve material properties optimized for specific optical applications.
Fundamental insights gained from this research have broad impacts on
applications spanning energy-efficient data communications, active metamaterial,
photonic memory, reflective display, analog optical computing, and beyond. In
addition, the project also enables research opportunities for undergraduate
students at the University of Central Florida and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Furthermore, the researchers develop a massive open online course
(MOOC) dedicated to glass materials, thereby filling a critical gap when it
comes to glass science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase change materials (PCMs) are a class of
compounds whose optical properties undergo dramatic changes upon micro-
structural transformation. Discovery of new optical PCMs and characterization of
their structural, optical, and phase transition properties, however, are
increasingly becoming the bottleneck given the low throughput of traditional PCM
synthesis and inability to reliably measure their properties in operando. With
this project, supported by the Ceramics program in the Division of Materials
Research, researchers at the University of Central Florida and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology develop a transformative synthesis and characterization
paradigm for high-throughput discovery and characterization of multicomponent
PCM alloys, specifically tailored for optical applications. Rather than relying
on vacuum deposition, they harness combinatorial printing of PCM solutions to
facilitate high-throughput, scalable synthesis of PCMs with custom chemistries
and even complex multilayer structures. The PCMs are printed on integrated
micro-heater arrays as a multifunctional characterization platform. It
facilitates systematic investigation on the impact of post-deposition annealing
and operando characterization of two critical attributes traditionally
challenging to assess: temperature-dependent phase transition kinetics, and
optical constants of thin film PCMs. Further coupled with a cohort of other
characterization techniques commensurate with high-throughput screening,
combinatorial solution processing presents a facile route for expedited
discovery of new optical PCMs with broad impacts on energy-efficient data
communications, active metamaterial, photonic memory, reflective display, analog
optical computing, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.