* 2225255
* Student Noticing of Quantitative Data in Introductory Biology Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jeremy Hsu, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2025
* USD 349,039.00

Many skills are typically taught in introductory biology lectures and labs and
are important for success as a biologist. One of these skills is quantitative
reasoning. Quantitative reasoning is the ability to use mathematical concepts in
biological contexts, which encompasses processing and interpreting numerical and
graphical data. However, many students in introductory biology struggle to apply
quantitative reasoning skills taught in math classes and other classes to these
biological contexts. The proposed project seeks to understand how students learn
and apply quantitative skills in introductory biology labs by using interviews
and observations to characterize what students notice and attend to when
learning quantitative reasoning, generating new knowledge into how students
transfer quantitative skills from other classes to biological contexts. These
results will provide insight into how to best support student learning of
quantitative reasoning in biology classes. In addition, through attending
conferences and workshops and working with the mentor and advisory board, the
project will provide the investigator with professional development and support
for learning qualitative methods for STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seminal Vision &amp; Change report identified
quantitative reasoning as one of the core competencies for undergraduate biology
students. Despite its importance, there have been very few works examining how
students learn quantitative reasoning in biological contexts, with most past
work instead assessing specific interventions or measuring student attitudes
towards quantitative reasoning. This project will examine how students learn
quantitative reasoning by exploring students’ transfer of knowledge from
mathematics to biology classes. The project will use the student noticing
framework to investigate what students recognize and perceive when creating,
analyzing, and interpreting graphical data in introductory biology labs, and
explore how such differences in student noticing shape the transfer of
knowledge. The project will address the following two research questions: 1)
What themes, patterns, and processes are students noticing (i.e., recognizing,
recalling, and applying to other contexts) when learning quantitative skills in
introductory biology labs? 2) How do differences in this student noticing
influence students’ learning of quantitative skills? The proposed project will
involve running record observations of students working with the quantitative
data they collect in introductory biology labs, allowing for characterization of
students’ centers of focus. The project will also involve semi-structured
interviews, allowing for more exploration of students’ centers of focus.
Validated instruments will be used to measure students’ quantitative reasoning
ability and interest, and changes will be tracked to see how differences in
centers of focus may influence learning of quantitative reasoning. Think aloud
interviews will be held to further determine students’ centers of focus when
working with quantitative data. These data will generate valuable insight on
what students perceive when creating and analyzing graphical data, leading to
more information on how students transfer knowledge into biology. Finally, the
project will allow the PI to develop key qualitative skills through targeted
mentoring and participation in workshops and conferences. The project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.