* 2225941
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Student Symposium at the 2022 ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Yi-Luen Do, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,944.00

This is funding to support participation by students and faculty based in U.S.
educational institutions in a Graduate Student Symposium (workshop) to be
organized in conjunction with the 14th ACM Creativity & Cognition (C&C)
conference, which will take place June 21-23 in Venice, Italy. Creativity is the
cornerstone and the fundamental motive of both the aesthetic and engineering
disciplines. It is a critical element of our economic and social prosperity, as
a precursor to scientific discoveries, technological advances, and new forms of
cultural and aesthetic experiences. Held every other year in an international
location since 1993, C&C serves as a gathering place for the diverse communities
of researchers, designers, engineers, and artists who provide an innovative and
cross-disciplinary perspective on creativity and cognition as well as
technological innovation. C&C is the only ACM-sponsored conference in which
human creativity is the central focus, and as such it provides pathways for
substantially different kinds of work including interactive art pieces, user
studies of creativity support tools, and new sensor technologies for creative
practice. It serves as a premier forum for presenting the world's best new
research investigating computing's impact on and ability to promote creativity
in all forms of human experience. The conference particularly values research
that explores new, synergistic roles for computing and people in creative
processes, or that addresses situations where computing, as contextualized in
sociotechnical systems, may sometimes have an undesirable impact. The theme of
this year's conference is "Creativity, Craft, and Design" and more information
may be found online at http://cc.acm.org/2022/. The Graduate Student Symposium
will have broad impact by contributing to the professional development of a more
knowledgeable, capable, and productive workforce in the U.S., and by inviting
participation of graduate students along with promising senior-level
undergraduates from under-represented groups and at institutions not
historically represented at the conference through aggressive and targeted
recruitment. To further promote diversity, no more than two graduate students
will be accepted from any one educational institution, and if there are two then
at least one of them must be female.

The Graduate Student Symposium will bring together up to 12 students (not all of
whom will be eligible for funding) and 3 distinguished researchers from academia
and industry as mentors, in a day-long event that will be held on June 20, 2022,
the day before the main C&C conference. It will provide the students with a
unique opportunity to present early-stage research and receive gentle feedback
from mentors with different disciplinary backgrounds. The young researchers will
gain experience and skills in communicating their own work and critiquing the
work of their peers, as well as professional and social connections that
transcend the event, and awareness of potential career paths in both academia
and industry. The student submissions will appear in the C&C Proceedings, and
they will be indexed in the ACM Digital Library. Students will also be invited
to present their work at the main conference during the Poster Session, which
will both give their work wider visibility in the community and provide an
opportunity for them to talk one-on-one with peers and senior researchers, in
addition to the focused mentoring in the GSS itself.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.