* 2225535
* Collaborative Research: ERASE-PFAS: Stabilization of Per- and Polyfluorinated Substances in Sewage Sludge Intended for Land-application
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Erica Mckenzie, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 80,000.00

In the United States (US), municipal wastewater treatment plants generate
millions of tons of sludge per year. A significant fraction of this sludge is
treated to produce a nutrient-rich product commonly referred to as biosolids. In
the US, it is estimated that 7.2 million dry metric tons of biosolids are
produced annually with approximately 55% of the biosolids generated used as soil
amendments and sources of nutrients and organic matter in agriculture, farming,
and land restoration. The detection of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) in biosolids has raised serious concerns about the continuing and safe
use of these solids in agricultural and farming land applications. PFAS are
fluorinated organic chemicals that have emerged as priority pollutants during
the last decade due to increasing concerns about their persistence, stability,
and toxicity to humans and other living organisms as they accumulate in the
environment. The overarching goal of this collaborative project is to identify,
design, and synthesize suitable sorbents that can bind and sequester PFAS in
biosolids. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of new fundamental knowledge and sorbents to mitigate
and eliminate the potential uptake of PFAS by plants when biosolids are used in
agriculture and farming land applications. Additional benefits to society will
be achieved through outreach and educational activities including the mentoring
of a graduate student at the University at Albany, a graduate student at the
University of Arizona, and a graduate student at Temple University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 55% of the biosolids derived from municipal
sludge in the US are used as soil amendments, fertilizers, and sources of
nutrients and organic matter in agriculture, farming, and land restoration. The
increasing detection of PFAS in biosolids is raising significant concerns about
their continuing and safe use in agricultural and farming land applications.
Preliminary work by the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project has
established that certain sorbents can sequester and stabilize perfluoroalkyl
acids (PFAAs) in biosolids. However, there are a number of unanswered questions
about this sorption-based stabilization of PFAS in biosolids including whether
it is applicable to a wide range of PFAS precursors, whether the stabilized PFAS
will remain immobilized in soils in the long term, and whether the stabilized
PFAS will be taken up by plants. The proposed research will address these
critical knowledge gaps. To advance this goal, the PIs propose to carry out an
integrated experimental and modeling research program to test the hypothesis
that anionic, cationic, or zwitterionic PFAS precursors can be stabilized in
biosolids upon amendments with suitable sorbents designed to enhance covalent
binding (via head group interactions) and adsorption (via tail group
interactions) between the target sorbents and PFAS precursors. The proposed
research activities will be structured around three tasks: 1) Investigation of
the transformations and distributions of PFAS precursors in model anaerobically
digested sludge samples with or without added sorbents; 2) Investigation of the
transformations and distributions of PFAS precursors in biosolid-soil systems
with or without added sorbents using soybeans as a model plant; and 3)
Evaluation of the fate, transformations, and distributions of 13C-label PFAS
precursors and their mixtures in real sludge samples. The successful completion
of this project has the potential for transformative impact through the
development of new fundamental knowledge to advance the identification, design,
and synthesis of efficient and cost-effective sorbents that can sequester and
stabilize PFAS in biosolids to enable their continuing and safe use in
agricultural and farming land applications. To implement the education and
outreach activities of the project, the PIs plan to leverage established
programs at the University at Albany (e.g., the Collegiate Science &amp;
Technology Entry Program) funded by the New York State Department of Education
to recruit and mentor two middle or high school students and two undergraduate
students to work on the project research team. In addition, the PIs plan to set
up a website to disseminate the project research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.