* 2225238
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Center for Equitable Environmental Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Pierre Wiltzius, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,716,249.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 HSI Institutional Transformation
Project (ITP): Center for Equitable Environmental Sciences (CEES), aims to
improve retention of students from groups underrepresented in STEM majors. Both
first-year and transfer students who share these identities disproportionately
leave declared STEM majors without a meaningful internship experience.
Maintaining students from diverse backgrounds in STEM majors is a key step to
building the next generation of environmental leaders. By foregrounding the
linkages between science and society, STEM faculty at UCSB and Santa Barbara
City College (SBCC) will generate innovative approaches to STEM education and
novel research questions about the societal implications of science and
technology. Finally, CEES will disseminate STEM education best practices to HSI
communities through publications and conference presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the theme of environmental justice
to facilitate the formation of intersectional STEM identities through a new
Center for Equitable Environmental Sciences housed within the UCSB Chicano
Studies Institute to provide mentoring, learning communities, and placement in
STEM internships. Culturally relevant mentoring coupled with learning
communities will enhance student experiences by fostering a greater sense of
belonging within STEM majors. In collaboration with the Career Services Center,
it will develop a new Environment and Society career track and a professional
development program for UCSB and SBCC faculty that develops both pedagogical
skills and interdisciplinary research projects that facilitate undergraduate
internship opportunities in partnership with non-profit and government agencies.
CEES will provide internship experiences anchored in principles of diversity,
equity, inclusion and justice (DEIJ). Building on cluster hiring in racial
environmental justice, this project aims to serve 1000 students through CEES,
mentor 300 students, develop 300 internships, and train 75 faculty across two
HSI campuses in professional development activities. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.