* 2225771
* RII-BEC: Co-Mentoring, Community Building, Career Development, and Content Area Research Experiences to Enhance Systemic Change in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Madhura Kulkarni, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 11/30/2027
* USD 994,852.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National data show a dire need for
higher education to more equitably serve students from diverse educational
backgrounds, especially students from underrepresented groups (URG) and transfer
students. These two populations were disproportionately affected by the COVID-19
pandemic. This project creates a “4C model” for systemic change in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. The model features
students as co-creators, highlighting the importance of student agency and
leadership in change efforts. The 4 “Cs” students will participate in are co-
mentoring (a non-hierarchical approach to mentoring), community-building
activities, career development, and content-area research experiences. These are
all evidence-based strategies to support students’ transitions into and through
college and to prepare them for post-graduation transitions. The project also
includes faculty- and institutional-level activities to advance systemic change,
including faculty co-mentoring with students and a Synergies Board convened
regularly to facilitate knowledge and interpersonal exchange across the
university, while changing power structures to elevate students’ perspectives.
The focus on workforce and graduate school preparation is necessary to impact
the research, education, and economic development needs of the region,
especially in light of the effects of the pandemic. However, the impact of this
project is broader. It will serve as a model that institutions of higher
education can adopt to increase successful student outcomes among students from
URG and transfer populations. The work and knowledge produced by these students
in their future STEM careers have the potential to make further impacts. Because
it is informed by Self Determination Theory (SDT) and Four Frames Theory, the
project will be valuable to educators and researchers by developing and
assessing an actionable theory-into-practice program (the 4C
model).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to increase direct
participation of students from URG and transfer populations in STEM research and
professions as measured using metrics such as retention, graduation, and
transition to career. The three objectives are to 1) build on existing student
supports by creating and assessing new structures and programs for supporting
URG and transfer students as they prepare for post-graduate careers, 2) offer
faculty and staff professional development to more inclusively and expertly
facilitate the successful transition of the focus students to post-graduate
careers, and 3) combine units and people across campus in support of objectives
1 &amp; 2 into a sustainable infrastructure. The project’s primary strategies
include creating and implementing the “4C” model fellowship program to support
students from the focus populations through scholarships and the four types of
activities listed above, including co-mentoring where students and faculty co-
mentor each other. Additionally, faculty will participate in professional
development to better serve these populations and experience professional growth
through co-mentoring experiences with students in the program. The project’s
Synergies Board aims to improve collaboration and streamlining between STEM
departments and other units on campus. The research component seeks to improve
levels of diversity in the STEM workforce from a new standpoint by extending the
application of SDT to increase the direct participation of URG and transfer
students in STEM-related activities through the identification and strengthening
of key transition points into and out of college. The extension of SDT will
transform higher education institutional approaches to STEM student success from
being reactive to proactive. This research will be the first that takes a
systemic change approach to extend SDT theory by evaluating how the Four Frames
for Systemic Change (structures, symbols, people, and power) interact with SDT’s
autonomy, competence, and relatedness to increase STEM URG and transfer
students’ college completion and successful transition into the workforce. The
project will provide valuable new knowledge for higher education institutions
seeking to increase STEM student success and understanding on how to
successfully develop and implement long-term, effective STEM programing
specifically for URG and transfer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.