* 2225464
* Linking DNA replication to chromatin organization
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Supriya Prasanth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2026
* USD 867,196.00

Accurate duplication of the genetic code and its faithful distribution to two
daughter cells is critical for the maintenance of genome stability and cell
survival. DNA is packaged into compact structures, facilitated by a group of
proteins called histones, to build chromatin. Chromatin compaction impacts
fundamental processes including DNA replication and gene expression. This
project will investigate how the process of DNA replication and chromatin
compaction are coordinated during the cell cycle. The outcomes will provide new
insights into the role of replication proteins in chromosome segregation and
cell cycle progression. The project will also provide opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate and high school students to perform research in the
fields of cell and molecular biology and genomics, including techniques such as
high-resolution microscopy and time-lapse imaging, and computational analyses of
large-scale genomics data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safeguarding the integrity of
the genome requires efficient and regulated replication of DNA packaged in
chromatin, and important mechanistic questions about this process remain
unresolved. In metazoans, pre-replication Complex (preRC) factors, Origin
Recognition Complex (ORC, composed of six subunits) and ORC-associated proteins
(ORCA/LRWD1) play pivotal roles in maintaining genomic stability and regulate
multiple aspects of cell cycle progression. The overall goals of this project
are to understand the fundamental molecular mechanisms of DNA replication and
chromatin organization by using ORCA/ORC as a tool to probe the coordination of
these processes. The specific aims are to determine 1) how chromatin regulates
origin licensing and firing and, 2) how preRC proteins regulate chromatin
organization at constitutive and facultative heterochromatin. The project
utilizes multidisciplinary approaches, including cell and molecular biology,
biochemical and biophysical tools to address these fundamental questions. The
results are expected to uncover cues that integrate DNA replication with
heterochromatin organization and chromosome segregation and elucidate the role
of preRC proteins in connecting these processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.