* 2225710
* 2022 Microbiology of the Built Environment GRC &amp; GRS
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Kyle Bibby, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

In today’s modern world, people spend about 90% of their time in the built
environment including residential homes/buildings, offices/schools, and
commercial, entertainment, and recreational facilities. Microorganisms in the
built environment can have adverse impact on human health ranging from
triggering allergies to the transmission of viral diseases such as COVID-19. The
interdisciplinary scientific field that studies these microorganisms is called
the “Microbiology of the Built Environment” (MoBE). This conference award will
support speakers, students, and early career researchers to attend the 2022
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on MoBE to discuss the state of the field and
learn from recent research findings. The GRC will provide opportunities for the
participants to exchange ideas and build new partnerships to advance the
important and emerging of field MoBE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic
has underscored the need to improve the fundamental understanding of pathogen
and disease transmission in the built-environment. An interdisciplinary field,
Microbiology of the Built Environment (MoBE), has emerged focused around the
science, engineering, and public health implications of the fate, transport, and
infectivity of microbial and viral pathogens in the built environment. MoBE
converges and integrates concepts, principles, and expertise from many fields
including microbiology, virology, engineering, medicine, and public health. This
NSF award will support the June 2022 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on MoBE
that will be held in Waterville Valley (NH). The theme of this conference is
“Microbes at the Interface of Water, Air, and Human Health in Built
Environments”. This GRC comes at a critical time as the MoBE field initiates
more in-depth discussions to identify critical research questions, “Grand
Challenges”, and unmet research needs. The NSF award will provide travel grants
to speakers, students, and early career researchers to enable them to attend the
MoB GRC. As a key deliverable for this award, the conference organizers will
leverage the workshop discussions to lead the crafting of a vision/perspective
article tentatively entitled “Microbiology of the Built Environment – the Next
10 Years”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.