* 2225948
* RI: Small: Computational Imaging for Underwater Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Jinwei Ye, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,495.00

The underwater environment poses great challenges for vision sensing due to the
refraction, absorption, and scattering that occurs in the water column. Although
a variety of manned vehicles, remotely operated vehicles (ROVs), and autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) have been developed for various underwater missions,
the vision sensing capacity of these underwater vehicles still stays at a
limited level. This project aims at developing novel computational imaging
solutions to facilitate underwater robotic tasks, such as autonomous navigation
and in-detail sea floor mapping. The project is expected to produce new imaging
systems, scene reconstruction algorithms, and control theories that are tailored
for underwater vehicles. The project benefits marine research, oil &amp; gas
industry, and the military by developing underwater vision systems that decrease
the costs, challenges, and risks associated with ocean exploration. The project
tightly integrates research with education by introducing new curricula on
computer vision and marine robotics. The project will provide training and
research experience to both undergraduate and graduate students, in particular
women and underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on three specific research objectives: 1) angular ray sampling for
nonlinear light transport analysis; 2) underwater reflectance modeling and
geometry estimation; and 3) visual perceptive tracking for underwater vehicles.
A critical component of this project is to develop a novel angularly sampled
imaging system that strategically emits and collects light rays, which allows
the analysis of nonlinear light paths through water. Specifically, the team will
first investigate the underwater light transport model in presence of
refraction, scattering, and absorption. Based on the light transport model, the
team will develop new surface reflectance models and three-dimensional shape
reconstruction algorithms that follow the physics of underwater ray optics.
Finally, the team will integrate the imaging system with underwater vehicles and
develop a novel visual perceptive tracking navigation system that leverages the
angular ray sampling scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.