* 2225601
* RECODE: Vascular Differentiation and Morphogenesis Controlled with Hybrid Memristors
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Jeremiah Zartman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

How groups of stem cells differentiate and form patterned blood vessels remains
an unresolved mystery. Solving this challenge will broadly advance the growing
tissue engineering industry, which produces implantable tissues and organs.
Present methods for stem cell differentiation are costly and inefficient.
Additionally, manufacturing three-dimensional tissues with precision is an unmet
challenge. This RECODE project will develop and test a new platform that
controls electrical and chemical signaling to differentiate stem cells into
patterned blood vessel networks. This project will impact the biomedical
community through research findings and education and outreach activities. The
team will organize a multidisciplinary conference at the interface between
multiple fields of biology and engineering. To support trainees from
underrepresented groups, travel awards will be provided to cover their costs to
attend the conference. Toward diversifying the STEM workforce, undergraduate
students from diverse demographic backgrounds will be recruited for summer and
semester research projects. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
RECODE project is to explore the fundamental mechanisms of how cell signaling
and physiology regulate stem cell differentiation and vascularization. To
achieve this goal, the multidisciplinary research team will engineer the first
autonomous hybrid memory resistor (memristor) and cell culture device to control
the differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into endothelial cells and
their morphogenesis into mature vascular networks. Such an achievement will have
broad implications in both developmental biology and regenerative medicine. The
platform technology will involve embedding an artificial neuronal network that
includes memristor circuits to concentrate and pattern extracellular signals and
coordinate the intracellular oscillations between communicating cells. The
multidisciplinary research team will design this memristor circuit to synergize
with an expanding synthetic biology toolkit that includes controlling cell
signaling and differentiation with light, synthetic hydrogels, quantitative and
dynamic biomarker measurements, molecular manipulation, and machine learning
algorithms. Expected outcomes include a deeper mechanistic understanding of how
chemical and physiological signaling influences the differentiation and
formation of vascular networks and new methods for the robust, reproducible, and
scalable production of differentiated cell types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RECODE project is jointly funded by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and Animal
Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.