* 2225555
* NSF-AoF: SOLID: System-wide Operation via Learning In-device Dissimilarities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Robert Heath, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,260.00

Cellular communication systems continue to incorporate new multiple-antenna
technologies. In particular, third, fourth and fifth generation cellular systems
saw advancements in the use of multiple antennas at the base-station
infrastructure and multiple antennas in the devices. A main application of these
antennas was to support multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication,
which is known to increase spectral efficiency and thus the data rates that can
be achieved by devices in a given bandwidth. The numbers of antennas and the
ways the antennas are used can vary across device models even from the same
manufacturer. At the same time, the types of devices supported in cellular
systems is growing beyond smartphones to include other highly mobile platforms
like aerial vehicles, automobiles, and robots. The differences in the hardware
between devices, coupled with the high device mobility, makes it challenging to
configure the antennas to provide MIMO communication with the highest
performance. This project develops machine learning-inspired solutions to
empower devices to learn optimal configurations collaboratively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;System-wide Operation via Learning In-device
Dissimilarities is a cooperation among experts in wireless communications at
North Carolina State University (NC State) and Tampere University (TAU). The
overall objective of the proposal is to employ machine-learning-assisted
collaborative solutions for MIMO beam prediction and codebook optimization in a
large-scale dynamic system. The key challenge of such networks is the extreme
diversity of the devicesâ€™ hardware (e.g., antenna designs and configurations).
The existing distributed ML approaches do not explicitly include this type of
client heterogeneity and do not fully support the temporal and spatial
heterogeneity of data, network resources, and deployments. The project team will
develop a novel integrated-learning and wireless-networking framework, which
will enable the design and optimization of advanced MIMO beam-management
solutions specifically tailored to the highly diverse and dynamic system. This
project will result in new algorithms for collaborative device-centric beam
management for 5G+/pre-6G MIMO communications in non-stationary environments
with highly mobile and heterogeneous agents. The specific technical
contributions occur in several directions: (a) Distributed user-centric learning
for optimizing codebook-based MIMO communications; (b) Novel representation of
device heterogeneity in an ML-friendly way; and (c) Network-resource
optimization to facilitate distributed learning. The immediate impact will be
improved communication efficiency in 5G+/pre-6G networks. The longer-term impact
will be the establishment of the core principles for designing fast and reliable
methods of distributed ML training deployed over wireless systems with diverse
hardware and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.