* 2225248
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Creating Opportunities for Minoritized Students to Participate in Faculty Mentored Research
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Melanie Bocanegra, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,300,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 3 Institutional Transformation Project
(ITP) aims to establish the evidence- and equity-based research training hub
ESTUDIO: Excellence in Student Training for Undergraduates, Diversity Initiative
Office at the California State University, Northridge (CSUN). ESTUDIO – which
means “a study” or “research” in Spanish – will allow CSUN to scale the high-
impact practice (HIP) of undergraduate research and create opportunities for
students to engage in this HIP, while also centering mentoring as part of
faculty life and bolster capacity and professional development for mentors. The
evidence is unequivocal that undergraduate research under competent mentorship
can support the success of all students and significantly diminish or eliminate
equity gaps in STEM. This study aims to combine decades-long experience with
HIPs and evidence in the literature to create ESTUDIO as a permanent and
sustainable campus-wide entity that serves the CSUN STEM community of ~6,000
minoritized students and 500 faculty. By expanding, deploying, and testing an
asynchronous and synchronous infrastructure of evidence-based training modules
and certificates rooted in an equitable theoretical foundation, this project
aims to reach a large community of practitioners, close pervasive and persistent
equity gaps, build equitable mentorship capacity, and disseminate content and
models to appropriately scale and duplicate these efforts at other
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are to: 1) scale the HIP of
research for all undergraduate STEM students; 2) promote and center equity-based
mentorship in faculty retention and tenure; 3) using a theoretical construct,
create new knowledge and models that can be adopted by HSIs of varying sizes and
means. This project aims to co-create ESTUDIO at CSUN as a campus-wide entity
and expand (to ~80) thoroughly tested and efficacious synchronous (in-person,
online, and hybrid) undergraduate STEM training modules and to create equity-
based and relevant certificate programs for CSUN students and faculty mentors.
Approximately 40% of modules and certificates will be converted to an online,
adaptive, and asynchronous modality to reach a broad audience and allow for
appropriate dissemination. This work will involve support for research projects
conducted by four faculty fellows who are emerging STEM and STEM education
scholars at CSUN. Together, the investigators and faculty fellows will also
study institutional level program implementation processes and metrics to
determine: 1) the required minimum viable version of ESTUDIO with most impact
and transportability; 2) effective approaches to reducing the gap between
faculty expectations and students needs; and 3) the path to creating student-
centered and mentorship-aligned retention and promotion criteria. The broader
impact of this work is to catalyze a cultural shift at CSUN that will serve as a
model for other HSIs, including several HSI campuses in the CSU system, serving
over 500,000 students. This aligns with NSFs HSI Program, which aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.