* 2225077
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: BioFI- Biodiversity Forecasting Initiative to Understand Population, Community and Ecosystem Function Under Global Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Efthymios Nikolopoulos, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 11/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

There is an urgent need to understand how biodiversity on the planet will
change. This requires predicting which plant species are at risk of extinction.
It also requires understanding the responses of as many species as possible to
future climate conditions. This knowledge is essential to ensure the
continuation of ecosystem services that contribute to human well-being. This
project- the Biodiversity Forecasting Initiative (BioFI)- increases our
knowledge of Earth's biodiversity and advances our ability to forecast
biodiversity and biosphere functioning almost anywhere on the planet. In light
of emerging environmental challenges and the rise of big data, demand for
programming skills and data literacy will continue to increase. This project
enhances the future of biodiversity science by training the next generation of
scientists in tools for analyzing global biodiversity data sources. One
education and training outcome is the development and delivery of an open-
source, multi-modal, multi-level curriculum in the emerging field of
Biodiversity Data Science. Additionally, this project provides direct training
and mentoring for several graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BioFI focuses on changes in plant species' abundance,
traits, and geographic distribution which impact ecosystem function. This
project brings together ecologists, environmental engineers, data scientists,
and conservation stakeholders to integrate a variety of biodiversity data
sources. BioFI provides the data and computational scaffolding to integrate
biological and environmental disciplines to produce accurate predictions of
future biodiversity trajectories. BioFI enables scientists to plan how to
respond to disasters such as droughts and fires. BioFI leverages immense
biodiversity and Earth observation data that provide global coverage and wide
taxonomic scope. BioFI allows scientists to: (i) forecast the short-term and
long-term consequences of biodiversity change; (ii) understand how potential
changes in biodiversity will impact human well-being (ecosystem services that
impact forestry, water supply, flood prevention, agriculture, and disease risk)
and (iii) expedite our ability to plan for effective
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.