* 2226623
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Animal Management and the Development of Social complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Arbuckle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 5,548.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the roles and impacts of
human-animal interactions on early urbanization and state development. Despite
the significant impact of human-animal relationships on the development of urban
societies and early states, animal economies have been comparatively
understudied, and often oversimplified, compared to other economic spheres.
Within this project, researchers investigate the types of human-animal
interactions that facilitated the development of one of the world’s first urban
and imperial societies. Combining rigorous empirical analyses and an innovative
theoretical framework, this project expands upon traditional models of
urbanization and political and economic power. Applying an innovative
theoretical framework that emphasizes heterogeneity in urban and state
societies, researchers acknowledge the agency of diverse communities within
early cities by highlighting the existence of multiple co-existing systems of
animal management resulting from diverse community-specific needs. This “low
power” approach to urban animal economy complicates traditional top-down
narratives, de-centers the state, and is widely applicable to the study of urban
and imperials landscapes in multiple regions of the world. Additionally, the
project itself promotes international cooperation and scholarly connections
between academic institutions in the United States and multiple international
collaborators. Zooarchaeological training will also be provided to archaeology
students participating in the excavation, facilitating the development of a
methodological specialization that is in demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
this project, researchers investigate the complex agropastoral programs and
geographically expansive economic networks that managed human-animal
interactions in early urban and state societies. The project provides a new
understanding of the economic networks that met the specific needs of early
urban communities and institutions, including subsistence, industry, and
ideologically motivated animal provisioning. Researchers will investigate the
systems that managed these human-animal interactions through the targeted
analysis of archaeological animal bones. Specifically, researchers ask, how were
animal economies structured and how did human-animal relationships impact urban
and state development? Using a combination of zooarchaeology (i.e., the study of
archaeological animal bones), isotope analysis (i.e., the chemical analysis of
archaeological animal bones and teeth), and historical and iconographic
comparison, researchers will investigate 1) specialized animal economies on a
micro- (e.g., households) and macroscale (e.g., city districts), 2) the
geographic scale of animal provisioning, and 3) the development of the city’s
economies from an independent kingdom into the imperial capital. Framed using an
innovative “low power” model of urban animal economy, highlighting multiple co-
existing networks designed to meet the specific needs of diverse communities and
institutions within the urban landscape, this project provides a novel framework
to the study of urban economies and the maintenance of urban and imperial
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.