* 2226407
* Collaborative Research: Disciplinary Improvements: Repeto: Building a Network for Practical Reproducibility in Experimental Computer Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Carl Maltzahn, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 929,913.00

The Repeto project will foster community practices to make reproducibility a
part of mainstream research and education activities in computer science. The
project seeks to understand the cost/benefit equation of reproducibility for the
computer science systems community, the factors that make reproducibility
feasible or infeasible, as well as isolate factors (be they technical or usage
oriented) that make practical reproducibility of experiments difficult. This
research coordination network will develop a range of activities from teaching
methodology for packaging experiments for cost-effective replication; using
reproducibility in teaching; collaboration with reproducibility initiatives
sponsored through conferences and institutions; community events emphasizing
repeating or replicating experiments such as hackathons, competitions, or
rankings; fostering repositories of replicable experiments and monitoring their
usage/replication; to reporting on state of art and emergent requirements for
the support of practical reproducibility. The outcomes of the proposal will be a
collection of computer science experiments replicable on open platforms, an
understanding of how much and to what extent they are used in mainstream
research and education activities via relevant metrics, as well as a series of
reports on current enablers and obstacles towards mainstream use of
reproducibility in computer science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Replicable
experiments will be created using platform programmability tools including the
Chameleon environment and associated software such as CHI, Trovi, and Jupyter
notebooks. This platform programmability approach allows experimenters to
express complex experimental topologies in repeatable and persistent ways.
Combining platform programmability with executable notebooks will allow
investigators to capture the full experimental process for subsequent
replication by other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the CISE
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the CISE Computer
and Networked Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.