* 2226154
* BRITE Synergy: Seismic Cracking of Embankments and Earth Dams
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Antonio Bobet, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 394,302.00

The safety of embankments and earth dams relies on an adequate assessment of
seismically-induced deformations. When subjected to earthquake loading,
embankments and earth dams may settle, deform laterally and longitudinally, and
may exhibit cracking in the longitudinal and/or transverse directions. Cracks
are considered one of the most hazardous consequences of strong earthquake
shaking on earthen dams, as they can lead to piping failure due to increased
seepage and internal erosion through the cracks. Observed cracks in earth dams
after an earthquake are most often associated with tensile stresses and strains
resulting from earthquake-induced permanent deformations. Current methods to
estimate earthquake-induced cracking seem inadequate, given the widespread
damage observed in thousands of dams after the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. The
research is geared at advancing our understanding of the cracking processes in
embankments and earth dams during an earthquake and at providing improved tools
for practitioners. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable
Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Synergy project aims at proving the hypothesis
that static analyses may provide information on the location and size of
cracking caused by earthquakes but challenges the current standard of practice
of performing two-dimensional plane strain analyses to estimate transverse
cracking on earth embankments and dams. The work will not only benefit
geotechnical and dam engineering, but society at large. An important outcome of
the work is an updated database of case studies, as well as guidelines and
protocols for collection of future information. The research will also benefit
other fields such as mining engineering, e.g., tailing dams in seismic areas and
will contribute to increasing infrastructure
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research will be
accomplished through a number of synergistic activities that aggregate
disconnected work, verify or validate unproven assumptions and perceptions and
new work to reach generalizations such that the overall outcome is more than the
sum of its parts. The work will combine existing information in the form of case
studies and empirical recommendations, and outcomes from numerical simulations.
It will expand and modernize databases, update and improve empirical methods,
and perform detailed dynamic three-dimensional numerical analyses of actual
dams, namely Lenihan Dam in California and Gatun Dam in the Panama
Canal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.