* 2226202
* Eager: Novel MXene nanocomposites based 3D printed flexible sensors for noninvasive health monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Danling Wang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 83,590.00

Modern medicine and health management highly demand novel noninvasive techniques
for rapid disease detection and early screening. The development of low cost,
portable and reliable devices for analyzing disease-related volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), for example, acetone, the biomarker of diabetes, in human
breath has been a both attractive and competitive frontier in medical
diagnostics, therapy control, and health management. The great progress in the
synthesis of advanced materials, especially nano-structured materials, and the
invention of new manufacturing techniques provide an opportunity to design and
fabricate advanced medical devices that can do noninvasive diagnosis, are
inexpensive and portable, and are therefore suitable for use at home or clinics.
Two-dimensional transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXene) are an emerging
family of nanomaterials which hold great promise in enhancing the performance of
electric devices in view of their multi-layered, porous structures, high
surface-to-volume ratio, rich and tunable surface chemistry and excellent
conductivity. 3D printing is a versatile technique which offers a simple, less
material-wasting strategy for the rapid and straightforward prototyping of
bespoke 3D architectures. The combination of sensing material, MXene
nanocomposites and 3D printing may potentially lead to advanced, scalable, low-
cost, and high-performance sensing devices for daily health monitoring and early
disease screening. Along with the scientific contribution, the project will also
promote undergraduate and graduate education through expanding material science
curriculum in Engineering and creating undergraduate research positions
targeting American Natives and female students, and benefit K-12 students via
local non-profit organization, uCodeGirl and Nature
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an advanced breath
acetone sensor constructed with nanocomposite of K2W7O22 (KWO) nanowires and
layer structured Ti4C3 MXene nanosheets, in which KWO serves as the sensing
material and MXene functions to not only enhance the sensor performance as the
supporting material but also make the sensing material become 3D printable and
accordingly enable the sensor device to gain a desired 3D architecture with an
enhancement in the repeatability, flexibility and stability. The primary goal of
the project is to deliver a novel breath analysis-based sensor device for daily
diabetes health monitoring. The research will involve (1) the synthesis of 1D/2D
KWO/Ti4C3 MXene nanocomposite sensing materials that demonstrate satisfactory
sensitivity and selectivity in detecting breath acetone, (2) the development of
a formulation of KWO/Ti4C3 nanocomposite ink for the fabrication of acetone
sensors with controllable pattern and 3D architecture via direct ink writing
(DIW), and (3) the formation of a prototype of breath acetone sensor that
features high sensitivity, excellent selectivity, high signal to noise ratio,
unprecedented signal reliability, room-temperature operation, scalable
manufacturing, low cost and being portable. Success in this project will provide
a guidance to the design and fabrication of functional nanomaterial-based gas
sensors which utilize 3D architecture to boost sensor performance and use 3D
printing technique to achieve mass production and reproducible fabrication of
the sensor devices. The approach can be readily extended to other applications,
such as sensors for pandemic prevention, affordable life-time medical devices
for chronic diseases management, scaffold sensors for cancer biomarker
detection, and air/water/food quality control for long-term health
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.