* 2226971
* Conference: US-Taiwan Workshop on Smart and Connected Communities, Agriculture, and Cyber-Physical Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jonathan Sprinkle, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,988.00

This project supports the coordination of a series of workshops and meetings to
explore deeper scientific collaborations between researchers from Taiwan and
researchers in the United States in areas related to Smart &amp; Connected
Communities and related disciplines. The meetings will be arranged in
conjunction with the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office (TECRO)
in the United States. A significant challenge with international collaboration
is to go beyond the matchmaking phase, in order to encourage deeper
collaboration that could lead to new discoveries.The proposed effort takes place
over several distinct phases: (1) a virtual meeting between US and Taiwanese
participants, aimed at discovering opportunities to start meaningful
collaborations that could result in deeper engagement; (2) international
collaboration through existing funding mechanisms, based on exchange of data or
replication of results to build confidence in collaboration mechanisms; (3) an
in-person workshop that allows collaborating teams to present their efforts from
Phase 2; and (4) planning for funded engagements between researchers based on
promising lines of inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual workshop
explores, over 2 evenings, similarities between efforts taking place in Taiwan
and the United States along the lines of Smart &amp; Connected Communities,
Cyber-Physical Systems, and Smart Agriculture. This (virtual) workshop will
include a discussion of the scope of the collaboration led by NSF and TECRO,
brief introductions of researchers, and then breakout sessions where researchers
explore how their research could be deepened through cross-pacific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.