* 2226270
* Functional characterization of the enzyme dipeptide interaction network and its role in the regulation of Arabidopsis carbon metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* aleksandra skirycz, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 471,281.00

Metabolism drives the life-sustaining chemical reactions that provide energy and
building blocks for plant growth and function. The goal of this project is to
investigate how a class of small-molecule compounds called dipeptides control
the activity of the central carbon metabolism of plants. This research may lead
to innovation in the form of dipeptide-based strategies for improving plant
fitness and perhaps generate knowledge that can be used in human and animal
health. This project will provide research training for high school students,
undergraduate students and post-doctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
its rapid and reversible nature, small-molecule regulation of key enzymatic
activities is vital to controlling metabolic fluxes. Systematic identification
of regulatory metabolite-enzyme interactions remains one of the grand challenges
in metabolism research. This research aims to systematically characterize the
newly discovered enzyme-dipeptide interaction network and its role in regulating
central carbon metabolism in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. To elucidate
the metabolic consequences of the studied enzyme-dipeptide interactions, the
research will exploit a combination of in vitro bimolecular binding assays,
characterization of enzymatic activities, comprehensive metabolomic analysis of
steady-state metabolite levels, and 13C metabolic flux analysis after dipeptide
treatments. The results of these assays will be overlaid with dipeptide
accumulation patterns to demonstrate the physiological relevance of the
identified interactions. The basic knowledge accrued through this project will
shed light on one of the central questions in biology: how organisms regulate
their metabolism as they adapt to the environment. The research will
characterize a hidden world of largely uninvestigated enzyme-dipeptide
interactions, as well as their role in the critical yet poorly understood
regulatory nexus of protein degradation and
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.