* 2226797
* I-Corps:  Software that predicts which undergraduates are at risk of dropping out or requiring more than four years to graduate
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Elise Demeter, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial intelligence (AI)-based technology to enhance the
understanding of college student success and how to help students align their
financial resources and academic plans. The proposed technology advances
techniques in data engineering, machine learning, and visualization, and may
enable colleges and universities to leverage their massive student academic and
financial records to support students’ success in more sophisticated, targeted
capacities. The proposed technology may help higher education institutions
achieve strategic goals for increasing graduation rates, improving time-to-
degree completion, and eliminating equity gaps in graduation outcomes for low-
income students. Students using the proposed technology may benefit from
insights gained into the runway of eligibility for federal financial aid,
allowing students to make more informed and efficient degree planning choices,
graduate before exhausting lifetime aid eligibility, and limit their educational
expenses and debt by reducing their overall time to degree. More individuals may
earn baccalaureate degrees in less time and with less overall expense and
student debt, and be ready to contribute better to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an intelligent system that incorporates financial, academic, and demographic
data to accurately predict whether undergraduates are likely to graduate from
4-year institutions and if they will graduate within four years or more. The
proposed technology has been designed to identify students who are at increased
risk in terms of their financial health, including students on a trajectory to
exhaust lifetime-limited federal financial aid resources before graduating. In
addition, the developed scripts for data cleaning and feature engineering may be
easily changed to fit a given university’s data models. Undergraduates may be
able to use the proposed advanced web and mobile technologies to wisely plan
their academic coursework in order to graduate before their financial aid runs
out, resulting in improved academic outcomes. A full stack model of development
characteristics includes software with layers developed based on the business
requirements and processes while complying with flexible technology capable of
working alone or integrating with existing enterprise software, secure
integration of machine learning algorithms through microservices, and the
ability to scale to large and small school sizes and integrate with different
enterprise information systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.