* 2226042
* CNS Core: Small: Migration to Next-Generation Multi-Band Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sifat Ferdousi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Optical networks are deployed worldwide to carry Internet traffic over high-
speed optical paths. As traffic demands continue to grow exponentially,
especially with the emergence of next-generation 5G/6G networks, optical
spectrum is becoming scarce, leading to a “capacity crunch”. With the inevitable
exhaustion of the single-mode fiber’s C band (around which, for the past
decades, optical communication systems flourished due to its minimum
attenuation), operators are now looking for solutions to address this capacity
crunch. Exploitation of other transmission bands beyond C band – i.e., the
entire low-loss spectrum encompassing O, E, S, C, and L bands – can utilize the
full potential of a standard single-mode fiber. This research will investigate
novel strategies for brownfield migration from current C-band-only networks
towards next-generation multi-band optical networks. This project will develop
new insights on multi-band network technology and related science, leading to
substantial improvement in next-generation network design and operations. This,
in turn, will help improve our national and global network infrastructures and
provide benefits for Internet users in future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-
band technology holds enormous potential towards capacity enhancements in our
networks, but also brings with it unique challenges and complexity. Migration
from C-band to multi-band systems will require careful planning to efficiently
exploit the performance variations across different bands. This project tackles
two main research areas associated with gradual migration from C-band to multi-
band systems. First, it will investigate efficient brownfield migration
strategies from C to C+L bands and study the physical-layer modeling challenges
during the upgrade. The project will systematically address critical questions
for multi-period batch upgrade, such as which and how many network links and
nodes should be upgraded, and when… by considering network topology, traffic
profile, network load, etc. The project will also investigate how to efficiently
upgrade beyond C+L bands and different orders and configurations for upgrade
scenarios will be explored (e.g., C only, C+L, C+L+S, C+S+E, etc.). It will
investigate different band-selection techniques based on transmission
characteristics of each band, and will explore which and how many bands are
commercially viable for upgrade at which network locations. For efficient
connection provisioning in a multi-band network, different band-assignment
strategies will be studied considering connection requirements and band
availability (as availability of different bands may vary in different parts of
the network). This project will expand the critical physical-layer modeling
across multiple bands to address the additional complexities imposed by
different bands. The project has plans to involve undergraduates and
underrepresented groups in the research effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.