* 2226953
* RUI: Sugar-mediated remodeling of the E. coli transcriptome and its impact on biofilm growth and composition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lisa Ryno, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 534,002.00

Antibiotic resistance has reduced the efficacy of many antibiotics and led to
livestock culling, compromised crops, and increased human deaths. Resistance to
antibiotics is heightened when bacterial cells are in the sedentary, biofilm
state. The overall goal of this project is to identify environmental conditions
that lead to defects in biofilm formation and/or an increase in the antibiotic
sensitivity of biofilm-associated bacteria. Research and education will be
integrated through a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) in an
upper-division biochemistry laboratory that has approximately 40 students
annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of the project is that
different sugars remodel the bacterial transcriptome to modulate biofilm growth
and the composition of the extracellular substances surrounding cells in the
biofilm. A comprehensive analysis of the influence of monosaccharides on E. coli
biofilm formation and composition has not been conducted at either phenotypic or
transcriptomic levels. To understand how sugars might be influencing biofilm
growth and composition, two methods of inquiry will be pursued. First, the
influence of environmental monosaccharides on biofilm growth and composition
will be measured using well-established UV-visible growth and biochemical assays
and confocal scanning laser microscopy. Second, the effect of these
monosaccharides on the transcriptomes of planktonic and biofilm bacteria will be
characterized using RNA-seq and putative targets will be confirmed with deletion
studies. The unique focus on examining both growth and composition will provide
the field with additional information about how specific pathways interact to
change the extracellular matrix, which relates to the heartiness of biofilm.
Understanding the influence of various sugars on these processes will reveal how
different carbon metabolic pathways are interlinked with biofilm formation and
composition. Moreover, leverage points will be identified in these linked
metabolic and signaling pathways that could work synergistically to eradicate or
promote biofilm formation. This work will provide the greater scientific
community with a list of pathways and individual proteins to target, which will
augment the leads medicinal chemists can use to develop new antibiotics and
provide materials chemists with a starting point for developing antibiofilm
compounds for coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.