* 2226164
* Collaborative Research: DARE: A Personalized Assistive Robotic System that assesses Cognitive Fatigue in Persons with Paralysis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 218,324.00

With the advancements in robotics and artificial intelligence, assistive robotic
systems have the potential to provide support and care to people with Spinal
Cord Injury (SCI). As robots become more widespread, like today’s mobile phones,
assistive robots can play a significant role in assisting persons with
disabilities at home, improving independence and everyday quality of life. For
example, a robot may assist an individual with motor impairments to perform a
task, such as preparing lunch. Current research focuses on ensuring safe human-
robot cooperation in industrial environments, which will not threaten or harm
the physical health of the human teammate. However, there is limited research on
understanding the cognitive or mental state of a human who cooperates with an
assistive robot daily for performing activities of daily living. This is
important for developing effective, intuitive, and personalized human-robot
cooperation. The objective of this project is to design and develop an end-to-
end personalized assistive robotic system, called iRCSA (Intelligent Robotic
Cooperation for Safe Assistance), to recognize, assess, and respond to a human’s
cognitive fatigue during human-robot cooperation. The focus of the system is on
human-robot cooperative tasks where a human with SCI and a robot cooperate
during daily tasks (e.g., cooking). Students who have experienced SCI will be
involved in every stage of the project, to ensure the acceptability and
usability of the proposed system. In addition to the significant impact of this
research on the improvement of life independence for persons with disabilities,
the project includes the development of new university courses for assistive
technologies and summer school programs for K-12 students, so that students gain
knowledge on robotics and assistive technologies for their prospective studies
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop an end-to-end framework for online cognitive fatigue
assessment as part of the proposed Human-Robot Cooperation (HRC) system, which
constitutes a breakthrough in the ability to effectively integrate the human
component in the adaptation (personalization) of assistive robots and address
key HRC challenges through these three thrusts: (a) The development of a novel
human-technology system for online cognitive fatigue assessment using multimodal
data; (b) the development of an adaptive robotic system for personalized
interaction based on cognitive fatigue assessment; and (c) an experimental
testbed of HRC scenarios to enable HRC, machine/deep learning, and robotic
systems computational advances. In addition to detecting a user’s cognitive
fatigue, the HRC system assesses the level of cognitive fatigue severity so that
new methodologies can be designed to provide personalized robotic interactions
based on the user’s state of cognitive fatigue. A participatory action research
approach will be followed involving students with motor impairments throughout
the project. Evaluation of the system will identify system benefits and
weaknesses to improve HRC for persons with paralysis, as well as assess system
usability, reliability, and user experience. Beyond the assistive robotic
applications, the project will advance research in multimodal machine learning
for intelligent online assessment and control in several fields where teaming
between robots and humans is required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.