* 2226463
* EAGER: High temperature superconducting thin film-based inductors and transformers for on-chip power management of 77K CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Subramanian Iyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2024
* USD 219,223.00

There is an increasing trend to operate microelectronics at low temperatures for
both conventional electronics as well as superconducting electronics. At 77K
liquid nitrogen temperatures, CMOS devices can operate at much higher speeds,
and phenomena such as quantum computing can be exploited for more diverse
applications. Cuprate based high temperature superconducting (HTS) materials are
typically grown on ceria substrates. These films have high critical currents
that make them quite useful at temperatures below ~80K. Unfortunately, they
cannot be grown on silicon substrates since their temperatures of growth are too
high for CMOS chips. This project aims to pattern Yttrium Barium and Copper
Oxide (YBCO) available HTS materials into fine wires and magnetic components and
transfer them via thermal compression bonding to silicon substrates and then
separating them from their native substrates for eventual use in 77K CMOS based
electronics. The objective is to design magnetic components such as on-chip
transformers, inductors, and resonant coils for power delivery to conduct
electrical signals with almost zero loss and very low energy. The project will
prove the feasibility to pattern HTS materials into usable wires that can be
applied to silicon chips. The project will educate students and the community on
the processing and implementation of HTS materials for low temperature
electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High temperature superconductors (HTS) have
potential use in low temperature electronics especially for interconnects,
magnetic components such as coils, transformers, and resonators. electronics.
The project proposes to address two main challenges of patterning the HTS films
into wires of micrometer dimensions; and to transfer these patterns to a silicon
substrate for fabrication of inductors, coils, and transformers. HTS films grown
with hetero-epitaxially ceria (Ce2O3) layers on sapphire substates will be
patterned using RIE methods, since the process is widely used for scalability.
Films will be separated from their native substrates either by laser-lift off or
hydrogen implant-based exfoliation and will be thermal compression bonded (TCB)
to the silicon substrate. The transferred patterned films will be characterized
for degradation of superconducting, electrical, and structural properties.
Smoothening techniques will be developed to address the intrinsically rough HTS
surfaces. Magnetic coils and components fabricated will be electrically
characterized at 77K for figures of merit and efficiency and will be compared
with conventional copper interconnects. Successful completion will lay the
foundation for a process to transfer of HTS wires-based interconnects to silicon
chips, with extensive application in low temperature
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.