* 2226908
* Collaborative Research: Machine Learning-assisted Ultrafast Physical Vapor Deposition of High Quality, Large-area Functional Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Xiaofeng Qian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2026
* USD 272,581.00

This grant supports research to produce high-quality, large-area functional thin
films using a machine learning-assisted ultrafast thin film manufacturing
approach. Functional thin films, such as oxides, chalcogenides and nitrides,
have a wide range of applications in semiconductor, communication, and energy
industries. However, conventional methods for scalable manufacturing of
functional thin films are time-consuming and wasteful, relying on solvents and
trial-and-error approaches. The goal of this project is to apply machine
learning to overcome challenges posed by structural and chemical defects
associated with conventional thin film deposition, thereby improve film quality
and manufacturing efficiency. Machine learning accelerates optimization of thin
film growth conditions via training the experimental and computational data and
speeds up the development of thin films with desired functionality. This award
supports fundamental research to enable faster and cost-effective manufacturing
of high-quality and large-area functional thin films for a broad range of
applications in electronics, photonics, and energy conversion. Results from this
project benefit the US economy and society by addressing semiconductor
manufacturing and clean energy challenges facing the nation. This research
involves multiple disciplines including materials science and engineering,
machine learning, and advanced manufacturing. This interdisciplinary approach
increases the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering research
and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The limitations of conventional thin film
deposition are lack of defect control and composition manipulation, long
development time, and material waste. This project applies machine learning to
ultrafast physical vapor deposition to overcome these limitations and
manufacture high quality, large-area functional thin films. In physical vapor
deposition, film thickness, microstructure, chemical composition, and property
can be engineered by tailoring the processing parameters. Closely integrating
machine learning, physical property calculations, and thin film growth
conditions improves film quality, shortens development cycle and reduces
material waste. This research uses machine learning algorithms, such as, linear
and nonlinear regression and Bayesian optimization, to train film growth and
property data generated by experiment and collected from literature. Machine
learning models, in conjunction with in-situ monitoring, are used to optimize
growth conditions such as substrate temperature, deposition time, partial
pressure, and ramping and cooling rates and achieve the targeted electronic and
optical properties at a lower cost and faster development cycle. The machine
learning-assisted scalable manufacturing of functional chalcogenide thin films
not only enriches the materials portfolio for solar energy conversion, but also
advances their applications in electronics and photonics, such as
photodetectors, phototransistors, thermoelectrics, and light emission diodes.
This approach can also be applied to accelerate the development of other
renewable energy materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.