* 2226123
* CAREER: MINDWATCH: Multimodal Intelligent Noninvasive brain state Decoder for Wearable AdapTive Closed-loop arcHitectures
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Rose Faghih, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2025
* USD 394,465.00

Smartwatch-like wearables have enabled seamless tracking of vital signs and
physical activities, but still lack a significant feature: they are currently
unable to provide any information about brain states or to modulate brain
function for optimizing human health and performance. This project aims to make
it possible for wearables to feature such capabilities. Being aware of brain
states is not only extremely valuable in clinical studies but is also crucial to
improving human performance in various everyday life activities. While recording
neural signals directly from the scalp region is possible, it is impractical for
use in everyday life. In order to fill this gap, the goal of this project is to
pioneer a closed-loop brain-aware wearable architecture called MINDWATCH. This
enables (1) decoding multidimensional brain states from noninvasive wearable
devices and (2) applying corrective control. MINDWATCH will transform healthcare
delivery (e.g., aging, autism, dementia) as well as human performance and
productivity enhancement (e.g., online learning, smart workplaces). For
instance, knowledge of mental health and cognitive engagement can enable
detecting if a student is depressed or is not cognitively engaged/learning,
which makes it possible to take corrective action early on. The research is
integrated with educational and outreach activities with an emphasis on
increasing the participation of minorities in science and engineering. These
activities include hosting hands-on STEM K12 events, supervising undergraduate
research interns and capstone senior design projects, creating educational
videos, and interdisciplinary course development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to overcome the barriers to achieving brain-aware wearables by
pioneering a transformative system-theoretic computational toolset for
noninvasive closed-loop wearable architectures that monitor and modulate brain
function without needing neural recordings. The proposed framework will (1)
infer discrete brain-related events in real-world settings, (2) decode
multidimensional latent neurobehavioral states based on inferred brain activity,
and (3) apply robust adaptive control to maintain the neurobehavioral states
within desired ranges. The closed-loop framework will be rigorously validated
using experiments on interactive human-technology environments and mental
health. The proposed research will provide foundational statistical signal
processing and control-theoretic tools for the analysis of multimodal binary and
continuous physiological observations that occur on multiple time-scales. While
the initial focus is on two aspects of brain function, namely mental health and
cognitive engagement, the proposed framework opens up the opportunity to
investigate broader questions in computational
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.