* 2226593
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Effects of Interfacial Properties on Charge Transport in Conducting Organic/Inorganic Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jennifer Heath, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2025
* USD 179,500.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are used
in many applications, such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and flexible
electronics. They also have shown promise for new technologies such as
converting heat into electricity and energy storage. In order to realize their
potential, it is necessary to better understand charge transport. This
interdisciplinary project will study how electrical charge moves through
composites of conducting polymers and nanoparticles. The focus is on controlling
charge transport across interfaces to create materials that are useful for clean
energy technologies. This collaborative project will be performed at two
primarily undergraduate institutions. While achieving the technical goals of the
project, the investigators will also educate the next generation of scientists
in energy conversion and storage concepts and techniques. The project uses
scalable earth-abundant materials and low-cost solution-based manufacturing
approaches. This will facilitate the widespread deployment of technologies that
make use of these composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study enhances understanding of the
physicochemical properties of the interface between components of a
nanostructured conducting organic/inorganic composite and their influence on its
charge transport, by exploring the role of an interfacial term on models of
charge transport and experimentally testing those models. In particular, this
interfacial term illuminates the emergence of composite transport phenomena that
transcend the sum of the individual components. Previous models of electronic
transport in these materials generally neglect interfacial effects by using an
effective-medium approximation to treat the interpenetrating material as a
combination of individual parallel and series phases. By incorporating the
impacts of interfacial area, thickness, and interfacial energy barrier, this
project guides the design of such materials for many applications, with a
specific focus on these materialsâ€™ thermoelectric energy conversion and
capacitive energy storage. At both Reed College and University of Portland,
undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of research, from initial
laboratory setup and theoretical modeling to data analysis, presenting results,
and writing papers. By design, this project uses straightforward solution-based
fabrication and experimental techniques, which makes it particularly accessible
to students who may be new to research and/or newly forming their identities as
scientists. This project directly involves undergraduate students in research
and will indirectly impact many others through improved research infrastructure,
updated laboratory curriculum, and new opportunities for undergraduate thesis
projects. It additionally links fundamental scientific understanding, both
experimental and theoretical, with the engineering of technologies that are
crucial for the future of our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.