* 2226272
* Conference: Elevating Indigenous Knowledges in Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Joseph Gazing Wolf, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,550.00

For all its advances over the last century, ecology is a relative newcomer as a
formal scientific discipline. Ecologists have developed sophisticated methods
and cutting-edge technologies to study the complexities of nature. Even so, the
records they rely on do not go very far back in time, which means that
ecologists have a relatively limited view of natural phenomena. Indigenous
knowledges (IKs), or Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK), in
contrast, provide a much deeper and more holistic perspective on particular
places. These ecological viewpoints allowed Indigenous communities to survive
and thrive for millennia prior to European colonization. The importance of such
knowledge has been illustrated in several well-publicized cases, such as fire
management in forests of the western United States and Australia. Ecologists
have generally not embraced IKs, but that is beginning to change. The central
problem is that most ecologists do not encounter IKs in their training, nor do
they understand the social and ethical challenges in collaborating with
Indigenous communities and knowledge holders. The goal of this workshop is to
build a path to IK for ecologists in a way that benefits both scientific inquiry
and Indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together Indigenous scholars and professionals to discuss how to accelerate
awareness of the roles of IKs to achieve a better understanding of the natural
world and how to do so in a mutually beneficial, reciprocal way. The workshop
will include well-established scholars and professionals, as well as graduate
students and early career individuals. Participants will suggest key elements
that all ecologists should know, and areas of concern, such as Indigenous rights
and sovereignty, knowledge/data sovereignty, cultural respect, and social and
economic issues. Participants will assemble these elements into a draft outline
to be presented to the broader ecological community during an open workshop at
the annual meeting of the Ecological Society of America. The draft outline, plus
feedback from the open workshop will be compiled and disseminated through venues
such as publications, webinars and one-page summaries. These products can be
incorporated into professional development activities for ecologists at all
career stages and will serve as a seed for continued conversations. Equally
important, the resulting products will increase diverse representation and
inclusion in the conduct of scientific research and knowledge creation and will
expand the research capacity of Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.