* 2226107
* CNS Core: Small: Enabling Streaming Analytics at the Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The ability to extract user analytics in a timely manner is of critical
importance for numerous online applications. This includes advertising and
financial applications, but also a growing number of online machine-learning
systems, which depend on analytics triggers to conduct a timely computation.
While it is well-established that online data is most valuable at the time of
arrival, all existing streaming analytics systems assume that the time of
arrival is when a user request reaches a server that a client communicates to.
The key question the project aims to answer is if one can utilize the edge
network infrastructure to early capture and analytically process user
requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable edge-based streaming analytics, the
project proposes semantic cookies, encrypted data structures set by the server
and then kept at the client. Contrary to the state-of-the-art web cookies, the
project aims to plant semantic user information directly into the cookies
themselves. This enables collaborating edge components to analytically process
the user requests. The project proposes a theory and systems to make edge-based
online streaming analytics a reality. The main research thrusts of the proposed
research are (1) revise the online streaming analytics to lay down the
foundation for the proposed system, (2) design, implement, and evaluate the
proposed analytics system, and (3) investigate its security, privacy, and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to make a
significant impact by enabling an edge-based streaming analytics service with
performance properties unattainable by existing systems. This can provide a lead
to a growing number of applications that fundamentally depend on fast analytical
triggers enabled by the proposed system. This projectâ€™s insights, theory, and
algorithms will help in-network streaming analytics become a mainstream service
offered by network operators. Importantly, the project opens the doors to edge
Internet Service Providers and Content Distribution Networks to leverage and
monetize their proximity to clients, in collaboration with cloud providers and
application developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the data associated with this
project, including measurement data, code, and results, will be made publicly
and openly available at http://networks.cs.northwestern.edu/edge-analytics/.
This website will be maintained for the duration of the project, and all the
data will remain available for download from the website for at least five years
after the project is completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.