* 2226418
* Collaborative Research: Disciplinary Improvements: Creating a FAIROS Materials Research Coordination Network (MaRCN) in the Materials Research Data Alliance
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alejandro Strachan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 429,379.00

The MaRCN (Materials research coordination network) will advance and coordinate
FAIR data and support Open Science materials research nationally and
internationally, bridging the fundamental gap between materials data and data-
intensive methods including artificial intelligence and machine learning. The
project will build on a range of planning and preparatory activities including
the MGI (U.S. Materials Genome Initiative) and MaRDA (Materials Research Data
Alliance), a community-based network spanning stakeholders in academia,
industry, and publishing. By building on these initiatives to propose ways of
advancing materials science to allow data to be leveraged in new ways, the MaRCN
will enable the acceleration of materials design and deployment. This project
will address multiple national research goals by advancing critical applications
in renewable energy and sustainability, health, agriculture, energy storage,
quantum computing, and advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MaRCN will
organize its activities around four over-arching themes: Data, Models, Training,
and Impact. Activities undertaken as part of the Data theme include connecting
and mediating the needs of data producers, data users, repository users, and
publishers to make data deposition and access in trusted repositories the norm.
The Models Theme will advance efforts and build community with a particular
focus on the domains of electron microscopy and X-ray science. Training Theme
activities will encompass a large number of convenings, including focus groups
and workshops to seed and grow the network of educators and practitioners fluent
in FAIR principles. The Impacts Theme will integrate and maximize the beneficial
outcomes of the other themes and actively seek to harmonize the projectâ€™s
activities with a large number of intersecting organizations with which the
project is connected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.