* 2226705
* Student Support for the 2022 Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium – An Additive Manufacturing Conference; Austin, Texas; 25-27 July 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Guhaprasanna Manogharan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2023
* USD 49,500.00

This award provides participant support for students to attend the 2022 Annual
International Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium – An Additive
Manufacturing Conference to be held 25-27 July 2022, in Austin, Texas. The
symposium focuses on new research and development activities in additive
manufacturing and 3D printing. The students and faculty present through oral and
poster sessions their latest research results to the additive manufacturing,
advanced manufacturing and broader engineering communities. Priority is given to
students who are women or who come from underrepresented minority groups. This
approach promotes diverse participation at the conference, in the short term,
and in STEM fields, in the long term. This award benefits the nation through the
education of a skilled and diverse manufacturing workforce, which is better
prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges in their chosen
fields. The conference plays an important role in supporting and sustaining the
important field of additive manufacturing/3D printing, a technology that is
pervasive and impacts across all industrial sectors with benefits to society.
This conference is timely because of renewed interest in the U.S in onshoring
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participant support is
expected to benefit the students' professional, scientific and technical
development. Attendance at the conference gives the students and faculty a
broader view of solid freeform fabrication, additive manufacturing and
additive/subtractive hybrid processes, its fundamentals, advanced materials and
processing, advanced characterization and applications. Symposium topics include
fundamentals of additive materials, additive process development,
microstructural analysis, process modeling, monitoring and control, and
specialized topics, such as Hybrid Additive Manufacturing Processes. Attendees
will learn about state-of-the-art research in their technical areas via access
to several technical and professional development talks by leading domestic and
international speakers. Students and young faculty enhance their communication
skills through oral and poster presentations and in-depth discussions of their
work with peers in their technical areas. This interactive experience
significantly broadens student education, increases their enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaints them with expectations for scientific careers, and
exposes them to new approaches for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.