* 2226339
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: PETS: Programmable Zero-Trust Security for Operating Through 5G Infrastructure
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* A.L. Narasimha Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

5G mobile communication technology has been standardized to provide high-speed
Internet connectivity to various devices and support diverse
applications/services. The request for enhanced security is becoming a critical
issue when users such as DoD want to securely operate through the current 5G
infrastructure. The goal of this proposal is to provide the DoD (and any 5G
users and operators) with new, flexible, and programmable zero-trust security
capability when operating through existing 5G infrastructure. This project
provides a solid foundation and collaborative community for existing and future
5G security operation and research. The key broader social impacts and societal
benefits include improved economic outputs, safety, security, privacy, cost of
regulation, liability, interruption protection, and distribution of access. This
multi-institute project includes experts in security, networking/communication,
telecom operation, convergence research, public policy, user study, team
science, and national security applications from multiple academic institutions
(including an HBCU) and industry partners. This project seeks to broaden
participation in the convergence accelerator research by engaging with diverse
stakeholder groups including private and public organizations, decision makers,
and members of the public, particularly under-represented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transitioning from existing research collectively done by
the team, this project proposes to build an innovative programmable zero-trust
security solution called PETS to enable unified, infrastructure-wide, dynamic,
and granular flow-level security control across the entire 5G infrastructure,
including end devices, 5G Radio Access Network (RAN), and 5G core network. Based
on the proposed system, the 5G operators, developers and/or users can easily
write security applications to customize their specific security needs and
realize zero-trust security features. Such new security applications can
continuously maintain and evaluate risks of accesses, and provide finer-grained,
programmable access control and isolation of resources in 5G infrastructure.
This project allows military, government, or critical infrastructure operators
to securely operate through existing 5G infrastructure with respect to either
non-cooperative or cooperative networks. It also enables new innovations in
programming dynamic and intelligent security applications to protect the entire
5G infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.