* 2226198
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 52nd IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN 2022)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Homa Alemzadeh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This project provides funding support for travel grants for students to attend
the 52nd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and
Networks (DSN 2022) to be held in Baltimore, MD on June 27-30, 2022. The
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) is a
premier international conference for presenting the research results, problem
solutions, and insights on new challenges in dependability and security of
computer systems and networks. The 2022 edition of the conference will be
organized around a number of thematic areas of emphasis, which include recently
emerged or emerging areas such as Autonomous Systems, Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS), Distributed ledgers and Blockchain, and Machine Learning and Artificial
Intelligence. The conference will provide various opportunities for student
submission and participation. These opportunities range from full-length
conference and workshop papers to medium-length preliminary contributions
considered by the Student Forum to brief descriptions of early stage research in
the Fast Abstracts category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the
attendance opportunity to students in U.S. universities, who otherwise might not
be able to attend the conference, in particular students from underrepresented
groups, undergraduate and graduate students who are attending the conference for
the first time, and students who might not have a paper or presentation at the
conference. The broader impacts of the project is primarily through the
education students will receive from attending the technical sessions of DSN,
mentoring that they will receive through the Student Forum activities, and
networking opportunities they will receive through numerous different conference
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.