* 2226156
* Collaborative Research: Biomechanics of Epithelial Tissue Homeostasis, Collapse, and Eversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Richard Dickinson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2026
* USD 369,426.00

Assembly and organization of cells into functional tissues is essential to
development and wound healing. Irregular or uncontrolled growth and assembly of
cells leads to pathologies such as tumor formation and cancer. Additionally,
model tissues grown in culture into functional cell clusters called organoids
have been widely used in drug development and regenerative medicine, as well as
in vitro studies of morphogenesis, host-pathogen interactions, and tissue
repair. This award supports a combined experimental and computational project
that will reveal the biomechanical principles that govern the assembly and
organization of cells in epithelial tissue by studying spherical cell monolayers
(called acini), which spontaneously collapse and evert polarity (i.e., where the
acinus turns itself inside out) when induced to become more contractile. The
final everted state is relevant to organoid applications where outer exposure of
the apical surface is desired, and it also resembles acinar gland abnormalities
in cancer. The knowledge gained from this study will be valuable to fundamental
understanding of tissue development as well as control of the structure of
cultured organoids. Thus, this project has broad potential impact on advancing
human health, as the findings will be directly relevant to establishing the
mechanical principles of tissue organization and development. It is also highly
relevant to the biomanufacturing of organoids for drug testing, regenerative
medicine, or models of disease. This project will support the training and
mentorship of diverse graduate and undergraduate students, including students in
the University of Florida Digital Arts program, who will render animations from
three-dimensional imaging of acinus dynamics for outreach and education
purposes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
biomechanics of acinus stability and eversion using a synergistic combination of
experimental and computational approaches. The first objective is to determine
the contributions to cellular stresses that lead to mechanical equilibrium of
the acinus, testing the hypothesis that surface tensions and/or the lumen
pressure are regulated to sustain the acinus at the critical point between
stable and unstable equilibrium states. A three-dimensional vertex-based
mathematical model will be used to model the interacting cell population in the
monolayer, accounting for the surface tensions and curvatures of the apical and
basal cell surfaces and the cell-cell interfacial tension. The model will also
account for the roles of cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion in the surface
forces and interfacial energies. These parameters will be perturbed
experimentally while tracking the 3D morphology of the acinus surfaces via high
resolution confocal microscopy. The second objective is to understand how the
acinus is perturbed from the equilibrium state and driven to contract and evert
to a state of everted polarity, testing the hypothesis that the difference
between and apical and basal surface tensions is the mechanical driving force
for eversion. The eversion process will be simulated using a dynamic
vertex/finite element model accounting for cell contractile and viscous forces,
and it will be experimentally tested by triggering eversion via chemical
perturbations (e.g. actomyosin activation, inhibition of ECM adhesion) and by
laser ablation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.