* 2226952
* I-Corps: Recycled plastic lumber building material replacement for structural lumber
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Rasim Guldiken, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a recycled plastic building material intended as a drop-in
replacement for structural lumber. This proposed material is similar in cost to
lumber and may provide equivalent installation methods, may reduce weight, and
may prevent damage due to rot and insects. The proposed initial application is
the US agricultural fence post market: 206 million linear feet of fencing or 15
million fence posts annually. Using current lumber prices, this market is
estimated to have a current value of $98 million. The softwood sawn dimensional
lumber, the targeted industry, has an approximate market value of $39 billion in
the United States. Based on initial customer interviews, wood fence posts
typically last 10-20 years. The polymers utilized in the proposed material have
a useful life of 30-50 years, significantly reducing future costs for end users.
Additionally, the reduction in wood usage could reduce the 10 million acres of
forest harvested for fence posts each year in the United States. The goal is to
develop a material that directly replaces lumber while utilizing low-cost
recycled materials and providing a similar or reduced price compared to
lumber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a composite material that matches the driving force and withdrawal force of
nails and other fasteners used in wood. The proposed material utilizes an over
jacketing extrusion technique to increase the gross mechanical strength of the
section as well as a hollow composite composed of the proposed materials. The
innovation requires an increase in the coefficient of friction while reducing
the compressive strength to allow for nails to be driven by hand. Over jacketing
extrusion must be reconfigured to allow for coextrusion of the bulk composite
material with macro-reinforcement, which is similar to the reinforcement method
used in reinforced concrete. These requirements must be maintained while
allowing for a hollow section to reduce material costs. The project seeks an
improved understanding of the influence of additives or fillers based on
polymer-based composites. Fillers provide advantages including reduced costs,
increased stiffness, and increased compressive strength, and their usage has
increased in the polymer industry. Futrue activities will focus on the
introduction of fillers for increased friction in mechanically fastened
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.