* 2226025
* III: Small: Predictive Modeling from High-Dimensional, Sparsely and Irregularly Sampled, Longitudinal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,883.00

Longitudinal data resulting from repeated observations from a set of individuals
over time are commonplace in many applications, including health sciences,
learning sciences, social sciences, life sciences, and economics. Such data
present unprecedented opportunities to uncover the relationship between the
time- varying patterns of certain measured variables (features or covariates)
and outcomes of interest e.g., economic meltdown societal unrest, disease onset,
health risk, etc. In real-world settings, the number of variables is often very
large; often only a small subset of variables is recorded at any given time,
resulting in sparse data with a high proportion of missing observations.
Furthermore, such data exhibit complex correlations which if not properly
accounted for, can lead to misleading statistical inferences. Additional
complications arise from the fact that the data exhibit abrupt discontinuities
that are often driven by transitions between states that are not directly
observable (e.g., from "healthy" to "infected"). Large size of data sets demand
methods that are scalable. And in high stakes applications, e.g., healthcare,
human interpretability of the predictive models is of paramount importance. The
project will yield substantial advances over the current state-of-the-art in
scalable machine learning methods for predictive modeling of longitudinal
outcomes from high-dimensional, irregularly sampled, sparse, longitudinal health
data. The open-source implementations of the predictive modeling tools will find
applications in many domains including behavioral, social, environmental,
economic, learning, and health sciences. The project will enhance the research-
based training of a diverse graduate and undergraduate students in Data Sciences
and Computer Science (especially Artificial Intelligence), areas of great
national importance. The educational activities associated with the project will
help equip a diverse cadre of Data Scientists, AI experts, and health sciences,
social sciences, learning sciences, and related areas with state-of-the-art
machine learning tools for predictive modeling from longitudinal data. The
project will produce a new graduate course and course modules, sample projects,
etc. on predictive modeling from longitudinal data to be integrated into Data
Sciences curricula. The project will help introduce students from diverse
backgrounds, including women and underrepresented minorities, to a broad range
of educational, research, and career opportunities in Data Sciences. The broader
impacts of the project will be further enhanced by broad dissemination of all
research results (publications, software, data sets, course
materials).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a family of scalable
deep kernel gaussian process regression algorithms for interpretable predictive
modeling from high dimensional, sparsely and irregularly time sampled,
longitudinal data with complex, a priori unknown correlation structure. The
resulting methods will be able to discover the patterns of transitions between
unobserved or hidden states, account for abrupt discontinuities in outcomes.
They will be able to explain their predictions by learning the underlying
complex correlation structure exhibited by the data and by identifying not only
the variables that drive the predictions, but also the temporal context in which
they do so. The project will rigorously empirically evaluate the resulting
methods with simulated longitudinal data (with different correlation structures,
different missingness mechanisms, different time-dependent variable importance),
several benchmark longitudinal data sets, and, most importantly, deidentified
longitudinal electronic health records data and socio-demographic data from
real-world healthcare applications (in collaboration with clinical
experts).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.