* 2226961
* Conference: Innovative and Ethical Practices and Pedagogies in the Social Sciences: Geospatial Data, Validity and Fairness
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Diana Ter-Ghazaryan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,965.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing a regional
conference focused on ethical, valid, and fair use of data science in the social
sciences. This interdisciplinary conference seeks to generate an in-depth
discussion on the challenges of academiaâ€™s boundaries and corporate need and use
for geospatial data science. This conference will bring together scholars in
several areas including geographic information science, geography, education,
linguistics, humanities, social sciences, and community groups. The conference
will focus on how and what to teach undergraduate students in the area of data
science to assure they can apply data science ethically, accurately, usefully,
and fairly to challenges facing the region of South Florida and across the
nation. An edited series of articles is expected to come from this conference,
thus enabling attendees and non-attendees access to many of the important
aspects covered in this conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
themes of the envisaged conference will focus on pedagogical strategies to teach
the ethical aspects of 1) data collection, 2) data analytics and analysis, and
3) data visualization. Conference contributions will address pressing challenges
in the context of constant and rapid technological advancements, such as
balancing technological and technical learning with conceptual and ethical,
valid, and fair knowledge production. From the applied perspective, the workshop
will also review innovative pedagogies and learning activities that integrate
ethical considerations of validity and fairness into the new ways of storing,
manipulating, analyzing, representing, and sharing data. From a theoretical
perspective, workshop participants will discuss (re)definitions of ethical
issues and brainstorm on key generative terms of geospatial data validity and
fairness. Conference contributions will also survey pedagogical strategies to
teach how geospatial data collection, analysis and visualization might challenge
biases, misinterpretations, and issues of power of government and corporations
in geospatial technologies and data practices that lead to injustice. Finally,
conference contributions will also explore potential alternatives to the common
forms of data collection, analytics and analysis, and visualization, such as
counter-data and participatory approaches to data collection, inductive
visualization, and integration of reflexive and context-sensitive approaches in
geospatial data science. Keynote presentations will include contributions from
social scientists working on ethical geospatial data issues and from local
community organizations. Some issues of focus are gentrification, evictions and
displacement, sea-level rise, systemic racism, disinvestment in public services,
resilience, and preservation of the culturally diverse history of minority
communities in some of the oldest neighborhoods in Miami. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.