* 2226936
* BRITE Pivot: Learning-based Optimal Control of Streamflow with Potentially Infeasible Time-bound Constraints for Flood Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Shaoping Xiao, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 547,101.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award will fund research that enables the intelligent
deployment of optimal strategies for mitigating the damaging effects of rain-
induced flooding, thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity, welfare, and health. Climate change is causing more
frequent extreme weather events, like heavy rains, with disastrous consequences
to infrastructure, public health, and national security. As the population grows
and new urban centers develop, flood mitigation becomes a complex task that
requires high-level coordination, is time critical, occurs in the presence of
uncertainty and lack of full observability, and may be only partially feasible
due to infrastructure constraints. This project will build a control framework
powered by artificial intelligence to operate reservoirs in an optimal way for
regulating streamflow while accounting for incomplete data acquisition,
unpredictable effects of extreme weather, and ethical decision-making. The
results from this research will benefit the scientific communities of hydrologic
systems, control, and robotics, with applications also to intelligent systems
with machine ethics. In addition, this project will provide undergraduate
research opportunities and outreach activities, including educational materials
for K-6 students to learn how climate change affects peopleâ€™s lives, with
emphasis on enhancing diversity, equity, and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to methods for combining physics-informed and recurrent neural
networks to predict the evolution of dynamic systems while also quantifying the
effects of uncertainty, as well as for constructing learning-based control
synthesis algorithms for complex high-level tasks that are temporally
constrained and potentially infeasible in a partially observable environment.
Data collected from US Geological Survey stations will be used to parameterize
hillslope-link hydrologic models for streamflow forecasts. Small model
simulations will then be combined with machine learning techniques to forecast
streamflows with uncertainty quantification. Next, a formal description of the
flood mitigation task that also accounts for lack of observability will be used
to characterize the cost of violating temporal and economic constraints and
ethical preferences. Finally, reinforcement learning techniques will be used to
train a control agent to intelligently accomplish infeasible tasks to the
greatest possible degree. A case study of the flood of 2008 of the Iowa-Cedar
Watershed will be used to demonstrate the model development and control
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.