* 2226311
* MID-INFRARED COLLOIDAL QUANTUM DOTS LEDs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Philippe Guyot-Sionnest, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 384,878.00

The objective of the project is to explore mid-infrared colloidal inorganic
Quantum dot Light Emitting Diodes (QLEDs). For visible light, QLEDs are widely
investigated as a competition to organic LEDs. The solution processing allows
such high volume and area production that either approaches, inorganic quantum
dots or molecular dyes, are revolutionizing the display and lighting
technologies. This project differs in aiming to take advantage of the
specifically inorganic nature of colloidal quantum dots which allows in
principle infrared luminescence, and to start research on mid-infrared QLEDs.
The applications will mostly derive from the fact that the mid-infrared covers
the molecular fingerprint region. As such, a combination of inorganic quantum
dot LEDs and detectors, both made by simple solution processing and printing,
could revolutionize molecular sensing. Example of applications could be sensing
of toxic or greenhouse gases as well as fat or protein content in the food
industry. The project therefore aims to start the exploration of mid-infrared
inorganic quantum dot LEDs, it includes the synthesis of novel bright mid-
infrared semiconductor quantum dots and their incorporation into novel mid-
infrared light emitting diodes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The emission efficiency
of LED scales proportionally to the photoluminescence efficiency of electron-
hole recombination, along with other losses due to poor photon extraction, Auger
effects and leakage current. In principle, inorganic quantum dots should be
efficient mid-IR chromophores, because they have low phonon frequencies and low
electronic density of states. Yet, to date, the record efficiency for a
colloidal quantum dot emitting at 5 microns is only 2%. It is thought that this
is not yet limited by multiphonon processes but instead related to surface and
vibrational absorption from surface or matrix The project will therefore pursue
material synthetic approaches to increase the brightness. In parallel, these new
chromophores will be incorporated into a mid-IR LED by developing new approaches
and borrowing strategies developed for visible QLEDs and the more conventional
mid-infrared III-V epitaxial semiconductor based mid-infrared
LEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.