* 2226255
* CNS Core: Small: Fundamentals of Gait Disorder Assessment with Ubiquitous Wireless Signals
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 135,173.00

Neurological/brain-related gait disorders affect many people and can be
devastating to the mobility, independence, cognition, and self-esteem of an
individual. Thus, early diagnosis and proper monitoring is key to giving an
individual the proper care that can optimize their well-being. Yet, many
individuals seek a medical opinion only after the disease has progressed for a
while. Furthermore, once medical help is sought, many patients miss follow-up
appointments to monitor the progress of their disease under therapy/medication.
The situation can be much worse in impoverished/developing nations (or rural
areas in US), due to the high cost of healthcare and/or lack of it for an
average family. Wireless signals, on the other hand, are ubiquitous these days,
which open up the possibility of using them for sensing and learning about the
environment. This is the main motivation for the proposed work, to introduce a
new mathematical foundation and design methodology that enables everyday RF
signals, such as WiFi, to detect, classify, and monitor gait disorders. The
proposed work can result in a considerable advancement towards developing an
affordable home health system for gait disorder assessment. Such a system can
further work in partnership with medical professionals, for the diagnosis and
monitoring of gait disorders. The project also has an educational component,
targeting K-12 as well as under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research proposes a new foundation for gait disorder assessment with ubiquitous
RF signals. This is a considerably challenging problem, which is divided into
four major tasks. The first major goal proposes a new methodology that can
translate the vast already-available online non-RF gait disorder datasets to RF
data, enabling the creation of a large synthetic gait disorder RF datasets
pertaining to different gait disorders. Such datasets are necessary for a
methodical analysis/design, but currently lacking and prohibitively laborious to
manually collect. The second major task then proposes a new processing
foundation that can mathematically characterize, for the first time, the general
full frequency content of the received signal, and its high-energy epochs,
enabling proper analysis of more complex movements. The third objective then
builds on the previous two to extract rich, efficient, and meaningful features
from the received signal and design a robust machine leaning pipeline for the
detection, classification, and monitoring of gait disorders, with an emphasis on
understanding the feasibility and limitations. Finally, the last objective
validates the proposed foundation with extensive
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.