* 2226850
* MACROSCOPIC PHASE COHERENCE FROM SYNTHETIC INTERLAYER COUPLING  IN VAN DER WAALS FLAT BANDS
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Andrea Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 445,000.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many spectacular physical
phenomena—and useful device—rely on macroscopic quantum coherence. The most well
known example are superconductors, where macroscopic coherence is directly tied
both the absence of electrical resistance as well as the emergence of coherent
degrees of freedom that form the basis for the best developed platforms for
manipulating quantum information. However, macroscopic quantum coherence, in
principle, a much broader phenomenon. This project aims to realize new
modalities of macroscopic quantum coherence in a broad class of materials known
as van der Waals heterostructures. Van der Waals heterostructures consist of
successively laminated two dimensional atomic crystals such as graphene; their
high crystalline perfection and broad range of tunability put a variety of new
quantum coherent states in experimental range. By realizing new states
characterized by macroscopic quantum coherence, this project furthers
understanding of these phenomena and opens new avenues towards quantum
information processing. Synergistic with the research effort is an educational
initiative focused on technical workforce development, implemented through a
summer school for graduate student across physics, chemistry and materials
science working on quantum science related problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this
project is to create a novel quantum bit based on interlayer coherence in a
bilayer exciton condensate. This bit exploits the spontaneous phase coherence
predicted to occur in these systems. Bilayer exciton condensates, first
discovered in semiconductor quantum wells, have recently been shown to exist in
graphene and chalcogenide heterostructures at higher temperatures and under less
demanding experimental conditions—particularly in the absence of magnetic
fields. The research team is using frequency-dependent interlayer tunneling
spectroscopy to directly detect the emergence of macroscopic phase coherence
through the excitonic analog of the AC Josephson effect. This new detection
modality then allows a broad search for macroscopic coherence in a variety of
double layer structures based on band-structure engineered two dimensional
double layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.