* 2226310
* Dynamics of elastic surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Benjamin Davidovitch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,440.00

Natural examples of thin, flexible objects floating at the surface of a fluid
include leaves, fibers, and insects. This award seeks to understand the
phenomena surrounding the process of attachment of these flexible filaments and
sheets to the liquid interface. Apart from advancing the fundamental physics
behind these ubiquitous natural processes, this understanding will lay a
foundation for the use of sheets and filaments as surface barriers that allow
the separation of two liquids. While this surfactant function is traditionally
achieved in technological processes by deploying appropriate molecules or
nanoparticles, using sheets to wrap and protect a liquid cargo, or sequester a
toxic droplet from its surroundings, offers significant advantages. An annual
workshop on pattern formation in fluids and flexible elastic materials, a topic
closely aligned with the themes of this award, will be organized for middle- and
high-school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a joint experimental
and theoretical research to explore dynamics of the adsorption of highly
flexible solid sheets at fluid-fluid interfaces. The proposed research study
novel dynamical aspects of elasto-capillary phenomena on the dynamics associated
with the adsorption of an elastic sheet or filament to a viscous interface.
Addressing the puzzles associated with this essential kinetic step lay bare some
fundamental issues in interfacial dynamics of flexible elements. While previous
studies of fluid-structure interaction have focused on regimes where shear and
capillary forces are balanced by bending moments within a flexible element, this
award will address the important, but unexplored regime of highly bendable
objects where fluid-generated forces are naturally much larger than the bending
rigidity. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the
research and have the benefit of exposure to theoretical and experimental
efforts. In addition, outreach efforts to train both graduate and undergraduate
students in the associated science topics will be conducted by organizing
targeted summer schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.