* 2226501
* Collaborative Research: A Bioinspired Approach towards Sustainable Membranes for Resilient Brine Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wei Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 249,996.00

Many water treatment and industrial processes generate significant amounts of
high-salinity brines including seawater desalination, inland brackish water
desalination, and oil and gas production by fracking. The management of
hazardous high-salinity brines from water desalination plants and oil/gas
production wells has emerged as a global environmental challenge. Membrane
distillation (MD) is a promising technology for the treatment of high-salinity
brines that could reduce the amounts of brine that need to be disposed of while
generating a purified water permeate to support industrial and agricultural
usages. During the last decade, significant progress has been made toward the
development of more efficient MD membranes with high wetting and scaling
resistance for high-salinity brine treatment. However, these membranes are
typically prepared by modifying their surfaces with long-chain per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), which have become priority pollutants due to
increasing concerns about their persistence in the environment, stability, and
toxicity to humans and living organisms. The overarching goal of this project is
to explore the design and fabrication of wetting- and scaling-resistant MD
membranes for brine treatment without the use of PFAS. Inspired by the unique
repellency of springtails towards low surface tension liquids, the Principal
Investigators propose to test the hypothesis that efficient MD membranes, with
both high wetting resistance and high scaling resistance, can be fabricated by
covalent attachment of springtail-inspired supracolloidal structures onto the
surface of a hydrophobic flat sheet membrane. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge to guide the design and fabrication of PFAS-free membrane materials
for robust and efficient brine treatment. Additional benefits to society will be
achieved through outreach and educational activities including the mentoring of
one graduate student at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville and one graduate
student at Colorado State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effectiveness of
membrane distillation (MD) as a brine treatment technology is limited by both
the intrusion of brines into membrane pores (membrane pore wetting) and the
precipitation of minerals on the membrane surfaces (membrane scaling). The goal
of this project is to design and fabricate a new family of biomimetic wetting-
and scaling-resistant MD membranes without using PFAS building blocks. To
advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) proposal to explore new
strategies to modify the surface of a commercially available hydrophobic flat
sheet membrane by covalent attachment of supracolloidal structures that mimic
the overhang texture of springtails and their unique capability to repel low
surface tension liquids. These supracolloidal structures will be formed through
controlled assembly of smaller colloids onto the surfaces of larger colloids
that have overhang structures with negative curvature and non-fluorinated
ligands. The specific objectives of the research are to: 1) Elucidate the design
criteria of supracolloidal structures for wetting resistant membranes, 2)
Characterize and unravel the mechanisms of scaling resistance of the new
biomimetic MD membranes, and 3) Evaluate the treatment effectiveness of the new
MD membranes using model brine mixtures and a high salinity produced water from
an oil and gas production field in Colorado. The successful completion of this
project has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of
new fundamental knowledge and functional materials to advance the development of
PFAS-free MD membranes for efficient and cost-effective treatment of high
salinity brines. To implement the educational and training goals of this
project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) plan to integrate the findings from
this research into existing undergraduate and graduate courses at the University
of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) and Colorado State University (CSU). In addition,
the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at UTK and CSU to launch outreach
activities to recruit and engage high and middle school students from
underrepresented groups with a focus on the utilization of bioinspired materials
to improve water sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.