* 2226555
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Building Resilient and Secure 5G Systems (BRASS)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Ang Cui, Red Balloon Security Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 682,189.00

5G wireless communications technologies currently in development rely on a wide
variety of devices, including base stations, radios, and end user devices. Most
of these devices contain a number of different processors, each running complex
firmware, each potentially vulnerable to cyber attacks. The Building Resilient
and Secure 5G Systems (BRASS) project tackles the challenge of low-level
firmware exploitation of 5G devices, and thereby prevent major classes of
attacks. The main research challenge to be targeted in BRASS by the performer
Red Balloon Security (RBS) is: How does one provide security on a 5G host in a
diverse supply chain environment with multiple vendors and unknown yet-to-be-
discovered vulnerabilities almost certainly present in the firmware of the 5G
devices – particularly, given the challenge of extreme diversity of firmware
formats, and frequent lack of access to source code and/or hardware design
information? Currently, addressing these challenges requires significant per-
device, per-processor, and per-firmware reverse engineering effort by an expert.
The BRASS project will research methods to automate and accelerate the
integration of passive and active firmware protections to platforms in critical
and vulnerable environments. Leveraging Red Balloon Security’s (RBS) experience
in commercializing its firmware security solutions, BRASS will not only result
in a prototype that addresses anticipated Department of Defense (DoD) mission
scenarios and can be transitioned into DoD operational use, but which can also
create protections that 5G Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) would want to
incorporate into their products. Given its focus on addressing the challenge
presented by the diversity of 5G devices, BRASS would support RBS's broader goal
of providing world-class protections to a broad class of cyber-physical system
(CPS) embedded firmware. BRASS improvements to RBS’s core firmware analysis and
modification toolchain will be made publicly available, enabling a variety of
firmware analysis, improvement, and hardening
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red Balloon Security (RBS) has pioneered and
successfully deployed novel, host-based embedded firmware defense technologies
capable of preventing and/or detecting large classes of cyber attacks, including
ones exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities. These capabilities are merged into the
candidate firmware using RBS's Open Firmware Reverse Analysis Konsole (OFRAK)
toolkit, which does not require access to source code. In BRASS, RBS would: 1)
apply firmware protections to baseband firmware on the end-user devices,
securing them in the context of arbitrary networks (tracks G.1, G.2, G.3); 2)
apply firmware protections to the platform and radio front-end firmware in the
5G infrastructure devices, without affecting their network functionality (tracks
G.2 and G.3); and 3) use OFRAK's autotomy capabilities to remove the code
implementing non-essential 5G features, and thus all vulnerabilities that code
could contain (track G.3 tailored networks not requiring a complete 5G standard
implementation). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase 1, RBS will leverage a team with
multidisciplinary proficiency to: 1) refine the requirements for its technology
based on the DoD mission scenarios and needs; 2) continue its ongoing dialogues
with 5G OEMs, such as Ericsson, Nokia, and Parallel Wireless, and to include at
least one of them in its Phase 2 team; and 3) demonstrate a proof-of-concept
prototype of 5G firmware protections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RBS will target 5G
firmware to: 1) perform a security assessment to highlight security gaps,
vulnerabilities, and design flaws; 2) develop a design document and proof of
concept describing the new firmware defense capabilities; 3) deliver a feature-
complete prototype integrated on target 5G firmware; and 4) demonstrate the
prototype’s security efficacy against an exploit in a 5G test
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.