* 2226389
* I-Corps: Neutral pH aqueous organic redox flow battery for grid energy storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Dawei Feng, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of grid-scale energy storage. As electric grids begin to rely on
intermittent solar and wind resources for clean energy generation, energy
storage capacity must be integrated concurrently. Studies have demonstrated the
need for long-duration (8+ hour) energy storage beyond the capabilities of
current lithium-ion battery technologies. The proposed solution is a sustainable
and affordable flow battery technology that wmay ultimately facilitate
economical and reliable renewable energy integration for all communities (e.g.,
urban cities, off-grid areas, low-income housing, and large
corporations/industries), ensuring environmental justice and energy
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
flow batteries storing energy in liquid phase chemicals to permit scalable and
long-duration energy storage. This flow battery technology utilizes molecularly
engineered organic molecules dissolved in pH neutral water. There is minimal
fire risk during operation and low corrosivity if spillage occurs. The
technology uses sustainable active materials that can be produced domestically
at low-cost. The technology seeks to provide improved economics with round-trip
energy efficiency and enhanced volumetric energy density to limit the footprint
of the battery. This technology may allow for long-term reliability for a highly
variable intermittent renewable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.