* 2226740
* SitS: Environmentally-benign sensors for the detection of nitrogen and foraging for nitrogen in soil
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jessica Winter, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,033,217.00

This project will develop new sensing technologies to monitor and study nitrogen
foraging by soil microbes that support crop plants. Next to carbon, nitrogen is
the nutrient most necessary to all living organisms. Nitrogen is needed to
produce the building blocks of life (e.g., DNA, proteins), and most nitrogen in
aboveground living organisms is sourced from plants. To provide nitrogen for
crops, worldwide in 2019, 107 million tons of nitrogen fertilizer were applied
to agricultural fields. Yet less than half of applied nitrogen reaches crop
plants, and much of the rest is converted by soil microbes into other forms of
nitrogen, including gasses like nitrous oxide (N2O) that make significant
contributions to global change. Increased understanding of how soil microbes
forage for nitrogen is critical to sustainable agriculture and global change
mitigation efforts. This proposal will develop non-destructive imaging
technologies that sense nitrogen in soil and release nitrogen fertilizers in
response to soil microbial signals. These tools will be used to assess nitrogen
foraging by beneficial fungi that support crop plants. This project will enhance
workforce development by training graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research through a Team Science course. This research will be
integrated with teaching through educational modules for students in mass and
energy balances, microbiology, and analytical chemistry courses, as well as
providing senior chemical engineering design challenges. Knowledge from this
work will be disseminated to the broader scientific community through a workshop
at an international meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop new
sensing technologies to monitor nitrogen in soils and apply them to study
foraging of a model, focal microbe (arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi). Sensing
technologies will be based on non-destructive Raman spectroscopy probes that
sense nitrogen and hydrogels that sense compounds secreted by the AM fungi,
resulting in nitrogen release. This research establishes the foundational
knowledge and engineering design principles to support development of these
technologies and establishes a foundation for future closed loop devices that
would be capable of sensing nitrogen levels and releasing nitrogen on demand.
This research has three objectives to: 1) Develop Raman probes that detect
different forms of nitrogen in soil, 2) Evaluate foraging by AM fungi for
different forms of nitrogen, and 3) Use an iterative approach to develop
hydrogels that coat probes and release nitrogen when soil organisms are
detected. Specifically, two sensors will be developed (Raman and hydrogel) that
can be used independently or together to detect a biological function related to
soil chemicals. The knowledge generated from this research could impact many
fields. For example, in situ detection of nitrogen or nitrogen foraging has
applications for precision farming. Raman probe nitrogen sensors could identify
different nitrogen forms in soil spatially, in real time, and sensing hydrogels
could release nitrogen on demand to fungi or plants based on their signaling
molecules, potentially minimizing applied nitrogen loss in agricultural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.