* 2226312
* Cross-Cutting Improvements:  The Development of a Geospatial Big-Data Infrastructure Supporting Socially and Environmentally Relevant Spatial Decision-Making and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Timothy Mulrooney, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,135,805.00

This research coordination network will foster GIS (geographic information
systems) and open data science support for faculty and student researchers in a
regional cluster of HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and Universities), MSI
(minority serving institutions), and local communities. The project will be led
by a team of researchers across multiple departments in the newly formed College
of Health and Science (CHAS) at North Carolina Central University together with
three other minority serving institutions in the region. This research
coordination network will serve both the regional and larger scientific
communities by advancing open science practices and principles in the
development and deployment of data infrastructure and services needed to support
the use of geospatial data in socially and environmentally relevant research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geospatial data analysis has been proven to
advance the understanding of social determinants of health affecting COVID-19
incidence rates, as well as a wide variety of other socially and environmentally
relevant research issues. This project will coordinate the creation of a large
number of new GIS data layers and make them available to the larger
multidisciplinary research community in accordance with FAIR data sharing
principles together with rich, standards-based and machine-readable metadata.
Georeferenced data from disparate sources and disciplines will be enriched and
normalized by standardized descriptive information based on a metadata schema,
driven by the community of experts and intended end-users and compatible with
international and federally mandated ISO 19115 standard and utilizing metadata
profiles developed and used by state and local
governments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources and the HBCU Excellence in Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.