* 2226500
* SitS: Wireless, sustainable, and automated sensory system for in-situ monitoring of soil heavy metals
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Wei Zhang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,199,999.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). With the rapid growth of industrialization and urbanization,
elevated levels of non-essential heavy metals in soils and irrigation water pose
major threats to ecosystem health, food safety, and human and animal health, due
to their toxicity, bioaccumulation, and environmental persistence. To closely
monitor and manage heavy metal contaminated soils for ensuring food safety and
human health, researchers at Michigan State University and Fraunhofer USA Center
Midwest are collaborating to develop a novel wireless sensor platform for
continuous field measurement of heavy metal concentrations in soils. In
addition, the research team will integrate the research topics into diverse
educational and outreach activities, including teacher training opportunities,
secondary education opportunities through summer programs, and communications
through various social media platforms and YouTube channels. If successful
research outcomes will have a significant positive impact on soil sensing
science and technology, soil quality, food safety, and public health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop an
environmentally friendly, sustainable, wireless, automated microfluidic-sensor
platform, capable of in-situ detection, continuous monitoring, and remote
reporting of soil pH and concentrations of major heavy metal elements. Metal
elements of interest include, but are not limited to, lead, mercury, cadmium,
nickel, and lithium. The proposed platform will synergistically integrate
several multifunctional modules in a hermetically sealed and compact package,
including: 1) a self-renewable microelectrode sensor array; 2) highly-efficient
microfluidics with an integrated porous ceramic filter, active mixers, and
parallel fluidic channels; 3) a high-performance, eco-friendly solar energy
harvester; 4) low power electronic circuitry for power management, microfluidic
control, and multichannel electrochemical sensing; 5) a zero-energy Internet of
Things (IoT) networking module capable of both above- and underground wireless
data communication; and 6) real-time signal processing and quantification for
the end-user. The prototype platform will be demonstrated in a pilot study to
investigate the episodic release of metals from soil microsites that are driven
by fluctuating and preferential distribution of soil water content, leading to
an in-depth understanding of the dynamic behaviors of heavy metals in
heterogeneous soil matrixes. The proposed platform will provide distinct
advantages over existing approaches for heavy metal sensing in soils. In
particular, material selection, soil sample processing, power management, and
device/system packaging are carefully considered as part of the system design to
achieve the best sensing performance while minimizing disturbance to soil
environments. Boron-doped polycrystalline diamond as a new sensing material
allows for highly sensitive and selective, long-term stable electrochemical
measurements. Integration of microelectrode sensors with automated parallel
microfluidics enables high-throughput, simultaneous detection of multiple
analytes with minimal sample volume. Deliberately designed multi-step sample
processing can reduce sample matrix complexity, provide consistent test
conditions, and prevent leaching of wastewater into the soil environment. The
zero-energy IoT communication enables secure and energy-efficient wireless data
transmission within a large network while eliminating tethered configuration and
line of sight between sensors and data aggregators. The use of a solar energy
harvester as a power source is environmentally-friendly, self-sustainable, and
cost-effective. Besides the significant contributions to soil sensing science
and technology, this project is expected to have a great impact on engineering-
and agriculture-related STEM education through integration of research with
diverse educational and outreach activities, such as annual workshops, outreach
publication, teacher training, K-12 summer programs, new SitS courses, social
media and YouTube channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.