* 2226930
* A nanoscale thermocouple on a micromachined cantilever for intracellular temperature measurements
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Angelo Gaitas, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 490,564.00

An award is made to the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai to develop an
instrument for subcellular temperature measurements that offers high spatial and
temporal resolution. This enabling instrumentation will aid in addressing basic
scientific questions helping researchers derive significant new knowledge. The
instrumentation will be able to uniquely provide reliable temperature
measurements on the surface and inside single cells with nanoscale resolution
and microseconds response time. The instrumentation will be compatible with
atomic force microscopes (AFMs) that offer exquisite force detection, spatial
control, and ability for fluorescence imaging. The devices will be made
available to outside groups. Results and designs will be disseminated thought
peer reviewed publications, conferences, websites, and online video
publications. Commercialization partnerships have been established to bring this
instrumentation to market once it is fully developed. Educational outreach
programs to expose youths from minority and economically disadvantaged
backgrounds to science include an undergraduate summer internship program and a
monthly high school hosting program with interactive demonstrations and
discussions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Temperature is one of the most important
physiological variables and is largely not studied at the cellular level due to
lack of reliable tools. The measurement of thermal events and temperature
gradients at the subcellular level are of great importance to the understanding
of cell function, since many biophysical and enzymatic processes can be
substantially accelerated by modest increases in temperature. This enabling
instrumentation is transformative in that new knowledge will be generated by
measuring temperature along with other parameters at subcellular levels. The
research made possible by this new instrumentation will shed light on how
localized and transient changes in temperature, evoked by physiological events
as disparate as cell division and synaptic stimulation, can influence the
downstream effects of those events. Better understanding of these temperature-
dependent biophysical processes could lead to better understanding of normal
function at the cellular and tissue levels, and diseases states. Findings and
comparative studies powered by this new instrument may lead to new treatments
and enable the development of targeted specialized temperature-sensitive drug
delivery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.