* 2226137
* Collaborative Research: Aureochromes-light signaling in the sea
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Brian Zoltowski, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 476,910.00

Photosynthetic organisms rely on light not only to fix CO2, but they also use
light information to learn about their environment. The scientific community has
a broad understanding of light-regulated responses in organisms living on land.
There, blue and red light sensing proteins help land plants determine
information such as the presence of neighbor competition or the time of day.
However, about 71% of the Earth surface is water, and aquatic environments are
strongly enriched in blue light and deprived of red light. How photosynthetic
organisms living in freshwater or marine environments harness light quality and
quantity information is an open question. As part of this project the PIs will
investigate the function of a group of blue light sensing proteins called
Aureochromes, which are widely distributed in marine algae. This project will
also train undergraduate/graduate students and postdoctoral associates across
disciplines (photochemistry, biochemistry, cell/molecular biology, mathematical
modeling) and provide visualization tools to teach the use of math in
introductory chemistry and biology. School teachers are at the frontline of
improving public scientific literacy and this project will continue previously
funded work to train preservice educators on science practices and teaching, and
identify how these preservice teachers learn, why they learn, and to investigate
if their way of thinking changes during the research and teaching
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the unicellular microalga Nannochloropsis
oceanica, the PIs will investigate the hypothesis that photochemical kinetics,
expression patterns and protein-protein interaction networks of protein
photoreceptors shape the dynamics of light responses and therefore the
organism’s response to changing light fluencies. To achieve this global
understanding of aureochrome signaling, the researchers will develop explicit
mathematical models of aureochrome signal transduction, where they will
experimentally determine kinetic terms regulating the photochemistry of these
LOV domain photoreceptors, their competitive dimerization, expression and
degradation rates, and DNA binding capacity. Combined, this project will examine
how these factors influence transcriptional activity and impact cell physiology.
In this manner, this work will enable the construction of a complete model of
blue-light regulation of N. oceanica that integrates local photochemistry with
organism’s physiology in a predictive, and falsifiable
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.