* 2226445
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale Geodetic Monitoring at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Scott Nooner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2028
* USD 86,754.00

This project continues long-term research and monitoring of the most active
submarine volcano in the NE Pacific named Axial Seamount. It is located about
300 miles off the coast of Oregon and represents an excellent site to study how
volcanoes work because it erupts frequently, has numerous monitoring
instruments, and has repetitive behavior. This research will improve
understanding of how magma (molten rock) is stored in the shallow crust at
volcanoes, how it is delivered to the surface, how eruptions are triggered, and
how eruptions can be successfully forecast. Scientists will use pressure sensors
and underwater vehicles to measure movements of the seafloor at Axial Seamount.
These movements take place as the volcano gradually inflates with magma between
eruptions, like a balloon, and then rapidly deflates during eruptions. The
seafloor moves up and down as much as 8-12 feet during these cycles. When the
volcano is fully inflated it is ready to erupt again. Scientists have observed
that Axial Seamount inflates to a similar level before each eruption, which has
enabled two previous eruptions to be successfully forecast months in advance.
Therefore, this research has broad implications for reducing hazards at
volcanoes around the world. This work will improve eruption forecasting at all
volcanoes, including those on land. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axial Seamount erupted
in 1998, 2011, and most recently in April 2015 and is more than 90% re-inflated
in 2022, so is building toward another eruption. It is an ideal natural
laboratory for the long-term study of active processes at a submarine volcano in
a mid-ocean ridge setting. Long-term research and monitoring at Axial have built
a remarkable time-series of bottom pressure observations that have revealed a
repeated cycle of inflation and deflation that has been used to forecast
eruptions with increasing accuracy. The 2015 eruption was the first captured in
real time by the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array
(RCA) and the network of sensors revealed the inner workings of the volcano in
unprecedented detail. Nevertheless, understanding is improved with every
eruption and novel techniques are revealing new and surprising phenomena that
were previously unknown. An example of this derives from the use of repeated
high-resolution bathymetric mapping using Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs)
that show that the deformation field extends over the entire summit caldera and
beyond. The new AUV data are complementary to the pressure measurements in that
the AUV surveys are spatially continuous and laterally extensive, whereas the
pressure measurements are temporally continuous but are spatially limited.
During this project, scientists will continue the pressure measurements and
further develop the AUV repeat bathymetry technique using Terrain Relative
Navigation (TRN) during fieldwork in 2024, 2026, and 2028. The two datasets will
be a powerful combination for advancing deformation modeling of the subsurface
magmatic system at Axial Seamount.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.