* 2226741
* RAPID: The Costs of Peace: War Experience, Territorial Loss, and Peace Agreement Consensus in Ukraine
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Gerard Toal, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 188,094.00

The Russia-Ukraine War raises an important question about whether a stable peace
settlement is possible. This project examines the question by tracing the ways
that wartime experiences shape ordinary Ukrainians’ attitudes toward different
peace settlement scenarios. It focuses specifically on how people’s experiences
and characteristics shape their dispositions toward potential territorial
concessions. Such concessions are presently recognized by all sides as part of
the road toward peace. Yet, in light of great resistance and suffering,
witnessing the death of friends and family members, and extraordinary
destruction and displacement, the question can be raised whether ordinary
Ukrainians accept the loss of further state territory as a necessary price for
peace. Deeper understanding of how general populations assess the cost of peace
can greatly inform preparation, negotiation and implementation of peace
agreements by both national governments and international third parties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance understanding of how people’s wartime
experiences influence their positions toward peace agreements requiring
territorial concessions, this project seeks to uncover the social psychological
processes and wartime experiences informing the dispositions of ordinary
Ukrainians toward peace. The scholarly literature suggests divergent impacts of
war experience on attitude towards the costs of peace. One line of evidence
suggests that direct exposure to violence and destruction may increase
Ukrainians’ perception of immediate threat, which may in turn increase their
willingness to support territorial concessions as a means to end violent
hostilities. Other lines of evidence suggest that anger, threats to Ukrainian
identity and values, and desire to honor the sacrifice of those who died
defending Ukrainian land, may harden attitudes toward territorial compromises.
In this context, war may have made all Ukrainian territory a ‘sacred value’
(absolute and non-negotiable) to ordinary Ukrainians. This would reduce the
possibility of territorial compromise, and make any settlement potentially
unstable. This study uses multiple methods to explore the complex factors that
come into play as people work to resolve these dilemmas. The project includes
collection and quantitative analysis of survey data from a large sample of
Ukrainians, including locals and internally displaced people, across three towns
close to the regions where active fighting is taking place. The survey is used
to identify small groups of citizens across the same three towns to participate
in focus groups. These discussions provide further opportunity to learn about
how citizens make sense of and assess tradeoffs associated with a potential
peace agreement. Integrated analysis of the survey and group discussions inform
the development of theoretical and practical implications for scholars,
policymakers and practitioners focused on peace
agreements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.