* 2226563
* RII Track-4: NSF: Soft Architected Metamaterials for Extreme Energy Dissipation
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Yanyu Chen, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2024
* USD 209,274.00

Designing innovative lightweight materials and structures with significant
energy dissipation against dynamic mechanical loads is critical for protection
and effective performance of assets and personnel in operational conditions.
Soft architected metamaterials (SAMs) consisting of spatially periodic
microstructures show new and/or customized energy dissipation behaviors due to
the interplay between material properties and geometry. Despite the promise,
there remains a lack of fundamental understanding of deformation mechanisms and
energy dissipation pathways in SAMs, as well as the structure-property
relationships that could be leveraged to devise novel structural arrangements
for enhanced survivability. With support from the primary research collaborator
Prof. Weinong Chen at Purdue University (PU), this project aims to investigate
the deformation and failure mechanisms of SAMs subjected to dynamic mechanical
loading using a combined computational and experimental approach. The
fundamental insights gained through this research project will enable the
development of advanced architected materials and fill the knowledge gap to
engineer architected metamaterials for enhanced energy dissipation. The
collaboration between the PI and the collaborator will not only lay a foundation
for continued research between the two institutions but will also strengthen the
research competitiveness of the PI’s research group and benefit students,
University of Louisville, and the State of Kentucky through the PI’s synergistic
workforce training, curriculum development, and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows project provides a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and
training for a graduate student at the University of Louisville at Kentucky. The
overarching goal of the research research is to investigate active and
reconfigurable control of low amplitude elastic wave propagation and high-
velocity impact energy dissipation mechanisms of SAMs through a new
collaboration with Prof. Weinong Chen at PU. To achieve this goal, the PI will
bring his expertise in metamaterial design and modeling. The primary
collaborator will provide complementary expertise in novel dynamic material
characterization techniques at high loading rates. The unique modified Kolsky
compression bar and high-speed synchrotron X-ray phase contrast imaging system
at PU is essential to capture the real-time fracture processes in SAMs,
including damage initiation and propagation during impact events and the
interaction between multiple failure modes. These experiments will be critically
integrated with modeling work to advance the research by calibrating model
parameters and validating models. The specific research objectives and methods
are to (1) construct an advanced modeling environment using a suite of building
blocks with behaviors modeled through a physics-based constitutive material
model, (2) develop high-fidelity multiphysics and multiscale computational
models for strain engineered elastic wave propagation and impact energy
dissipation, respectively, and (3) experimentally characterize elastic wave
propagation using a 3D scanning laser Doppler vibrometer and real-time damage of
SAM prototypes using the high-speed synchrotron X-ray imaging system. Successful
completion of the proposed research will significantly advance our fundamental
understanding of the dynamic mechanical behavior of SAMs and will ultimately
facilitate the design of novel architected metamaterials with improved energy
dissipation capabilities that can serve in harsh operating
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.