* 2226460
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: 5G Traffic Sovereignty: Operating Through an Adversarial Internet
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 12/31/2023
* USD 749,999.00

5G wireless technology has the potential to transform DOD mission-critical
operations, but taking full advantage of this opportunity requires new
techniques to operate through commercial networks worldwide. Connecting mission-
critical devices to commercial 5G networks will transform DOD communications,
but it also increases the attack surface for sensitive and critical
communications by exposing the traffic to the Internet at large. Nation-states
have nearly inexhaustible resources to disrupt traffic or passively recognize
communications patterns via network infrastructure under their control, and the
verified-trust paradigm in a zero-trust architecture cannot prevent these
attacks. Any secure communication solution in the 5G space must account for
adversarial Internet paths that traverse networks and routers that are
potentially controlled by adversary nation-states. In essence, operating through
5G networks requires not just focusing on the wireless last hop, but also the
Internet paths to reach the last hop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
three components to create an unprecedented ability to leverage commercial 5G
networks for secure and resilient communication. The first component takes
advantage of programmable data planes to facilitate path measurements – and
shift communications onto trustworthy paths – without modifying DOD
applications, existing network devices, or third-party networks. Component 2
creates an automated measurement application that interfaces with the router
from Component 1 to identify router-level paths that avoid adversaries, as well
as verify in real-time that communication paths for active flows behave as
expected. Component 3 will recommend ways for DOD to expand the availability of
secure communication paths to 5G networks. This last component will identify
high-value networks whose inclusion in an industry zone-of-trust could benefit
DOD, and apply existing geopolitical influence frameworks to evaluate
trustworthy communication paths between DOD and geographic regions. Tackling
this problem requires convergence research across six areas of expertise:
network measurement for path assessment; 5G communication and transport;
programmable switch implementation; realistic evaluation platforms; security
constraints of 5G-connected infrastructure; and geopolitical influence and
strategy in the cyber domain. This interdisciplinary and cross-sector
collaboration targets a persistently unsolved challenge that the 5G ecosystem
amplifies in importance: automatic selection of communication paths with 5G
devices to avoid networks, locations, or hardware potentially controlled by a
nation-state adversary. This project will provide broad impact by complementing
zero-trust architectures and secure 5G implementations, and by offering a
transformative approach to how DoD and critical infrastructure can operate
through the exploding yet dangerously opaque 5G
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.