* 2226708
* Conference: Future Faculty Workshop: Preparing Diverse Leaders for the Future, Summers of 2022-2025
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Emily Pentzer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 297,876.00

This interdisciplinary future faculty workshop (FFW) aims to support full
engagement of the American population in the science and engineering enterprise
through an event centered on supporting graduate students and postdocs in their
transition into faculty positions across the nation. Increasing the fraction of
faculty who belong to groups historically underrepresented in the academic
enterprise is a prominent route to improving overall diversity in the up-and-
coming science and engineering workforce. This can be transformational with
respect to talent development and research creativity, enabling more rapid
development of transformative solutions to pressing societal needs. The mission
of the FFW is to provide aspiring academic leaders access to the key information
critical to apply for, secure, and succeed in faculty positions across academic
institutions in the United States. The vision of the FFW is to foster an
inclusive academic climate that supports the diverse talent and human resources
of the American population in lifelong careers in the scientific and engineering
enterprise. Materials research inherently supports interdisciplinary,
collaborative, and collective research endeavors across traditionally siloed
disciplines (i.e., chemistry, physics, biology, geology, mathematics,
engineering, etc.). Thus, this field is an ideal venue to enhance economic,
social, racial, gender, and disability diversity in academia, as well as support
non-traditional career paths (e.g., pursuit of a STEM academic career after
military service).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The FFW is a hands-on multi-day
interactive workshop. Through this project, four two-day workshops will be held
annually from 2022-2025, and will bring together mentees who will have current
positions as senior graduate students and postdocs, and mentors who will be
established faculty from across US universities, many of whom are from groups
underrepresented in academic STEM fields and who participated in past FFWs as
mentees and/or mentors. The agenda for the workshop is built upon best practices
and knowledge gained from prior workshops, with targeted improvements based on
previous assessments. Panel discussions will cover how to prepare for an
independent academic career during time as a graduate student or postdoc; how to
identify, apply to, interview at, and negotiate for positions; and best
practices as an assistant professor. Mentees will also have the opportunity to
give a short proposed research talk and get feedback on content and presentation
style. A dynamic logic model framework that permits ready adaptation and
assessment will be used to facilitate success and inform best practices. The
assessment will include both formative and summative evaluation components,
which will be relayed to the PI and key collaborators and used to inform changes
to subsequent FFWs. A post-workshop community will be developed to support the
participates in their continued professional development and virtual pre-
application webinars will be held so that potential applicants can learn more
about the process and the barrier for application is lowered. Shorter-term
outcomes of this project will include enhanced preparation of women and
underrepresented candidates for the academic pathway, increased confidence in
similar populations in the pursuit of academic careers, and increased number of
similar populations who effectively pursue and succeed in academic careers.
Longer-term outcomes are increased numbers of faculty who are women and/or from
groups historically underrepresented in science and engineering, as well as
increased participation of similar populations in national
societies/groups/networks. Ultimately, this enhancement of the professoriate
will lead to increased innovation and inclusive excellence, and it will provide
a sustainable catalyst for improving diversity and inclusion across the American
science and engineering enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.