* 2226519
* Time Resolved Probing of Unconventional Orders in Novel Kagome Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Nuh Gedik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 720,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite tremendous advances in the
recent decades, conventional electronics based on silicon will soon hit a limit.
One way to circumvent this is to use novel materials with unconventional
properties. In this respect, there has been a tremendous interest in a new class
of metals in which the atoms are arranged in periodic patterns of corner sharing
triangles known as the Kagome lattice. The electrons in these systems behave in
a highly unusual manner displaying strong repulsion, geometric frustration and
topological properties. When these materials are cooled, first they go into a
state in which the electron density is periodically modulated (charge density
wave) and upon further cooling, they become superconductors. A key challenge is
to understand the mechanism of these phases and the relationship between the
two. The goal of this project is to use different types of optical and electron
based spectroscopies to investigate the charge density wave state of these novel
Kagome metals. A central part of this project is the training of next generation
of students both in advanced spectroscopies as well as in novel quantum
materials. This program will also contribute to K-12 science education and
improve the physics education at the freshman
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a
new class of superconducting transition-metal Kagome compounds were discovered
which display a complex interplay between multiple order parameters. Above the
superconducting phase transition, these materials host a charge density wave
order and a putative short-ranged chiral flux phase in which both inversion and
time-reversal symmetry are broken. This project aims to use an array of
ultrafast optical and electron probes to investigate the highly unconventional
phase diagram of these systems. With static- and time-resolved Kerr rotation
microscopy, the time-reversal symmetry-breaking suggested by recent muon spin
relaxation measurements is studied at a length scale inaccessible to other
probes. By aligning domains of opposite chirality with circularly polarized
light, the chiral charge density wave order proposed by scanning tunneling
measurements is investigated with second harmonic generation. Finally, the
competition or cooperation between different charge density waves will be probed
by a combination of ultrafast electron diffraction and time- and angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy which will directly yield dynamics of electronic and
lattice structure. These experiments will provide a comprehensive picture of the
microscopic interactions in these materials and will shed light on to the
unconventional orders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.