* 2226533
* Collaborative Proposal: How to Gel Oil (or Water) in an Immiscible Oil-Water Mixture: A Systematic Study of Phase-Selective Gelation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* George John, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 225,000.00

Everyone knows that oil and water do not mix. This award will study how one of
these liquids can be selectively converted into a gel – a process that is termed
phase-selective gelation. To induce such gelation, molecules will be synthesized
that will find their way into either the oil or the water layer and then undergo
‘self-assembly’ there. Self-assembly implies that the molecules will
spontaneously join and form structures – in this case, long fibers – with
nanoscale sizes. In turn, the nanofibers will entangle with each other and thus
convert the liquid into a paste-like material (with the consistency of ketchup
or hair gel). This will be the first systematic study on phase-selective
gelation. The insights from this award could help design new materials to clean-
up oil spills or to remediate oil-contaminated ground water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this award will be on the fundamental science
behind the phenomenon of phase-selective gelation, and the goal will be to
develop design rules connecting molecular structure, interfacial properties, and
gel structure/rheology. A range of amphiphilic molecules will be synthesized and
their ability to gel either the oil or water phase in a mixture will be studied.
Key criteria for a molecule to be a phase-selective gelator are: (a) it should
not emulsify the oil-water mixture; and (b) it should also not get appreciably
solubilized in either of the phases. The hypothesis is that such gelation can be
accomplished by striking the right balance of non-covalent interactions between
the amphiphilic molecules such as hydrogen-bonding between the head groups as
well as pi-pi and van der Waals interactions between the tails. The proposed
research will also be integrated with educational, mentoring, and outreach
activities at the collaborating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.