* 2226443
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track: G: Security Services for the 5G Software-Defined Edge
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Phillip Porras, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 06/30/2023
* USD 748,702.00

This project will focus on the creation of an in-depth security architecture
that integrates directly into the market-leading 5G Software-Defined Radio
Access Network (SD-RAN) reference standard, currently in development by the
leading international 5G industry consortium (O-RAN). The project introduces a
cross-layer security architecture that leverages the modular extensibility of
the new 5G software-defined architecture with services, applications, and
protocol extensions to achieve a comprehensive runtime security management of 5G
edge-to-core operations. It will augment and extend, not replace, the existing
SD-RAN reference implementation with low-level application monitoring, machine
learning, inline security compliance enforcement, identity management, and data
provenance. The project is initiated at a critical moment in the 5G life cycle,
particularly as 5G applications are increasingly developed for highly sensitive
computing environments, such as military, government, industrial applications,
and critical infrastructure. The project will dissect new 5G attack surfaces
that have emerged from the SD-RAN design and will introduce security solutions
from an experienced team of INFOSEC researchers, and an industry partner well-
positioned to accelerate the transition of these solutions into the U.S. market.
It decomposes the challenges of securing 5G networks into three focus areas: the
User-to-RAN attack surface, threats against and within the RAN control plane,
and threats that manifest through an analysis of RAN-to-core (the gateway
between 5G and the Internet) operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic areas
for this Convergence Accelerator project are decomposed into three complementary
technical thrusts. First, the project will address threats that arise from
hostile user equipment (UE) designed to attack RAN operations. It will
investigate 5G-specific privacy and security attacks that span across the user
edge, from 5G phones, IoTs, and sensor nets to automotive. UE attacks against
SD-RANs will be analyzed, and new security service enhancements to the RAN will
be proposed to detect and counter these attacks. Second, the project will design
security extensions to the 5G SD-RAN control plane, based on a framework of in-
depth 5G-specific security telemetry, automated policy generation, ML-based
modeling, runtime policy enforcement, and provenance-based data flow protection.
Finally, the project will design 5G-aware P4-enabled security services that can
interplay with the SD-RAN control layer, offering novel and scalable methods to
integrate core-to-edge defenses. The benefits of this project are multi-faceted.
A primary goal is to improve 5G UE-edge security for diverse communities,
including critical infrastructure providers, US DoD, and the society at a
national scale. The security-enhanced SD-RAN will deliver features that are
vital for addressing compliance directives that are pervasive within the DoD,
U.S. government, and critical infrastructure operating environments. Another
crucial project benefit is its contribution to the education and diversity of
the future U.S. workforce. The team is composed of an educational institution
and a research laboratory that are active in the preparation of the next
generation of computer scientists needed to protect the U.S. from cyber attacks.
In particular, the proposal incorporates a detailed education and participation
plan that encourages the inclusion of graduate students, particularly women and
minorities, and will build upon an ongoing collaboration with a non-profit
focused on retaining women in R&amp;D in the workforce. Throughout this project,
students will help conduct the proposed research, academic papers, and support
the preparation of our convergence material. This project will involve multiple
graduate and undergraduate researchers, and incorporate specific plans to reach
out to under-represented groups and encourage their direct participation in the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.