* 2226543
* RAPID: Supreme Court Support and Democratic Values
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Matthew Hitt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 92,673.00

The Supreme Court of the United States is one of the most powerful institutions
within the American political system – exercising authority over life, liberty,
and property. While granted these powers by law and political tradition, the
Court’s legitimacy in making these weighty decisions rests, in no small part, on
the public accepting that the Court is “above” politics. In other words, despite
creating “winners” and “losers” when issuing decisions, ordinary people seem to
believe two things: (1) the Court’s members were chosen via fair, democratic
processes, and (2) differences in opinion are due to conflicting Constitutional
interpretations rather than the naked partisan preferences of Justices. These
assumptions, however, have been sorely tested in recent years. From brutal,
polarized confirmation hearings to questions about candidates’ fitness to serve,
and controversial, highly visible decisions, some citizens may not see the Court
as the same backstop for democratic values that it was in the mid-20th Century.
These developments raise thorny questions about the sources of public support
for the Supreme Court more generally. We investigate whether citizens’
democratic beliefs are connected to their views about the Court’s legitimacy,
and, in turn, whether those attitudes are affected by the Court’s
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the relationship between public views
about democracy and their support for the Court, this research will deploy a
four-wave panel survey that will allow researchers to (1) test whether
democratic values correspond to diffuse support via a rigorous panel design and,
(2) analyze whether highly salient decisions affect the Court’s legitimacy,
generally, and whether such decisions affect the relationship between democratic
values and Court support, specifically. By collecting a combination of original
survey, panel, and experimental data, this research supplies a rare opportunity
to obtain contemporaneous public reactions to a series of high-profile decisions
that the Court will most likely issue during the summer of 2022, which bookends
a period of sincere political and democratic upheaval. Despite political
scientists’ concern about democratic backsliding, insufficient attention has
been paid to the role of the judiciary in deepening public cynicism about
democracy. This research not only represents a significant step forward in
understanding basic theories of why citizens respect the Supreme Court’s
legitimacy, but it offers a chance to analyze how a potentially counter-
majoritarian political institution may be contributing to this country’s ongoing
crisis of democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.