* 2226271
* Disciplinary Improvements: THE DBER+ COMMONS - A FAIR/CARE/OS RCN
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Shiv Karunakaran, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,249,282.00

The Discipline-Based Education Research plus (DBER+) Commons project will extend
the popular Humanities Commons (HCommons) system to build consensus around and
capacity for open science, the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
Reusable), and CARE (Collective Benefit, Authority to control, Responsibility,
Ethics) practices, principles, and guidelines for use in undergraduate,
postbaccalaureate, graduate, and postdoctoral science education research
activities. This research coordination network (RCN) will work to advance
several areas of science education research outputs including quality control of
metadata for research products, stewardship practices, interoperability,
reproducibility, sustainability, equity, and democratization of access to
research data. The project will engage the broader science education research
community in activities to develop shared norms, expectations, and
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics) education research takes place in a variety of extended areas such
as DBER, SOTL (scholarship of teaching and learning), educational psychology,
learning science, and cognitive science. This project adopts the nomenclature
DBER+ to refer to STEM education research in all of these settings and at a
variety of tertiary (undergraduate, postbac, graduate, postdoc) educational
levels. This research coordination network will foster cross, inter, and
transdisciplinary innovation by engaging perspectives from many DBER+
perspectives and sharing those perspectives out to the extended community. A
collaboration board will engage participants in the DBER+ Commons to increase
the impact of DBER+ research in university classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) is jointly supported
by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) Division of Undergraduate
Education (DUE) Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program. The IUSE
program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.