* 2226932
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Trustworthy and Performant Decentralized Resource Markets in the Blockchain Era
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ghada Almashaqbeh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,707.00

Driven by the movement toward the decentralized Internet, Web 3.0, recent
cryptocurrency systems build decentralized and transparent markets for trading
digital resources. Yet, there is a big gap between the promise of these markets
and their practical viability. To bridge this gap, this project introduces
secure frameworks that are specific for promoting scalability and efficiency of
blockchain-based resource markets, but generic enough to be used with any
service type. The project’s novelties include, first, developing a secure
architecture and protocols for sidechains (secondary chains tied to a main
blockchain) that have a dependence relation with the mainchain and which permit
exchanging arbitrary data. And second, introducing a provable security paradigm
for formalizing and analyzing security of resource markets and sidechains. The
project’s impacts include achieving secure and efficient schemes that permit
utilizing the advantages of blockchains in real-world applications, developing
foundational understanding of sidechain covering new dependency models and
previously-unexplored use cases, and promoting provable-security of large-scale
distributed systems. The investigator integrates their research in both
undergraduate and graduate level courses, is committed to mentoring and advising
students at all levels, and works closely with under-represented groups in
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves four directions.
First, chainBoost, a scheme that expedites service delivery, reduces the amount
of data to be logged on the blockchain, and extends system capability while
preserving compatibility. Second, chainScale, a scheme for improving scalability
in terms of throughput and number of supported users. This is done by splitting
the modules and workload needed to run a decentralized service among several
sidechains, devising a block summary and pruning technique, and building
mechanisms to handle cross-sidechain operations, syncing the mainchain, and
handling interruptions. Third, formulating a security notion for resource
markets and sidechains to capture various dependency relationships with the
mainchain, and formally proving the security of chainBoost and chainScale based
on this notion. Lastly, building proof-of-concept prototypes and use them in
conducting thorough benchmarks and empirical experiments to assess efficiency
gains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.