* 2226329
* ERASE-PFAS: Bottom-up synthesis of polymeric membranes for PFAS sequestration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Raul Hernandez Sanchez, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2022
* USD 419,999.00

Anti-corrosion and anti-stain coatings have been increasingly present in our
daily lives facilitating the cleaning of objects and/or materials, slowing down
materialâ€™s deterioration, and protecting them against chemical or thermal
stress. Naturally, as these coatings increase in performance, they become more
attractive to the public increasing demand, and thus driving forward their
manufacture. One large class of molecules forming part of these coatings are the
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Several thousands of PFAS have been
identified, some of which are made in a very large scale. The inherent chemical
properties of PFAS makes them essentially unbreakable when they leak into
ecosystems. Unfortunately, the presence of PFAS in drinking water across the
U.S. is now well-documented and human ingestion of PFAS has been associated with
a number of diseases and cancer. The grand challenge ahead of us is to find ways
of removing PFAS from the environment, especially when these substances
contaminate drinking water sources. The goal of this project is to develop
synthetic membranes capable of filtering water to remove the majority of the
PFAS to well below the threshold of 70 parts-per-trillion, as established by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Successful completion of the proposed
research will develop the chemical pathways and basic understanding to create
high-performing membranes to remove PFAS from water, ultimately with the goal of
protecting public health. Additional benefits to society will be accomplished
through education and training including the mentoring of two graduate students
at Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) are molecules generally composed of 1) an anionic head group, carboxylate
or sulfonate; and 2) a fluorinated backbone, which are incredibly resistant to
environmental degradation. Their chemical and thermal stability made them ideal
substances to use to protect materials from degrading or from events such as
fires. Enormous quantities of FPAS were produced until health-related effects
initiated the ban of certain species around the turn of the century. However,
the large quantity that was produced coupled with their environmental
persistence has resulted in widespread contamination of the environment,
especially drinking water sources. Documented health risks posed by PFAS to
humans include severe malformations in pregnant women, cancer in adults, liver
malfunction, thyroid disease, decreased fertility, high cholesterol, and
obesity. Given that PFAS have weak affinity and binding towards most chemical
adsorbents, the challenge ahead is to design membranes capable of removing them
from contaminated water. The overarching goal of this project is to design
recognition sites for anionic PFAS, which will be later developed and
incorporated into membranes used to filter water that would sequester long- and
short-chain PFAS. To accomplish this central objective, the project will 1)
design recognition sites embedded within supramolecular scaffolds; 2)
synthesize, characterize, and determine the anion binding properties of the most
promising scaffolds; and 3) polymerize the most promising architectures via
olefinic and/or epoxide functional groups incorporated into the supramolecular
scaffold, and test their PFAS sequestration properties in aqueous samples. The
successful completion of this project will establish the fundamental parameters
to enhance PFAS binding within molecular scaffolds to later translate this
knowledge into the design of polymeric filtration materials. Education and
outreach activities include creating seminars and hands-on workshops for high
school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.