* 2226175
* I-Corps: Surface-ionized personal respiratory protection
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Alexander Mamishev, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a face mask design that may positively impact multiple economic
sectors and better the lives of about 14.4 million workers in the United States.
These workers are employed in occupations where exposure to disease or infection
occurs at least once per week. The need for improved and more comfortable
respirators includes healthcare providers, firefighters, military medical
personnel, and everyday citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of new masks to prevent exposure to disease and
infection. The mask leverages electrohydrodynamic technology to create a novel
air pressurizing device that surpasses other personal protection equipment in
terms of size, weight, and comfortability, while maintaining a high filtration
efficiency. The unique advantage of this design is that the mask filters out all
particles in both exhaling and inhaling cycles without touching the skin of the
wearer’s face. The filtering action takes place along the entire perimeter of
the mask, a few millimeters away from the face. Particles and droplets present
in the air are removed with electrostatic forces. A comfortable headband keeps
the mask in place, and it matches the comfort of a well-fitted bicycle helmet.
Since the innovation is designed to avoid contact with the wearer’s face, it
eliminates bruising while feeling lighter (at about 454 grams). This technology
has been shown to be more comfortable to wear than other personal protection
equipment. With the addition of a clear face shield, this mask does not obstruct
the face of the wearer and those who are hearing impaired can communicate
through lip reading. Furthermore, the mask can be sterilized and is reusable, so
as to reduce environmental waste. The successful adoption of the mask will
improve lives across a variety of different sectors, including healthcare, and
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.