* 2226639
* High Energy Ultrashort-Pulse Microresonator Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jaime Cardenas, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 460,131.00

Laser sources that can generate ultrashort pulses in time are highly desirable
for applications including precision machining, ocular surgery, wavelength
conversion, deep-tissue imaging, and all-optical clocks. The associated broad
bandwidth from these sources is also ideal for spectroscopy, telecommunications,
and distance ranging applications. Current short-pulse laser technology is very
powerful but is restricted in size, cost, wavelength, and pulse performance by
the requirement of a carefully arranged laser gain medium. More recent
microresonator devices, on the other hand, operate without this gain limitation,
but suffer from very low pulse energies, which limits their wider applicability.
The objective of this research is to improve the energy performance of
microresonator sources by up to a thousand times to develop highly adaptable
sources of ultrashort pulses of light. In addition to significantly improving
the performance of current microresonator applications in telecommunications and
spectroscopy, this research can enable cheap, simple, small, light, and
wavelength-versatile microresonator sources that can supplant standard pulsed
lasers for traditional ultrashort-pulse applications including bio-imaging,
frequency conversion, and all-optical clocks. Beyond technological impact, this
project will train two PhD students in an area of large technological importance
at the interface of nano-technology, ultrafast nonlinear optics and advanced
optical technologies, and the PIs will integrate this important platform into
the regular curriculum as well as into the extra-curricular optics summer-school
program at the University of Rochester. &lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Chip-based frequency-comb sources have proven to be a
valuable resource for applications including spectroscopy, telecommunications,
ranging, and signal processing. However, current microresonator sources have low
single-pulse efficiencies and very low energies, at the femtojoule level.
Applications currently require external amplification, limiting the source
bandwidth and negating the benefits of an on-chip source. The objective of this
research is to develop versatile on-chip devices for generating frequency-combs
and ultrashort pulses with high efficiencies and up to a thousand times higher
energies than the state-of-the-art. The energy of microresonator solitons is
limited by the amount of optical nonlinearity that can be compensated by
dispersion before the soliton destabilizes. We will experimentally demonstrate
how this limit can be engineered through loss-engineering in strongly over-
coupled cavities. We will develop normal dispersion cavities with integrated
spectral filters to generate a type of novel chirped-pulse soliton that was
recently shown by the PI to support very high energies in related fiber
cavities. Successful implementation of these techniques, in addition to
improving the performance of current microresonator applications significantly,
will enable cheap, simple, small, light, and wavelength-versatile microresonator
sources that can supplant mode-locked lasers for traditional ultrashort-pulse
applications including bio-imaging, frequency conversion, and frequency-comb
self-referencing. Beyond technological impact, this project will train two PhD
students in an area of large technological importance at the interface of nano-
technology, ultrafast nonlinear optics and advanced optical technologies, and
the PIs will integrate this important platform into the regular curriculum as
well as into the extra-curricular optics summer-school program at the University
of Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.