* 2226864
* From the Ocean to the Air: Aerosol-cloud Interactions during the Onset of Arctic Sea Ice Melt
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Jessie Creamean, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2026
* USD 673,107.00

As the Arctic warms at least four times the global rate, features such as clouds
impact the temperature at the surface. This is important because the Arctic is
projected to become cloudier in the future, and temperature changes in the
Arctic can influence global weather and climate. However, our understanding of
Arctic clouds remains highly uncertain in part due to a poor understanding of
airborne particles (called “aerosols”) that help them form, especially during
the spring as the sea ice and snow start to melt. For this project, our goal is
to improve our understanding of aerosols in the Arctic during the spring melt
and how they impact clouds. We plan to accomplish this goal through
international collaboration and participation in the Swedish-led ARTofMELT
expedition in the Arctic Ocean during May–Jun 2023. This work involves both
observations and modelling of cloud-forming aerosols designed to test our
targeted hypotheses on where these aerosols come from and how they might help
clouds form. By testing our hypotheses, an improved understanding of aerosol
effects on Arctic clouds during the spring sea ice melt will be obtained. More
broadly, the project provides a unique opportunity to address the impacts of the
Earth’s changing atmosphere on sea ice in the “New Arctic,” a goal that can only
be successfully accomplished through interdisciplinary and international
collaboration. The project team includes 4 female and 6 early career researchers
and involves engagement with two nonprofit organizations by communicating the
study goals, plans, and outcomes through live virtual events and an ARTofMELT
expedition blog with K-12 classrooms, globally. Outreach seminars are also
anticipated to convey our findings, and more broadly, inform the public about
aspects of the rapidly changing Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
Arctic warms at least four times the global rate, feedbacks from clouds will
lead to compounding impacts on the surface energy budget that consequently
affect regional and global weather and climate. However, our understanding of
Arctic clouds remains highly uncertain in part due to a poor understanding of
airborne particles (called “aerosols”) that help them form, especially during
the spring as the sea ice and snow start to melt. For this project, our
overarching goal is to improve our understanding of aerosol sources and cloud
impacts in the Arctic during the spring melt. We plan to accomplish this goal
through international collaboration and participation in the Swedish-led
ARTofMELT expedition on the Icebreaker Oden in the Arctic Ocean during May–Jun
2023. This work involves both observations and modelling of cloud-forming
aerosols designed to test our targeted hypotheses on where these aerosols come
from and how they might help clouds form. Specifically, observations include
techniques to characterize aerosol physical, biological, chemical, and cloud-
forming properties. These measurements will be conducted on the icebreaker,
directly on the sea ice, and in the lower atmosphere via vertical profiling on
tethered balloon and helicopter flights. In tandem with airmass modelling, we
will use these observations to guide our collaborator’s cloud-scale modelling
simulations that will evaluate changes in cloud properties due to aerosols under
different air mass transport scenarios. By testing our hypotheses, a fundamental
characterization and improved understanding of aerosol effects on Arctic clouds
during the spring sea ice melt will be obtained. More broadly, the project
provides a unique opportunity to address the impacts of the Earth’s changing
atmosphere on sea ice in the “New Arctic,” a goal that can only be successfully
accomplished through interdisciplinary and international collaboration. The
project team includes 4 female and 6 early career researchers and involves
engagement with two nonprofit organizations by communicating the study goals,
plans, and outcomes through live virtual events and an ARTofMELT expedition blog
with K-12 classrooms, globally. Outreach seminars are also anticipated to convey
our findings, and more broadly, inform the public about aspects of the rapidly
changing Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.