* 2226426
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: 5G Hidden Operations through Securing Traffic (GHOST)
* TIP,ITE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Alexandra Siegel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,186.00

: The proliferation of 5G networks around the world presents an attractive
opportunity for U.S. government organizations, nongovernmental humanitarian aid
organizations, and private sector enterprises to take advantage of indigenous 5G
networks to eliminate the costs of installing and maintaining an alternate
communications infrastructure. However, in many areas of the world, 5G networks
are deployed and operated by organizations that are untrusted and potentially
hostile to the U.S. In these environments, new security technologies are needed
to secure operations. The 5G Hidden Operations through Securing Traffic (GHOST)
project provides four layers of security. First, GHOST protects against end-user
and networking devices from being compromised by a hostile network. Second,
GHOST anonymizes individual identities and obscures user locations. Third, GHOST
prevents traffic analysis that could reveal operational plans and activities by
anonymizing communication connections and introducing “GHOST” traffic into the
network to maintain a constant level of activity. Finally, the GHOST project
will further obfuscate traffic analysis by injecting “false flag” traffic that
models real operations to confuse and mislead analysis. The GHOST technology
will enable organizations ranging from the U.S. military to private entities to
securely operate over indigenous 5G networks, regardless of the politics of the
network operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GHOST project addresses the core
intellectual challenge of providing secure communications resistant to
penetration and traffic analysis over untrusted networks. The GHOST project
considers the network as a black box that is assumed to be operated by a hostile
agent. Addressing the challenge will yield four intellectual benefits to the
research and operational communities. &lt;br/&gt;• First, the GHOST project will
deliver technology that will protect end-user devices and non-indigenous
networking equipment from penetration and compromise. The technology secures
devices at the hardware level through the use of Trusted Execution Environments
(TEEs). The idea behind a TEE is that anything coming from outside the chip
boundary is untrusted. TEEs enforce this trusted boundary by implementing
integrity verification of data and code and encrypting them once they cross the
trusted boundary. &lt;br/&gt;• Second, the GHOST project will deliver technology
to anonymize or disguise end-user identities, locations, and communications
endpoints. End-user identities will be protected using software defined
credentials. Locations are protected using geo-spatial identity management.
Communications connections are protected by peer-to-peer
anonymization.&lt;br/&gt;• Third, the GHOST project will deliver technology to
overlay normal traffic with “GHOST” traffic — essentially network white noise —
to obfuscate traffic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;• Fourth, the GHOST project will
deliver technology to model and generate “false flag” traffic. Through
monitoring and simulation, models of traffic patterns associated with specific
operations will be generated. “False flag” traffic injected into the network
will reflect the traffic associated with a particular operation and be
convincing to any observers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GHOST technology will benefit
end-users of any network, not just untrusted networks. The primary criteria for
success of the GHOST project will be:&lt;br/&gt;• Device protection from network
operator attacks;&lt;br/&gt;• The obfuscation of user identities, locations, and
communications connections;&lt;br/&gt;• The obfuscation of traffic
patterns;&lt;br/&gt;• The injection of “false flag”
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.