* 2226451
* Collaborative Research: MFB: Integrating Deep Learning and High-throughput Experimentation to Rapidly Navigate Protein Fitness Landscapes for Non-native Enzyme Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Anthony Gitter, Morgridge Institute for Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 10/31/2025
* USD 444,038.00

Understanding the relationship between protein structure and function remains a
major challenge. This knowledge would benefit drug design, recycling, and
chemical production. This project is designed to learn how to create proteins
that will facilitate reactions seen in nature. Artificial intelligence will
interpret the data generated by experiments. Two classes of enzymes will be
modified to facilitate novel reactions. To help diversify the STEM workforce,
workshops in machine learning will be offered to students interested in protein
design. Summer research opportunities will be offered to high school and
undergraduate students traditionally underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, protein engineering is treated as
a Bayesian optimization problem, with the objective to explore sequence space
for improved specific activity. This approach models both the expected activity
and the uncertainty of the prediction made. Training deep learning models is
data intensive. A convolution neural net (CNN) using transformer architecture
will use simulated sequence-function data to pretrain. The simulated data will
be generated using Rosetta. Pretrained CNN will be refined with experimental
data generated using combinatorial codon mutagenesis (CCM). Enzyme activity in
single bacterial cells will be monitored using GFP expression, FACS-based
screening, and next-generation DNA sequencing to determine the corresponding
amino acid sequences. Biosensor screening can suffer from crosstalk when
multiple cells are present. A picoliter-scale microdroplet screening technology
developed in the Romero lab will be utilized to avoid this issue. A simulated
annealing algorithm to randomly search over sequence positions and degenerate
codons for libraries with high values for the expected batch BO objective will
be developed. In addition, a probabilistic program using sampling-based
inference to estimate the optimal combination of codons will be designed and
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(CBET), the Division of Chemistry (CHE), and the Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems (IIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.