* 2226680
* SitS: Electrochemical signals to monitor soil microbiome structure and function
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Haluk Beyenal, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). Soil health reflects the ability of soil to support both plant
growth and other ecosystems. To date, there is limited knowledge on how soil
microbiome compositions and activities are associated with electrochemical
signals in the soil environment. Electrochemical signals produced by organisms
in soil can be used to advance non-destructive monitoring of belowground
microbiomes and their functional relationships to soil health and plant
productivity. The correlations between soil microbiome structure and function
and electrochemical signals can be used as a sensor. Such a sensor can be used
to predict and control soil health in real-time to improve plant productivity.
This project will train undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of
microbial electrochemistry, microbial ecology and -omics, and data science to
help generate a much needed workforce with expertise in data- and model-driven
soil science and engineering. If successful, this work will develop tools to
support future ecosystem research in new ways and help protect the Nation’s food
security by enabling more support for sustainable agriculture decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The soil microbiome plays critical roles in plant growth
and ecosystem services with relevance to both managed and wild terrestrial
habitats. This microbiome is one of the most challenging systems to study due to
high biological diversity and spatial heterogeneity. Most work to date focused
on dissecting the genomic and metabolic basis of interactions within the
microbiome and between the microbiome and plant hosts. However, there is a lack
of measurements that would enable rapid assessment of community structure and
function for the purposes of microbiome monitoring, management, and
manipulation. In addition, there is limited knowledge on the correlations
between electrochemical signals, microbiome structure and function, and soil.
Uncovering these relationships will provide foundational knowledge that will
enable new ways of monitoring and manipulating plant and soil microbiomes. One
novel approach will take advantage of the fact that much of metabolism conducted
by living organisms is redox chemistry. This chemistry is measurable through
extracellular electron transfer–electrochemical signals. The project goal is to
understand electrochemical signals in plant-soil-microbe systems and develop
rules relating electrochemical signals to microbiome function in a model
agricultural system. The project activities include 1) investigation of electron
transfer mechanisms in soil to link electrochemical signals, local chemical
conditions, and microbial community structure and function; 2) investigation of
feedbacks between electrochemical signals, microbiomes and plant phenotypes, and
performance; and 3) extraction of rules from high-dimensional data correlating
microbiome structure and function to electrochemical signals and plant
phenotypes and sensor. This project will build the fundamental knowledge to
predict microbiome structure and function from electrochemical signals, paving
the way for more in-depth understanding of soil microbiome activity and soil
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.