* 2226174
* SBIR Phase II: A machine learning-driven telerehabilitation solution designed to promote the personalized recovery of hand and arm functions post stroke
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Mee Eriksson, NEUROTECHR3 INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2025
* USD 997,735.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to potentially improve the quality of life
for individuals suffering arm and hand impairments from stroke, through a
medical device for telerehabilitation. Each year, ~800,000 people have a stroke
in the United States, and about 65% of them suffer long-term upper extremity
impairments. Due to many barriers such as cost, transportation, and time, many
individuals do not obtain enough therapy for recovery. The telerehabilitation
approach may reduce some of these barriers, allowing therapists and their
patients to have meaningful remote sessions. For therapists, this may improve
fiscal outcomes by automating the flow of reviewing patient progress, adjusting
their rehabilitation treatments, and billing for services. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the development of a personalized
telerehabilitation system, specifically for hand and arm motor recovery, for
individuals suffering from a stroke. New exergames designed for rehabilitation
of the fingers, hand, and arm will be developed and added to the current library
of games. Machine learning will be added to the system to create a versatile,
engaging, and customizable solution. This novel approach to rehabilitation will
personalize treatments that may be more effective by addressing individual user
needs with predictive analytics. Machine learning will drive the recommendation
system to synchronize the rehabilitation plan with the patient recovery
trajectory. This synchronization will help the therapist provide personalized
therapeutic exercises and possibly increase their patients’ recovery outcomes.
The games and machine learning algorithms will be evaluated with clinicians and
individuals with stroke. The final step will be to test the feasibility of the
system in a comprehensive stroke center. These capabilities of personalized
virtual rehabilitation, remote clinician supervision, and progress tracking may
offer a cost-effective way to improve patient
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.