* 2226568
* SitS: Leveraging spectroscopy and in situ soil sensing for the prediction of keystone soil microbial functions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Zachary Freedman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,199,989.00

Soil represents the second largest pool of carbon on Earth, and soil microbes
like fungi and bacteria are key determinants of the amount of carbon sequestered
in soil. Because relatively small changes in the amount of carbon sequestered
can affect the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, soil microbes have
the potential to mitigate or exacerbate climate change. Current biogeochemical
models of carbon sequestration do not adequately incorporate soil microbial
activity and this research team will use recently developed sensors to explore
the role of soil microbes to carbon dynamics in diverse ecosystems. More
specifically, this project will implement novel low-cost and efficient soil
sensing platforms to facilitate the rapid estimation of microbial functions from
thousands of samples collected across space and time in the continental US to
improve predictions of future storage of soil carbon. Additional broader impacts
of this project include experiential learning opportunities in soil ecology for
high school students across Wisconsin as well as opportunities for young
scholars in computer science to develop interactive games about soil sensing,
microbial functions, and biogeochemical modeling. This award was made through
the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative partnership
between the National Science Foundation and the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA
NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will transform understanding of
dynamic soil processes by defining parsimonious sets of spectral and microbial
parameters that can be used to estimate microbial functions associated with soil
carbon dynamics in both natural and managed systems. Interdisciplinary
approaches to integrate soil sensing, mechanical engineering, metabolomics,
microbiology, and biogeochemistry will be used to uncover relationships between
novel in situ soil sensing data, soil spectra, and key microbial functions that
are associated with soil carbon sequestration. The project will test the
hypothesis that combined mid-infrared spectroscopic and novel in situ soil
sensing technology can revolutionize understanding of key microbial processes at
regional and continental scales and improve next generation biogeochemical
models of carbon sequestration. To test this hypothesis, the team will integrate
field and soil spectral observations from two long-term data sources, National
Ecological Observatory Network sites and a cropping systems trial in Wisconsin,
with lab estimations of soil carbon fractions, microbial activity, and
metabolite variability to quantify the capacity of soil sensing technology to
predict soil microbial functions that drive soil carbon sequestration. In
addition, the resulting dataset that will be made available to the research
community to address future questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.