* 2226055
* Collaborative Research: The role of the Southern Ocean in Late Miocene climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Ana Ravelo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 240,179.00

Concern over rising global temperatures makes it important to predict future
climate change. However, to predict future climate requires a better
understanding of how the climate system works in a warmer world. One way to
better understand future warmth is to look at a warm period in the past. The
project will explore one of the most recent periods of long-term warmth, the
late Miocene, approximately 5 to 8.5 million years ago. The Miocene was
characterized by warmer temperatures globally, and particularly in the polar
regions. However, currently models are not able to correctly hindcast Miocene
temperatures and often underestimate the warming. The ability to predict and
understand this warmer world is limited by the availability of observations from
the late Miocene. This is particularly true of the Southern Ocean, the area of
ocean around Antarctica. This region plays an important role in controlling
global temperature changes because it interacts with atmospheric carbon dioxide
through physical processes (e.g., ocean mixing) and biological productivity
(e.g., photosynthesis). Currently, there are no records of surface ocean
temperature or biological productivity from the late Miocene for the Pacific
sector of the Southern Ocean. This project will generate records of late Miocene
oceanographic conditions in this region, including ocean surface temperature and
biological productivity. These data will document how warm the Southern Ocean
was during the late Miocene. The data will also provide key insights into how
climate in a warmer world responds to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Finally, the study will assess how processes in the Southern Ocean may have
contributed to the cooling of the globe at the end of the Miocene. This work
will support graduate and undergraduate students in both oceanography and
science education. As part of the project, science education MS students and
oceanography PhD students will work together to develop expertise in equitable
teaching methods and curricular design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Miocene (23.3 -
5.05 Ma) is critical to understand as it was a period of sustained warmth
leading up to the early phase of Northern Hemisphere glaciation. A recent
Miocene model comparison study (MioMIP1) indicates that: during the late Miocene
the majority of warmth is attributed to atmospheric carbon dioxide (pCO2)
forcing; climate sensitivity to pCO2 forcing is state dependent; regional
sensitivity to orbital variations in insolation is poorly understood and model-
dependent; while a reduced meridional sea surface temperature (SST) gradient is
generally a robust feature of warm climates with profound impacts on the
hydrologic cycle, it is not well-constrained. One of the largest data-model
misfits is in the southern high latitudes where models severely underestimate
observed warming. However, this misfit is determined by observations from only a
few southern sites, none of which are from the vast region of the central
Pacific Southern Ocean (SO). This project will produce the first
paleoceanographic records from the late Miocene to early Pliocene (8.3 – 4.0 Ma)
in the Central Pacific sector of the SO from a recently drilled site (IODP
Expedition 383, Site U1541). These records, covering the Late Miocene Cooling
and Late Miocene Carbon Isotopic Shift, will enable the determination of South
Pacific meridional SST gradients, an evaluation of long-term climate sensitivity
to pCO2 forcing and orbital forcing, an assessment of the links between SST and
paleoproductivity variability, and of the evolution of deep-water circulation.
The project objectives are to: (a) develop a high-resolution Uk’37-based SST
record to constrain the cold southern end member of the meridional SST gradient
and to evaluate responses to decreasing pCO2 forcing and potential changes in
orbital variability as the mean state changed, and (b) use paleoproductivity
proxies to test the hypothesis that enhanced marine productivity during the late
Miocene contributed to the removal of atmospheric CO2 leading into the Pliocene.
Although not the focus of this project, the study will also use benthic
foraminiferal d13C at U1541 to constrain zonal and meridional gradients in deep
ocean d13C to inform potential changes in global deep-water circulation. The new
late Miocene data from Site U1541, a previously unstudied region, will provide
new insight into the workings of the climate system in a warmer
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.