* 2226186
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Cutting Improvements: Non-Clinical Tomography Users Research Network (NoCTURN)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessica Maisano, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 188,814.00

The NoCTURN (Non-Clinical Tomography Users Research Network) research
coordination network will improve standardization and adoption of FAIR data
guiding principles for non-clinical tomography, broadly understood here as data
gathering technologies used in a wide variety of research disciplines to obtain
sectional scans of physical objects and samples by use of wave signals. The
project will coordinate with more than one hundred participating institutions
and groups, both public and private, on needed standardization of common, core
requirements for data reuse, such as metadata, storage, and interoperability.
The goal of the project is to increase the research value of tomographic
datasets, foster interdisciplinary collaborations, and create new opportunities
for linked data initiatives and metadata aggregation or
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonstandard formats of tomography scans
currently limit data reuse because datasets often cannot be shared and quickly
become obsolete once the proprietary software that generated them is deprecated.
As a result, digital warehouses for publicly funded tomography data such as
Morphobank, Morphosource, and Phenome10K tend only to host outputs from specific
steps in the data generation pipeline that utilize non-proprietary file formats
such as .TXT (for metadata), .TIFF (for image stacks), and .STL (for digital 3D
objects). Intermediate data, including detector outputs, reconstruction
algorithm parameters, 3D volume files, and segmentation editor files, often are
considered to be transient because they have no cross-platform utility. As a
result, files representing these data generally are not made accessible,
rendering it impossible to replicate each step of the data-capture and
processing pipeline. This curtails methodological repeatability and data reuse,
and it forestalls future advances in image processing that could augment data
already in hand. These challenges can be overcome through better connectivity
across the tomographic community and to that end a network of more than one
hundred representatives from diverse fields of research, education, and industry
ranging from established practitioners at the forefront of tomographic science
as well as early career scholars have come together for this project to develop
and foster adoption of new standards for data sharing across multiple
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate for Engineering and
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.