* 2226883
* RAPID: Red lines and Negotiables: How Exposure to Wartime Violence Influences Support for Peace Settlements
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Thomas Zeitzoff, American University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2023
* USD 31,434.00

This project will study how exposure to wartime conditions influences public
support for different possible peace settlements. Does exposure to violence lead
citizens to take a hardline approach to any peace settlements? Or does it make
them more open to peace settlements in order to end the violence? To answer
these questions, the project will conduct a series of surveys and survey
experiments looking at which types of peace deals are considered acceptable, and
conversely which terms of terms peace are unacceptable. Finding credible
estimates of different potential terms of peace settlements that publics would
accept during wartime is a crucial national security question that can influence
the policies of national leaders on questions of wartime negotiations and war
termination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What kind of peace settlements
would a public living through the violence of a foreign invasion be willing to
accept? How does exposure to violence and displacement influence these
attitudes? These are crucial questions to understanding war termination. In this
project researchers develop a novel theory of how exposure to wartime violence
leads people to harden resolve on certain issues by turning negotiable terms of
settlement into “red lines,” while being increasingly flexible on other terms of
settlement. Using a survey experimental approach, along with novel measurements
of self-reported and observational exposure to violence paired with
administrative data, this project will test hypotheses when and why citizens
engage in both deontological (red lines) and consequentialist (negotiables)
reasoning during wartime when considering different possible peace plans. The
results of this project will make innovative and significant contributions to
scholarship on questions relating to the causes of public opinion, wartime
negotiations, and the domestic sources of war
termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.