* 2226640
* Conference: 2023 NSF Algorithms for Modern Power Systems (AMPS) Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Barry Lee, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The project is to hold a workshop, titled "2023 NSF Algorithms for Modern Power
Systems (AMPS) Workshop," which will be held at George Mason University in Fall
(October) 2023. Modernizing the power grid infrastructure continues to be a
grand challenge in the United States and around the world. Modernization will
lead to a more reliable source and delivery of electric power, which is vital to
the national security and economy of this country. The urgency of this goal has
been further accentuated by the devastating societal consequences that have
recently occurred due to disruptions in the delivery of electric power. But to
achieve this goal, a combined effort from many branches of science and
engineering will be needed. In particular, because of the substantial
mathematical and statistical basis of power grid analysis and modelling,
mathematicians and statisticians can greatly contribute to this effort.
Innovative mathematics and statistical approaches can be applied to traditional
and modern power grid applications. To accelerate this contribution, the
Division of Mathematical Sciences at NSF has recently partnered with the Office
of Electricity at the Department of Energy (DOE) to create the Algorithms for
Modern Power Systems (AMPS) program. The goal of this conference is to bring
together mathematicians and statisticians of active AMPS projects and DOE
engineers and scientists to report on research development, and to facilitate
creation, transfer and application of knowledge on modern power grids. In
addition, this conference will foster synergism between the different AMPS
projects and DOE projects on the emerging power
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical talks and posters will be presented in this
conference. Topics to be presented include machine learning and neural networks
approaches to power grid dynamics, uncertainty quantification and dimension
reduction techniques for weather renewables, real-time approaches for fault
detection, and power grid vulernability. Student and post-doctoral researchers
are strongly encouraged to attend this workshop. This workshop will provide
these early-career researchers exposure to other directions in power grid
research supported through AMPS, and opportunities to connect with DOE
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.