* 2226006
* RI: Small: DaRE: Detection and Recognition of Euphemisms
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jing Peng, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2025
* USD 564,126.00

To fully understand human language, machines need to be able to recognize and
interpret expressions that contain hidden meanings. This project concentrates on
euphemisms, mild or indirect phrases used in place of harsher or more offensive
ones. Euphemisms are often used to mask profanity or refer to sensitive topics
such as death, sex, religion, disability, or personal relationships in a polite
way. People use euphemisms all the time, e.g., 'negative patient outcome',
'between jobs', 'financially fortunate', 'correctional facility','friendly
fire', or 'sunshine unit'. Different cultures/languages use different
euphemisms. Euphemisms change over time. Machines that process human language do
not understand euphemisms yet. This project is devoted to making machines
understand euphemisms in different languages, and therefore contributing to
improving the capabilities of artificial intelligence. Additional benefits
include interesting new generalizations about the nature of euphemisms and the
training of a diverse cadre of undergraduate and graduate students in highly
practical work on a difficult interdisciplinary problem. Montclair State
University, a Hispanic Serving Institution, is known for its diverse student
population and a large proportion of first-generation college students.
Montclair State University puts great emphasis on justice and inclusivity in
academia. This project is not an exception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting and
interpreting figurative language is a rapidly growing area in Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Unfortunately, the processing of euphemisms is lacking in NLP
thus far. The project addresses the following: 1) algorithm design for detecting
and interpreting euphemisms, and 2) interpretability of black-box neural models
by creating a series of new datasets and tasks that explore the embedding space
of transformer language models for euphemism recognition. The key insights are
1) euphemistic expressions and their paraphrased counterparts differ in the
strength of the sentiment they convey; 2) euphemistic and non-euphemistic
interpretation is context-sensitive; 3) euphemisms are vaguer than the taboo
expressions they substitute. The experiments test what linguistic properties of
euphemisms the deep learning approaches capture and why. The algorithm developed
can detect new euphemisms, not previously recorded in dictionaries, without
human intervention. The computational work on euphemisms is important to further
the understanding of how strategic use of language can bias people's perceptions
of important and highly contentious actions and perhaps find ways how to de-bias
language models. This work on euphemisms helps understand what topics are
controversial or sensitive in a specific culture. Applying the algorithm to
diachronic data and detecting the change in euphemism usage leads to a better
understanding of culture changes. The corpora produced are useful for answering
questions at the intersection of AI, NLP, linguistics, cultural anthropology,
and social psychology. The range of languages provides a natural way of making
interesting linguistic observations about euphemisms. Since euphemisms are a
form of verbal behavior, finding a way to detect and interpret euphemisms
automatically may lead to a better understanding of human behavior in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.