* 2226117
* SHF: Small: A Distributed Scalable End-to-End Tail Latency SLO Guaranteed Resource Management Framework for Microservices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Hao Che, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,953.00

Microsevice architecture typically yields highly scalable, maintainable,
testable and loosely coupled systems. For this reason, cloud-computing services
are shifting from traditional monolithic architectures to microservice
architectures to enable fast development, easy debugging and frequent software
updating. A primary design goal of cloud computing is to provide user-centric
services that meet diverse end-to-end application query tail-latency Service
Level Objective (SLO) requirements, while maximizing system-resource
utilization. This proposal aims at developing such an approach, known as
Distributed scalable End-to-end Tail lAtency SLO Guaranteed rEsource Management
framework for microservices (DETAGEM). DETAGEM explores foundational principles
to establish a solid theoretical foundation towards a comprehensive solution for
resource allocation with guaranteed per-query tail-latency SLO. The algorithms
and tools developed in DETAGEM will be made available to benefit a broad set of
researchers, engineers and educators, and thereby advancing research across a
range of other areas. Moreover, the obtained results from this project will be
integrated into existing undergraduate and graduate curricula on a continuous
basis. The involvement of underrepresented students in this proposed research at
The University of Texas at Arlington will enhance their competitiveness in the
future job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DETAGEM is a comprehensive distributed
scalable solution rooted in fundamental principles. The approach taken by
DETAGEM is to (a) derive a mathematical foundation that maps the SLO for
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) workflows for queries to the task queuing budgets
for tasks in the queies at their respective microservices, based on the
statistics of unloaded task response time measured at individual microservices
at runtime; and (b) develop task-queuing-budget-aware queue-management schemes
and resource-auto-scaling schemes based on measured task-queuing budget-
violation ratios. The objective is to ensure that all the microservices meet
their respective task-queuing budgets, which will then guarantee that the end-
to-end query tail-latency SLO for the queries are satisfied. The successful
completion of the proposed project is expected to greatly advance the state-of-
the-art in terms of methodologies, theories, and practical solutions for the
microservice architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.