* 2226880
* SCC-IRG Track 2: A data-driven approach to designing a community-focused indoor heat emergency alert system for vulnerable residents (CommHEAT)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ulrike Passe, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,216,000.00

Extreme heat is deadly and disproportionately affects the elderly and residents
of low-income neighborhoods. Extreme heat and humidity events will increase in
coming years. Lack of air-conditioning and the urban heat island effect create
dangerous indoor conditions. Up to 60% of older, poorly built homes in low-
income areas lack AC. Combining residents’ behavior and building characteristics
in machine learning (SciML) and agent-based models (ABM) will identify when
residents are exposed to overheating risks in their home and connect them with
resources to mitigate dangerous conditions. Leveraging collaboration between
Iowa State University, the City of Des Moines, Polk County, community
organizations, and collaborators at UNI and UTA, this team will use empirical
data and participatory processes to develop novel hybrid social- and physics-
aware models to increase predictability of extreme heat-related indoor
conditions. A community-focused microclimate-informed indoor heat emergency
alert (CommHEAT) system will personalize community heat-related emergency
management capacity. This will provide societal benefits via improved prediction
of indoor conditions in homes for adaptation to extreme heat. The social-
biophysical models are broadly transferable to facilitate climate adaptation and
improve public health associated with extreme heat. Project completion will
provide communities with a framework for microclimate-informed heat alerts in
real time. Outcomes will support local heat health action plans to reduce
emergency calls, heat illness-related hospitalizations, and mortality from
indoor heat exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address knowledge
gaps through social and thermal-physical models of adaptation/response to
extreme heat indoors. Data will integrate social/behavioral responses to extreme
heat with physics-constrained models and develop response strategies across
spatial and temporal scales. Intellectual merit includes development of novel
data-driven modeling combining validated ABM and physics-constrained SciML
models of building features with human behavior within/near buildings. This
project contributes to three scientific advances: (1) describing human behavior
during extreme events based on human choices; (2) creating localized physics-
constrained indoor condition models with real-time parameters; and (3)
integrating models in an app using a transferable framework to predict
conditions over time. Through participatory design with vulnerable residents in
the study area the ABM will be an empirically valid model of the community,
enabling prediction of responses to different app-enabled heat mitigation
strategies under climate scenarios in a heat alert system that will improve
health outcomes. Transferable SciML will account for underlying physics that tie
local conditions to building thermal properties. The CommHEAT app will visualize
alert mitigation scenarios to guide decision-making at multiple scales for
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.