* 2226343
* 2022 Waterman Award
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Daniel Larremore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Daniel "Dan" B. Larremore,
assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science and the BioFrontiers
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder as a 2022 Alan T. Waterman Award
recipient. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Larremore is recognized for his unparalleled
interdisciplinary research in the field of computational epidemiology and high
impact work in the emerging field of data science. His research combines the
development of advanced computational methods with their application to produce
new scientific understanding about important societal problems. His innovative
research combines mathematical models with complex social and biological systems
to advance not only the forefront of science, but also help shape policies that
have enormous real-world impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Larremore's
interdisciplinary work combines mathematical models with complex social and
biological systems to advance the forefront of science and help shape policies
that have enormous real-world impact. Dr. Larremore is also actively engaged in
studying the structure and dynamics of the scientific enterprise itself, in the
interdisciplinary field called the "science of science," which sheds new light
on the drivers of scientific discovery, from the structure of faculty hiring
markets to productivity and career trajectories. Dr. Larremore is committed to
making science more inclusive through his actions as a collaborator and mentor,
with rigorous academic work that builds an evidence base for quantifying and
breaking down barriers to broadening participation in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Larremore received a Ph.D. in applied
mathematics from University of Colorado Boulder (2012) and holds an
undergraduate degree from Washington University in St. Louis. He is an assistant
professor in the Department of Computer Science and the BioFrontiers Institute,
leads the Larremore Lab, and is affiliate faculty for applied mathematics at the
University of Colorado Boulder. He is also external faculty for the Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, where he was a postdoctoral fellow investigating
the epidemiology and genetic networks of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium
falciparum, from 2012-2015. He was an Omidyar Fellow at the Santa Fe Institute
(2015-2017).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.