* 2226699
* Collaborative Research: Novel silicon-based optoelectronic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Timothy Strobel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 10/31/2025
* USD 149,564.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon is an essential
semiconductor for the majority of modern electronic and solar-energy devices.
Nevertheless, the normal crystalline structure of silicon that is currently used
has physical properties that limit light absorption/emission processes and other
advanced technological applications. In contrast, different crystalline forms of
silicon with alternative physical properties can overcome these challenges and
impact a range of technologies including solid-state detectors, optical
communication, and energy conversion devices, while simultaneously maintaining
the intrinsic advantages of silicon, such as natural abundance and low toxicity.
This collaborative research project aims to develop and discover completely new
crystalline structures of silicon and silicon-based compounds with enhanced
and/or complementary optical and electronic properties using a joint theoretical
and experimental strategy. Research is focused on developing recently discovered
crystalline forms of silicon, and on revealing novel synthetic approaches to
achieve additional silicon-based materials with computational guidance. In
contrast to conventional synthetic approaches that take place at high
temperatures and low pressures, access to new silicon structures in this project
is enabled by the utilization of very high pressures (up to one hundred thousand
times atmospheric pressure) and moderate temperatures. These unique processing
conditions provide access to new silicon structures possessing a range of
physical properties that extend beyond those of the normal form of silicon that
is currently used. This research project is executed within an educational
environment that promotes the academic development of students and postdoctoral
scholars and emphasizes science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) career
trajectories. The methodologies developed for this project are expected to be
generalizable to other classes of materials beyond silicon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
computational methods predict the existence of new materials and their
properties with remarkable accuracy. Nevertheless, practical synthetic
strategies are needed to access a plethora of hypothetical materials with
superlative properties. This collaborative research project explores the depth
of realizable materials for silicon and probes the relationships between
metastable allotropes/compounds and optoelectronic properties in order to
achieve new structures of silicon with properties that exceed or complement the
normal diamond-cubic form. Accompanying the development of two novel silicon
allotropes (Si24 and 4H-Si) via crystal growth, doping, strain engineering and
properties optimization, the discovery of additional silicon allotropes and
compounds is enabled using unique high-pressure synthetic methods guided by ab
initio transition pathway and structure searching predictions. The comprehensive
exploration of complex potential energy surfaces is facilitated through the
development of computationally efficient machine learning methodologies. The
research expands the library of synthetic routes to kinetically controlled
silicon-based materials using novel precursors, and the intrinsic optical and
electronic transport properties of new silicon allotropes and compounds are
determined experimentally. The overall goal of the project is to produce and
characterize new silicon phases with enhanced optoelectronic function and the
potential to inform next-generation technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.