* 2226249
* Equipment: Acquisition of Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer for Isotopic Analyses of Sulfur, Carbon, and Oxygen
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Amanda Oehlert, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2025
* USD 414,601.00

This award will enable the acquisition of a stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer (SIRMS) and peripheral equipment to be used in the Department of
Marine Geosciences at the University of Miami’s Rosenstiel School of Marine,
Atmospheric, and Earth Science. These instruments measure small differences in
the concentration of stable isotopes of sulfur, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen in
a variety of sample types. The new equipment will increase our analytical
capabilities, allowing for measurements of organic matter, as well as carbonate,
sulfate, and phosphate minerals. These new analytical capabilities will support
active and planned research, complement the available instrumentation currently
used, and support the research and education mission of the university. Graduate
and undergraduate students will receive hands-on training in the operation and
maintenance of SIRMS, as well as data analysis and interpretation through
ongoing and future research. The principal investigators will also share these
approaches through their teaching. Both graduate and undergraduate students from
the University of Miami and other partner institutions will gain hands-on
experience with SIRMS through student-led class projects. This award will also
support outreach activities, such as the training of a Master of Professional
Science student, a workshop aimed at training local students in design and 3D
printing for scientific applications, and a YouTube channel where videos on
SIRMS maintenance and operation will be posted to enhance knowledge transfer
beyond our own research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the proposed
SIRMS will be vital in supporting several active and planned research programs
facilitating investigations into geological environments, including tropical,
shallow-marine carbonate settings to brine pools at the bottom of the Red Sea,
to extreme environments analogous to conditions that characterized early Earth.
We will continue our history of analyzing samples from sediments, sedimentary
organic matter, shales, corals, brine pools, soils, plants, speleothems,
celestine, seawater and sediment pore waters, and will facilitate new
measurements of fish carbonates, Amazonian plants and soils, as well as
microbial mats and stromatolites. The new capabilities of this instrument,
including high temperature pyrolysis of organic matter, sulphates, and
phosphates will add innovative geochemical capabilities augmenting established
techniques in the department to ongoing and future projects. This new instrument
will also support PI teaching, giving graduate and undergraduate students hands
on experience with stable isotope analyses. This project will also support new
education and outreach initiatives, including a 6-month internship for a Master
of Professional Science Student, a MakersLab Workshop aimed at training
undergraduate students on the principles of 3D design and printing for science
applications, and a YouTube channel providing at least 10 videos on research and
IRMS maintenance. Finally, we will disseminate our research through Women in
Science Day and Diversity in Science Day events at the Rosenstiel School. In
concert, new analytical capabilities enabled by this award will support state of
the art research and education at the University of
Miami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.