* 2226007
* CAREER TRAJECTORIES OF STEM DOCTORAL STUDENTS: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF LATENT GROUPS USING CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE MEASURES AND METHODS
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* James Neumeister, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,255.00

This research project focuses on understanding the experiences and perspectives
of marginalized groups in STEM fields. Three aims frame the project team's
research plan. First is to examine factors that influence and predict career
trajectories of subgroups of STEM doctoral students and graduates based on their
career motivations and aspirations. Second is to develop and integrate
culturally responsive student and context-level measures to investigate the
career pathways of STEM PhD students. Third is to validate survey measures for
marginalized groups in STEM. Thus framed, the project offers both substantive
and methodological contributions. In the first case, the project holds promise
to provide novel empirical evidence to understand STEM studentsâ€™ career
trajectories, the mechanisms and factors that influence them, and variability
across diverse subgroups. In the second case, the project seeks to develop new
measures and scales associated with Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT),
evaluating their psychometric properties and evaluating their operation and
utility across diverse populations. Moreover, the study results could address
key shortcomings in current quantitative analyses of STEM graduate training and
career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's principal investigators
will employ a mixed-methods research design to answer three sets of research
questions: (1) What discreet sub-populations can be identified based on the
career motivations and objectives of STEM PhD students and recent graduates?
What are the characteristics of each sub-population? (2) What individual
proximal and broader social factors influence the career trajectories of STEM
Ph.D. students and recent graduates within each sub-population? Why? (3) Does
evidence support the construct and cross-group validity of the survey constructs
adapted and developed for this study? The investigators will collect survey data
from current and recent doctoral students of three North Carolina institutions
and analyze the data set using regression mixture modeling. The study results
could inform policies and practices to expand the pipeline for diverse STEM
doctoral students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR supports fundamental STEM education research
projects that address issues relevant to STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.