* 2226886
* EAGER: Censusing via acoustic energy (CVAE) for tracking animal phenology and population size
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Laura Kloepper, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,186.00

Estimating animal population sizes is crucial for conservation, especially when
predicting how species may respond to changes in their environment. However,
traditional methods to estimate populations require significant time, effort and
expense, and are often conducted only once per year. This approach is likely to
miss within year dynamics. This research, using Adélie penguins and cave
roosting gray bats, will develop and test a new method using sound to remotely
estimate how the numbers of animals living in groups changes over time. The goal
is to develop a new approach to counting animals that reduces hands-on effort,
increases the frequency of population counts, and improves data available for
species conservation. This project will also support a scientific workshop to
discuss data needs and emerging approaches for low-cost continuous population
monitoring in remote locations. Lastly, this research will include undergraduate
research opportunities for students from under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding spatiotemporal population dynamics,
especially for mobile animals in patchy habitats, can uncover fundamental
processes that regulate populations across taxa and help predict how animals
will respond to disturbance events. Models are widely used to study the
population dynamics within and among populations. These models require
population counts, which are typically conducted in discrete time periods such
as yearly counts. Although yearly counts can be adequate for assessing
population responses to longer term press events, this approach cannot capture
how specific or interconnected populations will respond to short-term
perturbations, or pulse disturbances. More frequent monitoring of multiple
populations is needed but especially challenging in remote habitats. Using
island-nesting seabirds and cave-roosting bats, this research will test the
hypothesis that acoustic energy indices are reliable estimates of population
sizes for mobile, vocal animals in patchy habitats, and that with the data from
this non-invasive approach can be used to model how animals respond to pulse
disturbances. If successful, this approach to remote monitoring could benefit
demographic and metapopulation modeling, and has the potential to revolutionize
how scientists study and understand species that inhabit isolated landscapes. It
would also provide critical data needed to protect species experiencing
anthropogenic-induced population declines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.