* 2226779
* Role of the Glycocalyx and Spike-Like Proteins in Virus-Cell Adhesion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Anand Jagota, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 446,953.00

Viral infection is a major public health issue around the world. It is important
to work on methods such as vaccines that can eliminate or reduce the chance of
getting infected. Infections begin when a viral particle sticks to the outer
coating of a live cell and most vaccines and therapies work by trying to block
the adhesion between the viral particle and the cell surface. It is, therefore,
important to understand how virus particles infect our body’s cells. In this
project, the investigators propose to study the mechanisms of virus-cell
adhesion. The approach is two-pronged. First, computer model simulations of
virus-cell adhesion will be developed and used to study two common features of
virus/cell adhesion processes: (a) the role of spike-like adhesive protrusions
on the virus or cell surface, and (b) the mechanism by which viruses penetrate
through the protective cell surface coating: the Glycocalyx. Second, the
computer models will be validated by experimental measurements of adhesion. The
multidisciplinary and collaborative nature of this research program will provide
excellent educational and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. The investigators will work with the Deputy Vice President for Equity
and Community to seek under-represented minority candidates for graduate study
through Lehigh’s institutional membership in the National GEM Consortium with
its mission to enable underrepresented minority graduate students’ education in
STEM disciplines. Via a long-standing partnership with the Da Vinci Science
Center in Allentown PA, the work will be communicated to the general public
through the design of new learning activities for informal education about
viruses, how they infect human cells, as well as how vaccines or therapies work.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop meso-scale coarse-
grained (CG) models to study two common features of virus-cell adhesion
processes: (1) the omnipresent glycocalyx that decorates the exterior surface of
a cell membrane, and (2) spike-like protrusions either on the viral surface
(e.g., SARS-CoV-2) or on the cell membrane (e.g., Ebola) that form flexible
receptors and so mediate adhesion. The CG approach is used to effectively
optimize between the generality of highly abstracted continuum models and the
specificity of highly detailed all-atom molecular simulations. Studies are
designed to answer two related puzzling questions: (1) What is the role of the
glycocalyx in mediating virus-cell adhesion? Specifically, how does the virus
reach the cell-membrane-bound receptors when the glycocalyx thickness is
significantly larger than the virus size? and (2) What is the role of the
physical properties of spike-like protrusions, such as their length and
flexibility, and how do these affect adhesion? Models will be validated and
accompanied by experimental investigation of adhesion using AFM force
spectroscopy and adhesion contact mechanics within the Johnson-Kendall-Roberts
framework. The primary outcome will be a set of experimentally validated coarse-
grained models that can be used to study and predict the effect of spike-like
protrusions and glycocalyx properties on virus-cell adhesion. Because these two
elements occur in so many of the viruses that cause infections in humans, the
results of the studies will have broad societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.