* 2226508
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Structural and Compositional Instability-Driven Ductility in Refractory High-Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Peter Liaw, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 11/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering term for a material’s
ability to be stretched by pulling, without breaking, is known as “ductility”.
This collaborative research program is developing an atomistic understanding of
the relationship between how refractory high-entropy alloys are made and their
ductility response. These alloys, which have near equal amounts of multiple
elements can have both high strength and high melting points and are ideal for
elevated-temperature applications. A main drawback of these alloys however, is
their low ductility at room temperature. This research project addresses this
issue by seeking to increase the ductile strength of these alloys with twinning-
induced plasticity and transition-induced plasticity. These approaches can
result in changes to the crystal lattice known as distortions. To detect these
lattice distortions as soon as possible and at the level of atoms, a data
mining-based transmission electron microscopy approach is being developed. The
study is assisted by a complimentary effort to make new materials, mechanically
test these materials, and characterize their structure. Results are assisting in
the design of new refractory alloys and the data mining microscopy technique can
be applied to other materials as well, therefore a broad impact on other alloy
research is expected. This project also integrates with an outreach effort
across multiple levels tasked with contributing to a sustainable, adaptable, and
globally competitive science, technology, and engineering workforce in the areas
of alloy design and characterization. This research program is also seeking to
increase public awareness of materials, data science, and related technologies,
while simultaneously enriching the pool of underrepresented groups interested in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project explores the phase
stability of group IV elements (Ti, Zr, and Hf) containing alloys and their
related twinning-induced plasticity and transition-induced plasticity effects.
Specifically, the research focuses on the precursors of phase transformation, in
the form of structure-induced local lattice distortions and chemical short-range
ordering in disordered multi-principal component alloys. The study is motivated
by the promise of the high-entropy alloy concept for designing new alloys and
the lack of understanding concerning the effects of chemical complexity on phase
stability and physical properties. This research uses ductility in refractory
high-entropy alloys as a model problem for the studies of body-centered-cubic
(bcc) dynamic instability, and the effects of chemical disorder and lattice
distortions on phase stability. This project is also further developing the
cepstrum-based analysis of electron-diffuse scattering in electron nano-
diffraction patterns. Correlation with lattice distortions and short-range
ordering in selected alloys is being assisted by efforts to synthesize and
characterize a collection of multi-principal element refractory alloys.
Specifically, this study is answering the following questions: How can one
determine local chemical ordering and its impact on dynamic instability? How do
phase transformations manifest in a distorted lattice? How do the above two
effects influence stress-induced martensitic transformation and deformation
twinning? This project also supports the goal of contributing to a globally
competitive workforce in STEM while also enriching the pool of underrepresented
groups who will be participants in such a workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.