* 2226404
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Identifying and Quantifying Design Principles For Improving Password Manager Usage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Scott Ruoti, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 515,999.00

To be safe, people need to select strong passwords that attackers can’t guess.
They also need a different password for every one of their accounts. The
difficulty of this task leads many people to select weak passwords or reuse
passwords. Password managers seek to improve password quality by helping people
create, store, and enter passwords, allowing for the creation of stronger and
unique passwords. However, prior research has shown that while people like their
password managers, they fail to use many of the password manager’s security-
critical functionality. For example, many people only store passwords of their
own creation, ignoring the password manager’s password generation feature,
leaving themselves vulnerable to attack. This project will address this problem
by measuring the extent to which different designs can encourage people to use
all the security-critical functionality their password manager provides. Not
only will this work increase the scientific understanding of how to build
password managers and other authentication systems, but it will also offer
tangible security and usability benefits to password manager users. These
security and usability benefits will positively impact societal welfare and
national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work to identify design
principles to improve password managers’ usability, utility, and utilization in
three areas. First, this project will address password generation, making it
easier to enter generated passwords on a wide range of devices—for example,
tablets, TVs, game consoles, etc. This will be accomplished by surveying people
regarding the devices where they enter passwords, measuring those devices’ input
characteristics, and designing password generation schemes that consider those
characteristics. User studies comparing these prototypes will measure their
relative effectiveness. Second, this project will improve password managers’
health check functionality. This will be done by conducting exploratory user
studies to understand impediments to using password health checks correctly and
frequently, prototyping systems that address those impediments, then measuring
the effectiveness of those prototypes in user studies. Third, this project will
explore how password managers can better support the symbiotic needs of parents
and children. This will be done by interviewing and surveying parents and
children to understand their authentication needs and how they currently use
password managers, designing and prototyping approaches for addressing those
needs, and evaluating those prototypes through user studies. Design principles
identified throughout this research will be summarized in research papers and on
a public-facing website that synthesizes this project’s results in a manner
easily digested by password manager vendors and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.