* 2226437
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: SONIC: Securely Operate through 5G Networks with Informed Control
* TIP,ITE
* 08/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 12/31/2023
* USD 749,995.00

With its strong academia-industry-government partnerships, the SONIC team is
well positioned to convert diverse research outcomes into practical solutions to
support DoD’s goal of securely operating through 5G networks. The success of the
project will not only directly benefit DoD and other government agencies,
thereby enhancing national security, but will also produce broader societal
impacts. The proposed convergence research, with its particular emphasis on a
number of emerging technologies, will enable 5G/NextG networks to securely
support diverse applications in various industrial sectors. The participating
organizations are actively involved in various industry initiatives; this puts
the team in a strong position to influence standards development and contribute
to 5G/NextG and other emerging technologies. In a nutshell, the proposed
convergence research will help advance the US as a leader in current, emerging
and future wireless systems. In a larger scientific and broader societal
context, the proposed research will accelerate the development of new services
and applications over 5G/NextG networks, many yet to be imagined, that will
bring enormous benefits to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop an approach that aims to Securely Operate through 5G Networks with
Informed Control (SONIC). The underlying principle to SONIC is to use
intelligence to secure all operational aspects of operating through a 5G
network. SONIC aims to gracefully adapt to operational mechanisms that might be
available in different operating environments. For example, intelligence in a
non-cooperative setting will enable a limited action/response space, whereas the
same intelligence in a cooperative network with open RAN capabilities will
enable a broader range of actions. Similarly, the SONIC solution space involves
a range of technical risks, i.e., from well established technologies (e.g.,
inverse-multiplexing multiple mobile network operators, e-SIMs), to emerging 5G
abstractions (e.g., network slices), to relatively immature beyond-5G approaches
(e.g., open RAN abstractions). The SONIC team brings a range of expertise,
including mobile networking, Open RAN, spectrum management, wireless
communication, networking economics and policy, network protocols and security,
network measurement, data mining and machine learning. In addition the SONIC
team involves a broad range of organizations, including academia, a mobile
network operator, a small business, a technology company/defense contractor, and
a government agency. The primary security concerns the project addresses are
threats to the performance, availability and robustness of 5G networks.
Specifically, with SONIC, intelligence related to the state of the network,
external threats to the network or operational/situational awareness, drive the
selection of networks or network options (for non-cooperative network), or
interactions with the network (for cooperative networks), to ensure the best
performance, availability and robustness of operating through the available
networks and environment. The project addresses the zero trust goal in securely
operating through 5G networks by advancing and incorporating novel
architectural, structural and mechanistic solutions to add security and enhance
availability and resilience. Instead of looking for point solutions to enable
zero trust, SONIC provides a powerful, flexible and intelligent framework for
securely operating through 5G networks to support DoD
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.