* 2226511
* MFB: Accelerating the Discovery of Novel Liposome Formations with Origins-of-Life Insights, Laboratory Automation, and Machine Learning
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sarah Maurer, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,074,218.00

Formulations chemistry is a crucial, but often overlooked area, in fields as
diverse as pharmaceuticals, agricultural chemicals, paints and coatings,
cosmetics, and household products. Modern designed lipid bilayer structures are
complex, multicomponent blends that define the cell. How much can they be
simplified and still achieve basic functionality? Understanding how to build
lipid structures with specified functionality can advance both fundamental
knowledge about origins of life and biotechnology. Machine learning and
autonomous research methods developed in this project have direct applications
to this problem. Designed lipid bilayer structures with simplified compositions,
like liposomes, are important for drug delivery of novel biological
pharmaceuticals, mRNA vaccines, and agrochemicals. More speculatively, the
ability to create artificial, minimally functional cell-like structures could be
combined with existing cell-free biochemistry systems to generate novel
synthetic biological systems that combine the engineering advantages of cell-
free systems with the ability to self-repair or self-support of cellular
systems. Developing artificial protocells with simple components would not only
inform our knowledge about how life evolved, but also enable the creation of
engineered abiotic biochemical systems. To do this we must overcome the
anthropogenic bias and combinatorial explosion with laboratory automation and
machine-learning methods. Traditional approaches to chemical evolution have been
biased by considering a “best guess” for starting conditions and reactants based
on extant organisms and considered only a relatively limited numbers of chemical
inputs (&lt; 10 reactants) to tame combinatorial complexity. In this project the
investigators will use a combination of laboratory automation and machine-
learning-guided experimentation to obtain datasets and statistical baselines,
needed to test algorithms for exploring and optimizing these complex, non-ideal
mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop algorithms for
autonomous formulations chemistry. Experimental chemistry data is noisy, biased,
and small compared to most machine learning datasets, and so it is necessary to
both make use of existing data while also exploring new chemical systems. The
investigators will develop active and meta- learning machine learning approaches
to learn from existing experimental data when approaching new optimization
problems, utilizing contrastive meta model changes to infer relevant variables.
They will also explore graph regularized matrix factorization methods to learn
low-dimensional representations directly from experimental observations.
Finally, they will continue the development of open-source experimental data
management software to facilitate data reuse and sharing. In this project the
PIs will engage the broader machine-learning community by running open challenge
competitions, using platforms like Kaggle, and disseminating open datasets, with
the aim to bring new technical insights into origins-of-life and biophysics
research, by drawing upon a pool of citizen scientists. This research will be
conducted at two undergraduate-only chemistry departments at Central Connecticut
University and Fordham University. This award will support summer and academic
year research positions for undergraduate students at the two universities, as
well as research of two postdoctoral researchers. Bringing postdoctoral
researchers into undergraduate-focused departments exposes undergraduates to
another phase of the “life of the scientist”, particularly in the form of a
“near peer” who may be more relatable than a professor. It also exposes
postdoctoral researchers to the possibility of active research careers at non-R1
universities. The PIs will continue the development of low-cost, open-source
robotic hardware and pedagogical material that brings origins of life and
laboratory automation into teaching labs, to help train the next generation of
chemists to incorporate automation into their experimental process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Division of
Chemistry (CHE), the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS), the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), and the Division of
Physics (PHY) Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.