* 2226489
* I-Corps:  Imaging Software for Long-Bone Fracture Alignment
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Mohammad Abedin Nasab, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software-driven visual aid for surgeons treating femur
fractures to improve alignment and prevent reoperations. Approximately 350,000
proximal femur fractures and 65,000 femur shaft fractures occur in the United
States annually. Due to the aging population, this number of fractures is
increasing and is anticipated to double by the year 2050. Current surgical
procedures are manual, and surgeons experience a myriad of complications to
align femur fractures, including difficulty in achieving accurate reduction,
subsequent malalignment of bone fragments, high x-ray radiation, nonunion
complications, and soft tissue damage. Malalignment is a serious complication
with long-bone fractures, with a malalignment of 15° or more after femur
fracture fixation occurring in 28% of patients. Using the proposed imaging
software, the surgeon may have more accurate vision and be able to track the
position of the bone fragments during the surgery. The tracking system may
prevent the trial-and-error approach for fracture alignment and reduce the time
of the surgery. By using the proposed imaging software, the surgeon may check
the length and rotation of the aligned bone intraoperatively, which may prevent
malalignment and subsequent reoperations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of an imaging software to aid long-bone
fracture surgery to improve alignment and prevent reoperations. Using the
proposed imaging software, surgeons may have a precise sense of the bone
segments' positions in space relative to each other. Optical trackers are used
to find the position of 2 rods that are attached to the distal and proximal bone
fragments. Image registration is then performed on the X-ray images to find the
exact three dimensional (3D) position of the bone segments. In addition,
computer tomography data of the unbroken bone is used to providing data to align
the fractured bone. Using the proposed imaging software, the surgeon may track
the bone position in real-time while manipulating the bone into the final
desired position guided by the image of the healthy bone. This 3D vision may
provide an advantage for surgeons in comparison to the 2D X-ray images that are
used today to check the bone position and alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.