* 2226021
* CCF:SHF:Small:NAND gate based integrated DNA circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Dmitry Kolpashchikov, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 379,009.00

This project is devoted to addressing existing technological challenges toward
building a computer made of DNA. Electronic computers have dramatically improved
information processing speed and ultimately promoted progress in science,
education, technologies, and welfare. However, modern electronic computers are
difficult to use inside human bodies as they are made of non-biocompatible and
non-biodegradable materials. Moreover, electronic computers can not directly
recognize chemical inputs (e.g., proteins, hormones, DNA, and RNA) and require
chemical sensors with capabilities to translate the chemical recognition event
into an electronic signal. On the other hand, computers do not have to be
electronic. For example, some early computers used mechanical movements of their
components as input/output signals. Biomedical applications would benefit if
computers were made of biological molecules. Such computers could be used as
components of molecular biorobots to continuously control the health state of a
human body without human assistance. In addition, they could be used in
personalized medicine to analyze complex mixtures of biological markers, thus
improving health care in the nation. The principles of the DNA nano-processor
developed in this project can impact the biomedical field by providing efficient
tools for monitoring and correcting a disease state. The concepts and
experimental approaches used in this project will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project
Investigator's long-term goal is to construct a molecular scale processor from
DNA logic gates. This project includes the following stages needed for building
a DNA nano-processor. First, principles for integrating DNA logic gates in DNA
circuits will be developed. Second, principles of connecting two integrated
circuits in a more complex circuit will be established to enable modular and
scalable construction of complex DNA circuits. Third, a universal mechanism for
powering the integrated DNA circuits via signal amplification will be developed.
Finally, the developed technologies will be applied to assemble complex
computational circuits made of DNA molecules. Therefore, this project will solve
the problems of DNA logic gate integration and powering. The solution to these
problems will create a basis for manufacturing a DNA computer, a smaller and
biocompatible counterpart of the modern silicon processors. The research
activities will be integrated with education via (i) developing biochemistry wet
lab experiments dealing with the integration of DNA logic gates and their
application in molecular diagnostics; (ii) research training of students at
undergraduate and graduate levels; (iii) outreach program. The outreach activity
has the potential to impact high school students across multi-ethnic Central
Florida through partnerships with local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.