* 2226201
* Collaborative Research: ER2: The development of research ethics governance projects in computer science
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Katherine Shilton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 03/31/2026
* USD 174,075.00

This collaborative research project is supported by the Ethical and Responsible
Research program. The core focus of the project is to determine what rules and
practices support the national interest in promoting the progress of computer
science while preventing unethical and unjust computer science research.
Computing researchers are currently revising ethics codes, writing new ethics
guidelines, forming new ethics committees within conferences and professional
associations, dictating ethics requirements for funding, and proposing new
ethics requirements for publications. This project characterizes and evaluates
historical, ongoing, and emerging ethics governance projects within computer
science. By creating a recent history of computing governance during this active
period of questioning, the project will appraise and evaluate current efforts,
and recommend best practices for computing research governance. The results of
this project will serve to advance several scientific fields including science
and technology studies, research ethics, and computer science. They will also be
used in discussions with stakeholder communities including activists in
computing ethics, in creating classroom materials for educators, and in
developing accessible and brief white papers that are to be disseminated to
funders, practitioners, and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the
goals indicated above, this project uses qualitative case studies to compare,
evaluate, and interpret the resources, mechanisms, and outcomes of current
cross-cutting efforts in computer science research ethics self-governance. The
case studies will examine the workings of the computing research’s ethics
governance projects to facilitate better understanding of the possibilities and
challenges of a field undertaking diverse and multiple ethics governance
efforts. Building on previous science and technology studies scholarship, our
research reveals the relations enrolling researchers in cultures of ethical
practice. To identify a typology of enrollment and enforcement practices, the
team will undertake analysis of the resources each project has, and the approach
that each project uses to repair past harms, anticipate the future, resolve
insecurities about what counts as ethical behavior, and settle controversies
within the field. Through analysis of historical and current ethics governance
projects, the team will discover how project organization shapes the scope,
goals, and outcomes of ethics governance projects; how different mechanisms for
effecting adherence to ethical guidelines impact outcomes; how contrasting
stakeholders (participants, outside advocates, practitioners) assess the success
of ethics governance projects; and the challenges and opportunities different
ethics governance projects generate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.