* 2226627
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (IEEE ICDM 2022)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Xingquan Zhu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The annual IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) has established
itself as worldâ€™s premier research conference in data mining. The 2022 IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining (IEEE ICDM 2022) will continue the
success of the previous ICDM conferences and provides a leading forum for
disseminating the latest research and education in data mining, machine
learning, and provides an international forum for presentation of original
research results, as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative and
practical development experiences. This project sponsors students, including
earlier career researchers, to attend the 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining (IEEE ICDM 2022), which will be organized in Orlando, FL, from
November 30 to December 2 2022. The scientific program will cover synergistic
themes on foundations, algorithms, models and theory of data mining, including
big data mining, deep learning and statistical methods for data mining, as well
as applications of data mining in social sciences, physical sciences,
engineering, life sciences, web, marketing, finance, precision medicine, health
informatics, and other domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICDM encourages submissions
in emerging topics of high importance such as ethical data analytics, automated
data analytics, data-driven reasoning, interpretable modeling, modeling with
evolving environment, cyber-physical systems, multi-modality data mining, and
heterogeneous data integration and mining. In addition to the main conference
presentations, the conference also features tutorials, an applied track, PhD
forums, open-source project forum, women in science research form, and
workshops. This year, there are 27 workshops, which will be hosted on the first
day of the ICDM 2022 conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.