* 2226714
* SitS Socializing Soil: Enhancing Community CoOperation with Iterative Sensor Research (S3-ECO-wISeR)
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Shayla Sawyer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,191,777.00

Community-engaged soil sensing is essential for confronting the challenge of
toxic pollution—specifically arsenic and per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS)—in human environments. This project uses bacteria as sensors of soil
contaminants, ultimately leading to the production of paper-based “test strips”
that generate a quantitative reading of contaminant concentrations in soil. Such
biosensors can support basic science as well as community-engaged investigations
of exposure pathways. The project uses a “responsible research and innovation”
(RRI) framework, which means including stakeholders—particularly citizen
scientists—in the research process to enhance capacity to anticipate
consequences of different sensor designs, reflect on the researchers’
assumptions, and respond to stakeholder needs and
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to create a biohybrid device that
can exploit and tune the strengths of both electronic and biological sensing
with the invention of a dynamic bioelectronic interface. By separating the
actuation and sensing stages with different bacteria, a transfer function
between signal gain and system stability can be engineered and customized toward
community sensing needs. Development of the device involves pursuit of four
interdependent aims: 1) engaging stakeholders through citizen science and an
advisory board in order to inform research priorities and approaches, 2) using
two different bacteria that function as the sensing front end (E.coli) and
electroactive backend (S. oneidensis) to produce arsenic detection at detection
levels comparable to current standards, 3) experimentation with electroactive
bacteria species (P. aeroginosa) to advance toward a PFAS biosensor, and 4)
iterative development of a paper-based sensor design that is suitable for
community-based environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was
made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative
partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United States
Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA
NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.