* 2226826
* HyperTran: High-Performance Transient Stability Simulation of Power Systems on Modern Parallel Computing Hardware
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hantao Cui, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 320,000.00

Computer simulation is a widely used but computationally intensive method for
predicting the transient stability of power systems following large
disturbances. Currently, simulation performance lags behind industry demand for
online, real-time applications and research need for data-driven applications,
particularly for practically sized systems with high penetration of renewable
energy. This NSF project aims to develop a high-performance framework that
enables data, task, and job parallelisms for transient stability simulations to
scale to the full capacity of contemporary and future parallel computing
hardware. The proposed framework will bring transformative changes to the
understanding of how power system models should be represented and how
computational workflows should be structured to take advantage of modern
parallel computers. The intellectual merits of the project include a)
accelerating the building and solving phases of differential-algebraic equations
(DAE) through the design of parallel-enabled software representations of power
system models, and b) the identification and utilization of computational
methods and hardware devices based on the characteristics of simulation test
cases. The broader impacts of the project include the dissemination of research
findings via open-source software and publications, integrated research and
education activities, and the potential to enhance the stability of the power
grid infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three tasks have been identified to
accomplish the goal. Task 1 will create software representations of power models
and computational workflows to enable staged data and task parallelisms for the
DAE building process on CPUs and Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). It will
ensure correct results from concurrent executions by coordinating the updating
of equations shared across models while optimizing caches. Task 2 will develop
adaptive dispatchers to identify and apply the most efficient hardware and
solution algorithms for given power system cases, considering system size,
acceleration techniques, and practical constraints. Task 3 will investigate
pipelining algorithms for parallelizing multi-scenario jobs on heterogeneous
hardware to build and solve DAEs for maximized hardware utilization. Upon
successful completion, the project is expected to have established a novel,
high-performance framework for modern computing hardware that will markedly
accelerate the simulation of power system dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.