* 2226370
* Collaborative Research: Disciplinary Improvements for Past Global Change Research: Connecting Data Systems and Practitioners
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Michelle LeFebvre, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 12/31/2025
* USD 202,636.00

The geoscience community bridges a variety of research areas which use a wide
variety of paleoclimatic, geochemical, paleobiological, and archaeological
records. This research coordination network supports groups of investigators to
communicate, innovate, coordinate, and standardize research practices, training,
and educational activities across disciplinary, organizational, geographic and
international boundaries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Community curated data resources
(CCDRs) in the paleoecological, contemporary ecological, paleoclimatic, and
archeological disciplines will be improved through three aims: 1) Improving
interoperability and reproducibility by developing guidance for interoperability
among long-tail CCDRs and promoting adoption of common metadata standards and
FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability) data
principles, 2) Fostering data curation and stewardship by promoting best
practices in data science, curation, and stewardship, particularly for early-
career researchers, 3) Supporting equity and improving democratization and
access to science by promoting the learning and implementation of CARE
(Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility, and Ethics)
principles in disciplinary data resources. Communities of practice will be
developed to further these aims through annual in-person symposia and project
activities including workshops, working group meetings, and
webinars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.