* 2226485
* Rheology revealed by microscopic rotation: orientation fluctuations, friction and mechanics in colloidal gels
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Jeffrey Urbach, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 12/31/2025
* USD 691,996.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Soft solids formed from particle gels are
found in a wide range of materials, with applications ranging from consumer
products to bio-manufacturing and additive manufacturing. Despite their
importance, we lack a fundamental understanding of the connection between the
microscopic structure and dynamics of the particles and the macroscopic
mechanical properties of the gel. As a result, we have only limited capacity to
predict basic properties like gel stiffness and ultimate strength even with
detailed knowledge of the particle properties and of the solvent in which they
are immersed. This, in turn, limits our ability to engineer gel properties. In
this work we will use a suite of novel tools to reveal, for the first time, the
dynamics of rotations of individual particles, and use this information to
determine how the particles assemble into networks that support forces and
determine the stiffness and strength of the gels. We will use these insights to
develop robust pathways to engineering materials with defined properties and
support the design of tunable and adaptive materials for applications such as
self-healing, stimuli-responsive materials, and materials for 3D printing. In
addition, this project will support efforts to harness soft materials to address
the profound challenges of sustainability by strengthening contacts between the
soft matter research community and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle-resolved studies of gels formed when
micron-scale colloidal particles interact via short ranged attraction, mediated
by the depletion interaction, have provided a wealth of information and
considerable insight into the connection between gel microstructure and
mechanical properties. However, much of this work is limited by the inability to
directly assess particle-scale interactions and dynamics in the gel state. This
project employs novel colloidal particles containing an off-center core that
allows for precise determination of the orientation of each particle by
fluorescence microscopy, in combination with advanced instrumentation that
allows for simultaneous high speed confocal imaging and rheology. The project
leverages the fact that the orientation dynamics of the particles provide a very
sensitive measure of interparticle interactions, and in particular, that
monitoring the rotational Brownian motion of individual particles reveals a
transition from rotationally mobile to arrested states as the strength of the
depletion interaction is increased. In this research, the PIs exploit the local
information provided by this transition to address fundamental questions about
the links between microscopic heterogeneity and macroscopic rheology.
Complementary computer simulations, building on an existing platform that
reproduces many aspects of particle gel rheology, inform and are informed by the
experimental results. The research also exploits Boundary Stress Microscopy, a
technique developed by the PIs enabling measurement of local stresses at the
boundary of a sheared gel with high spatial and temporal resolution, to directly
connect particle interactions to mesoscale stress heterogeneity. The impact of
surface modifications that change interparticle friction on the rotational
dynamics-rheology connection will also be assessed. The insights from these
measurements are used to develop and validate computational models, which in
turn guide the development of predictive models connecting micro- and meso-scale
material heterogeneities to their macroscopic mechanics. The research is
disseminated through the network maintained by the Institute for Soft Matter
Synthesis and Metrology at Georgetown, including the semi-annual Mid-Atlantic
Soft Matter Workshops, and connects to an initiative to integrate Sustainable
Materials into efforts at Georgetownâ€™s newly formed Earth Commons Institute for
Environment and Sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.