* 2226425
* Disciplinary Improvements: The SEEKCommons Research Coordination Network
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Gerd Heber, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 899,953.00

The “Socio-environmental Knowledge Commons” (SEEKCommons) research coordination
network will disseminate and study open science tools and methodologies to
advance collaborative socio-environmental research. SEEKCommons will build
bridges between domains of scientific, technical, and environmental expertise
through community-building workshops and support activities that enable the
sharing of skills, resources, and socio-environmental research products as
public goods. The project seeks to bridge long-standing divides between the
social and environmental sciences through the adaptation and application of open
tools and methodologies in ways that will overcome disciplinary barriers to
acceptance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEEKCommons will draw primarily from three
areas of research and development: Science and Technology Studies (STS), OS, and
Socio-Environmental research. Each of these component areas will be integrated
and coordinated with the others by using STS as a “translational component” that
will mediate between open science practitioners and socio-environmental
researchers working with communities affected by environmental and climate
issues. Five major activities will be conducted to establish the SEEKCommons
RCN: (1) empirical STS research on common problems and capacity gaps related to
“openness” in socio-environmental research; (2) regular convenings to share
research findings and challenges, and to build consensus on how to advance
collaborative work; (3) fellowships for students and early-career researchers to
investigate emerging problems and opportunities in the application of OS to
socio-environmental research; (4) a Data Facilitation Consortium; and (5)
creation of a Resource Hub and Curriculum Builder to disseminate open research
outputs and highlight the work of our network
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.