* 2226976
* Data-Driven Leaning and Controlling Metallurgy Matters in Dissimilar Metal Joints
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* ShunLi Shang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2025
* USD 672,473.00

This grant will support fundamental research on controlling phases generated at
the welded interface between dissimilar metals. Joining dissimilar metals has
become increasingly important for creating lightweight, high-performance, and
economic structures in various industries. However, the chemical reactions
between two dissimilar metals during welding can generate harmful phases like
brittle intermetallic compounds. This award aims to address scientific and
technical challenges in controlling the metallurgical phase formation in the
weld by introducing a suitable interposing metal to create a nonlinear alloy
composition pathway through the joint thickness. The situation is illustrated by
the laser welding (LW) of aluminum and copper. These two metals are major
materials in the assembly of battery cells, which are in high demand for
electric vehicles. This research will enable engineers to design and transform
the metallic phases in the weld in a controllable fashion with more freedom than
when limited to the two base metals. In turn, this award can broaden the
adoption of dissimilar metal joints in industries such as automotive, aerospace,
power generation, marine application, medical devices, and information
technology. This research involves several disciplines, including manufacturing,
materials science, multiscale simulations, and machine learning. The multi-
disciplinary approach will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in research and positively impact both undergraduate and graduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will design and realize optimal bonding
phases with a data-driven paradigm to learn and control metallurgic phases in
dissimilar metal joints. The research team will conduct multiscale simulations
for data generation to establish data-driven models which provide high-fidelity
welding predictions. Metallurgical reactions at the bonding interface will be
explained using calculation of phase diagrams (CALPHAD)-based analysis,
correlation analysis and molecular dynamics simulations. Machine learning will
be used to provide inverse design of the nonlinear modification and laser
welding processes, and simulation and designs will be validated experimentally.
This research will fill the knowledge gap in understanding the interactions
between LW energy inputs, keyhole dynamics, phase formation, and transition from
liquids to solids under different LW conditions. It will build an efficient
methodology, via thermodynamics and kinetics, to predict preferred phases and
properties to meet a joint’s requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.