* 2226478
* Elucidating the Impact of Nanoscale Strain and Concentration Fields on Martensitic Transformations in NiTiHf-based Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Michele Manuel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 10/31/2025
* USD 480,840.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory
alloys (SMAs) are a unique class of alloys that can recover their original
shape. This feature makes SMAs a leading contender for many future commercial
and industrial technologies such as medical devices, sensors, actuators, and
components for aerospace vehicles. Shape recovery in these metals relies on a
reversible change in atomic arrangements. Designing and engineering their atomic
structures can radically change their shape memory performance. Producing nano-
sized particles, called precipitates, in SMAs offers a direct route to modifying
their local atomic structure and chemistry, thereby achieving targeted shape
memory properties. However, accurately pairing the characteristics and
properties of nano-sized precipitates to shape memory performance remains a
challenge due to a lack of high-precision, real-time measurements, which creates
a roadblock to establishing a reliable alloy design for various applications.
The PIs address this challenge by developing atomic-resolution, in situ electron
microscopy techniques to quantitatively measure the impacts of precipitates on
shape memory behavior in SMAs. The gained knowledge can generate powerful alloy
design rules for precipitation-engineered SMAs for applications requiring high-
temperature operations and improved mechanical properties. Moreover, the
collaborative research activities between the PIs will be intertwined with
educational programs and outreach activities through summer internships for
underrepresented minority high-school students from local public schools,
curriculum development targeting both on-campus students and distance-learning
students (e.g., industry and military), and research training of graduate and
undergraduate students with a strong emphasis on alloy design and materials
characterization. These education plans promote student awareness about critical
materials needs for new technologies and encourages diverse students to pursue
careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical
and chemical effects of precipitates play a crucial role in controlling
martensitic transformation (MT) dynamics in shape memory alloys (SMAs). However,
there is a distinct lack of systematic and quantitative experimental evidence
that can support, or test, theoretical models of the physical mechanisms of a MT
modified by non-transforming coherent precipitates within the microstructure.
This experimental program aims to quantify and elucidate the effects of
nanoscale strain and concentration fields induced by coherent precipitates on
the phase transformation and mechanical properties of NiTiHf-based SMAs.
Specifically, the PIs seek to uncover and isolate the role of Heusler and Han
phase precipitates (when they coexist), which have a distinctly different
crystal structure and chemistry in NiTiHf-based SMAs. To achieve the goal, the
PIs utilize a unique set of expertise in atomic-scale materials characterization
based on aberration-corrected electron microscopy, electron diffraction, and in
situ heating applications, as well as alloy design/synthesis and thermo-
mechanical properties characterization. This program focuses on: (i) the
development of alloy synthesis routes that allow for co-precipitation of Heusler
and Han phases with controlled microstructure and chemistry; (ii) the
quantification of strain and concentration fields around precipitates using
atomic-resolution electron microscopy, spectroscopy, and scanning electron
diffraction to uncover their effects on the microstructure morphology of the
matrix; (iii) the characterization of the MT mechanisms in precipitation-
strengthened SMAs and the phase transformation pathways using in situ
temperature-controlled experiments for determining the dependence of a MT on the
designed properties of precipitates (i.e., strain and concentration fields).
This work provides a strong foundation for future SMA designs as well as in
computational modeling by offering a quantitative, holistic understanding of the
structure-composition-property relationships of SMAs and their dynamic response
to realistic in-service environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.