* 2226053
* Modeling Coriolis and stability effects on wake dynamics for wind farm flow control
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michael Howland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 303,839.00

Wind turbines operating within wind farms interact aerodynamically. By
extracting power from the wind, wind turbines produce wake regions downwind that
are characterized by low wind speed and high turbulence. Wake interactions can
significantly reduce the efficiency of wind farms but they can be alleviated by
controlling the wind flow in the farm. Given the continuing expansion of wind
energy generation, there is a growing need to improve the fluid dynamics
knowledge of the interactions between wind turbines and the atmospheric flow and
to leverage this knowledge to improve farm efficiency. This research project
will characterize and model the impacts of atmospheric flow on wind turbine
wakes. The working hypothesis of this research is that the incorporation of the
atmospheric effects from Earthâ€™s rotation, buoyancy, and temperature variations
will improve the predictive accuracy of wind farm flow models and will increase
farm efficiency when using model-based flow control. This research will
characterize the impacts of these atmospheric effects on wakes using computer
simulations under a wide range of atmospheric conditions. A new flow model which
captures these effects will be developed and validated, and the model will be
used for case studies of flow control. The climate change mitigation impacts of
this project will be integrated into engagements with K-12 schools, courses and
mentoring for Massachusetts Institute of Technology students about careers in
the physics of energy systems, and workshops with energy industry about wake
losses, modeling, and flow control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
characterize and model the impacts of Coriolis forces from Earth's rotation and
atmospheric stability effects from buoyancy and temperature gradients on wake
dynamics, which will lead to improved flow control strategies to maximize farm
efficiency. First, the impacts of Coriolis and stability effects on wakes will
be characterized using controlled, large eddy simulation (LES) numerical
experiments. Coriolis effects influence wake deflection, deformation, and
recovery both through direct forcing and through modification of the wind speed
and direction shear in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) wind profiles
incident to turbines. Novel controlled numerical experiments will be developed
to isolate each of these effects as independent flow parameters and to
characterize their impacts on wakes. The influence of stability on wakes will be
characterized and quantified using LES of turbines in stratified ABLs, simulated
over a range of non-dimensional flow parameters. Second, a new, computationally-
efficient flow model which captures these effects from first-principles will be
developed. Third, validation and uncertainty quantification of the model will be
performed, and the model will be used for wind farm flow control case studies
using LES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.