* 2226901
* Collaborative Research: Coordinating Offline Resource Allocation Decisions and Real-Time Operational Policies in Online Retail with Performance Guarantees
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Paat Rusmevichientong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 144,541.00

Many industries must intermittently make tactical resource allocation decisions
that constrain the effectiveness of subsequent operational decisions using these
resources. For example, online retailers must decide how to distribute their
available inventory among geographically distributed warehouses, influencing
individual order fulfillment decisions. In current practice the resource
allocation decisions do not consider the nature of the operational decisions,
which can result in significant losses in efficiency. This research project will
contribute to the economic welfare of the nation by developing a general
strategy for these problems that can be customized to different problem
settings, providing a context-independent coordination mechanism that can be
applied to many industries. The educational and outreach activities will involve
students in hands-on optimization projects, create new education programs in
datacentric decision-making, and address the food deserts problem in urban areas
by viewing the problem from the lens of coordinating resource allocation
decisions with real-time operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current state of
knowledge does not provide efficient algorithms for coordinating tactical
resource allocation decisions with the operational decisions that use those
resources. There are two main reasons for this gap: computing the optimal
operational policy often requires solving a high-dimensional dynamic program,
and the optimal value functions may lack structure, providing no clear basis for
resource allocation decisions. This project will build a general approximation
framework for coordination that is independent of the application setting. The
framework uses surrogate functions to develop an upper bound on the performance
of the optimal operational policy and a lower bound on that of an approximate
operational policy. Bounding the relative gap between the two surrogates will
yield a performance guarantee for the coordination problem. Selection of
appropriate surrogate functions will allow application of the approximation
framework to different applications, providing efficient approximate solutions
with provable performance guarantees. To achieve such solutions, ideas from
combinatorial and dynamic optimization, as well as discrete choice and price
response modeling will be combined. The resulting algorithms will be tested on
several publicly available datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.