* 2226232
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Proactive End-to-End Zero Trust-Based Security Intelligence for Resilient Non-cooperative 5G Networks
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Indrajit Ray, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 06/30/2024
* USD 749,866.00

Military and tactical units are required to operate in regions where a dedicated
and trusted communications infrastructure may not be available. To communicate
effectively, efficiently, and securely at all times, it is critical to have the
ability of operating through untrusted indigenous infrastructure and at the same
time, seamlessly and securely connect with devices on trusted networks. With the
growing threat landscape and attack surfaces in 5G communication systems, a
promising approach to tackle the security challenges is to adopt a holistic Zero
Trust approach based on the principle of “never trust, always verify”. The goal
of this project is to achieve trustworthy communications over untrusted and
potentially compromised 5G networks by creating end-to-end security
intelligence. The project team comprising of experts from academia, industry,
and academic-industry partnerships, will accelerate the development of a
software-based solution for automated and trustworthy network orchestration
allowing military and critical infrastructure operators to securely communicate
using commercial 5G networks. The project aims to develop capabilities that
enable military and critical infrastructure personnel to securely communicate
using both military and modern commercial 5G infrastructure anywhere in the
world, without the risk of being breached or hacked. The developed tools will
enhance the capabilities of tactical networks in enforcing Zero Trust and
policy-based access management of tactical units. Furthermore, the convergence
team will develop a cross-disciplinary curriculum for training and education of
next-generation workforce on Zero Trust for 5G networks. Special emphasis will
be placed on recruiting under-represented minority students in the research and
development of secure 5G networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate cross-disciplinary expertise from trustworthy system design, machine
learning/artificial intelligence, and 5G networks &amp; edge computing to
accelerate the automated creation of an overlay of proactive, end-to-end zero-
trust security and resilience mechanism over the tactical 5G network cloud
infrastructure. The convergence research is centered around three main thrusts.
Thrust 1 will focus on the dynamic and proactive trust evaluation of tactical
devices in the network. A distributed and autonomous approach will be used to
collect information about device interactions, leverage triggers, and indicators
to make quantitative trust assessments. Thrust 2 will use the trust information
obtained in Thrust 1 to orchestrate network resources according to tactical
mission scenarios and the requirements of different end-to-end paths. It will be
achieved using a deep reinforcement learning approach by iteratively obtaining
access permissions from a novel trust management engine and providing it with
resource selection decisions. Thrust 3 will automate the access management
system to proactively thwart unqualified access to critical resources and
prevent lateral movement of attacks and malware. The tools developed as a result
of this project will be oriented toward operational scenarios in tactical
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.