* 2226666
* Novel measures of thermalization and time-evolution of strongly correlated, disordered, and topological systems by nonlinear THz spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 437,932.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;If a physical system is shaken, the rate that
it returns to equilibrium is an important measure of its physics. In materials,
we are used to measuring such rates in the context of their response to small
electric and magnetic fields. For instance, the rate that current decays in a
metal after an electric field impulse can be related to the width of its low-
frequency “Drude” response in its optical conductivity. The rate that
polarization decays after polling a liquid with an electric field corresponds to
the width of the broad peak in the Debye relaxational functional form. In
contrast, the energy relaxation rate is a fundamental rate that governs many
processes, but which is unfortunately not measured straightforwardly via
conventional electrodynamic measurements using small fields. This proposal
concerns the development of measurement tools to probe materials with large THz
range fields that can push materials far from equilibrium allowing new
parameters to be measured. The systems of interest in this proposal possess
unconventional features with regards to their interactions or band structures
that will affect energy relaxation in interesting ways. The team will
investigate the rates of energy relaxation in a variety of materials with
interesting quantum mechanical correlations. This project also includes a broad
initiative in education and outreach. The work is of particular educational
value in training students with unique skills to prepare them as the work force
in high-tech industries. The research team will play active roles in the Johns
Hopkins Physics Fair- an outreach activity which brings hundreds of people each
year through Hopkins' labs during a Saturday event and exposes them to various
physics demonstrations and activities. The team will also give demonstration
shows at the Physics Fair and work with under-resourced local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to investigate fundamental
aspects of energy relaxation, time-evolution, and thermalization in strongly
correlated, topological, and disordered systems by new nonlinear “pump-probe”
THz spectroscopies. The research team will exploit recent developments in the
form of THz range 2D coherent spectroscopy (and its relatives) to get new
information about energy relaxation in correlated and topological metals, as
well as disordered electron glasses. Measurements will emphasize the extended
THz range (here 0.1 - 40 THz [0.4 - 165 meV]) where generally responses target
the low energy emergent degrees of freedom, but experiments will use a full
complement of photon energies up through the near infrared. This topic of THz
range dynamics and nonlinear response of quantum materials is an effectively
wide-open area, in which there has been much interest and some theory, but very
few experiments. Among other aspects, the team will investigate the rates of
energy relaxation in the regime of “Plankian dissipation” in the cuprate
superconductors. It has been conjectured that their anomalous properties reflect
an intrinsic quantum mechanical bound on the rate of relaxation that arises from
maximally allowed inelastic scattering. This has been inferred from the
resistivity experiments, among others. The team will shed light on the origin of
this remarkable property by probing the interplay of energy relaxation with this
bounding scale. Another project that will confront a long-standing challenge in
condensed matter physics is the understanding of materials with both strong
interactions and strong disorder. The team will investigate the issue of
thermalization and time-evolution in the “electron- glass” state of doped
semiconductors on the insulating side of the 3D metal-insulator transition. The
team will use both the novel technique of THz 2D coherent and THz pump-probe
spectroscopy. The mechanism of energy relaxation, both internal to the electron
sub-system and coupling to the lattice are expected to be very different in such
glasses and the results of this study may have relevance to the lack of
thermalization in many-body localized systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.