* 2226447
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Combating Vulnerability and Unawareness in 5G Network Security: Signaling and Full-Stack Approach
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Sonia Fahmy, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Over the last ten years, 5G research and network deployments have engendered
significant economic development and greatly improved lives around the world. At
the same time, the Department of Defense (DoD) has made significant efforts to
leverage commercial investments made in 5G networks. The push for DoD to rely
heavily on 5G commercial systems is, however, problematic because commercial
networks are not designed for many of the adversarial settings and electronic
warfare (EW) scenarios common in military-hardened networks. Academic research
must play an important role in addressing fundamental security challenges
arising from the vulnerabilities and design weaknesses of 5G networks. Such
challenges manifest themselves in major threats that threaten confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of 5G networks such as eavesdropping on messages,
spoofing and man-in-the-middle attacks, distributed denial of service (DDoS),
and downgrading the service from 5G to 3G/2G. Historically, however, many of the
security-related and adversarial problems common to DoD have been viewed as
strictly outside of the academic research purview. The proposed project aims to
change this by building upon the momentum to accelerate academic and industry
research into secure beyond-5G wireless networks. The team is joining forces
from academia, industry, and government with the focus on consolidating the
ongoing 5G security-related research efforts of its members. The project will
also contribute to workforce development by creating research experiences,
involving both theory and experiments, for a diverse team of both undergraduate
and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three
unique attributes that enable Zero Trust solutions: (a) Particular focus on
signal/waveform level and 5G radio access network (RAN) security; (b) Fine-
granular data-plane and control-plane threat detection, tracking, and defense
mechanisms; and (c) Integration and evaluation via full-stack, Open RAN/Mobile
Core testbed. DoD applications are the main motivation for the proposed
solutions. To both narrow the scope of the efforts and make it more grounded,
the proposed research will be organized across the following three interwoven
aspects: (i) The modeling of threats at the user equipment (UE), RAN, Enhanced
Data for Global Evolution (EDGE), backhaul, and 5G packet core levels to
understand how suboptimal 5G networks are; (ii) The design of threat detection,
tracking, and protection algorithms/mechanisms that effectively modify signaling
at the 5G RAN and the software functions/protocols at the 5G Core for granular
access control and encryption; and (iii) Formal verification of the various
security requirements of service-based architecture in the context of 5G RAN,
Core, and Internet Edge that use existing and novel programmable hardware. The
level of visibility and controllability that this project enables would allow
the 5G service-based architectures to adapt themselves quickly to make way for
the military and other critical services in a secure and timely manner - similar
to how cars make way for ambulances and fire trucks on the highways, sharing the
same road infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.