* 2226098
* Collaborative Research: Twist Control of Correlated Physics in Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Shawna Hollen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Innovations in materials science drive the
creation of technologies that fundamentally alter how societies function. For
years there has been excitement around the possibility of computers based on the
principles of quantum mechanics. This dream remains unrealized both due to the
lack of tunable quantum behaviors in materials and a pipeline for training a
quantum-literate workforce. The main research objective of this project is to
accelerate the production of next-generation technologies by achieving
unprecedented control over the physics in quantum materials. The project will
specifically investigate atomically thin materials that individually have strong
electronic interactions to understand how these interactions may be manipulated
through layer engineering. This new ability to design quantum states by twisting
layers can hasten the creation of memory and computing technologies that are
superior in performance and energy efficiency to the status quo. Twist angle
physics in quantum materials also provides new insight into how interactions
between electrons can lead to unexpected behaviors. The education goal of this
project is to build a quantum-literate workforce by teaching high school and
undergraduate students about possible career paths in quantum technology as well
as how to follow these paths. Quantum workforce development is carried out
through cross-institution, academia-industry events that include: 1) a ‘Careers
in Quantum’ event where students can directly interact with industry experts, 2)
outreach events at the Principal Investigators’ institutions, and 3) a middle
school science camp. These activities are poised to make a long-standing impact
in the preparation of students for exciting careers in an increasingly quantum
high-tech industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to discover the role of
interlayer interactions in layered quantum materials through the exploration of
twisted heterostructures of tantalum disulfide. Existing studies of layered
quantum materials demonstrate connections between electronic ground state and
layer alignment, but these are limited to a small set of naturally occurring
stacking configurations and wrought with contradictions. By leveraging twist-
tunable heterostructures and a range of characterization and modeling that spans
nanoscale to mesoscale physics, this project systematically explores strongly
correlated physics in tantalum disulfide to uncover the total phase space
detailing the interplay of Mott physics, charge density waves, magnetism, and
metallic states. This research is enabled through a partnership between the
University of New Hampshire and George Mason University and with the Quantum
Material Press at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The central research
activities are: 1) creating the first twisted heterostructures comprised of
strongly correlated materials; 2) elucidating the twist-angle structure-property
relationships in tantalum disulfide through the correlation of nanoscale
scanning tunneling microscopy and mesoscale magneto-Raman spectroscopy; and 3)
discovering the impact of aperiodicity in a new class of twisted quantum
quasicrystals. Experimental results from these efforts can inform the creation
of theoretical models of twist physics by collaborators at the Naval Research
Laboratory, leading to a more general understanding of quantum emergence in
layered solids. The structure-property relationships established in this work
provide a set of guiding principles for designer quantum behaviors in twisted
heterostructures, such as switchable ground states, through the judicious choice
of 2D material and layer orientation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.