* 2226392
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Autonomously Tunable Waveform-Agnostic Radio Adapter for Seamless and Secure Operation of DoD Devices Through Non-Cooperative 5G Networks
* TIP,ITE
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Luke Beckwith, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 01/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

U.S. DoD personnel and assets deployed in ground, sea, air, and space must
always maintain operational wireless network connectivity across all warfighting
domains and throughout the electromagnetic (EM) spectrum to deter and defeat
agile adversaries who increasingly seek to undermine its strategic and
operational strengths by impeding and denying U.S. DoD’s command and control
capabilities. Florida International University (FIU), Florida Atlantic
University (FAU), Virginia Tech (VT), and PQSecure Technologies LLC join forces
to create a universal radio adapter that will enable seamless and secure
operation through non-cooperative indigenous 5G networks for U.S. military,
government, and critical infrastructure systems. The goal of the proposed
universal radio adapter is to accelerate transformative outcomes on how DoD
personnel, aircrafts, satellites, mobile phones, vehicles, sensors, drones, and
other IoT devices operate through either friendly or adversary untrusted 5G
network infrastructure and seamlessly connect with devices on trusted U.S.
military networks, while providing end-to-end data integrity, confidentiality
and resiliency by data hiding and by autonomously switching between
communications pathways. Through this research, FIU (the only Majority-Minority
Carnegie R1 Research University in the U.S.) and FAU (a federally designated
Hispanic Serving Institution) will develop a research center in 5G and beyond
technologies to train undergraduates/graduates Hispanic and other minorities
students in 5G wireless systems, post-quantum cryptography, physical layer and
network security. VT (Arlington Campus) will serve as a bridge for FIU/FAU
student workforce and DoD labs/government agencies. PQSecure is a small business
that has already completed several projects on quantum-safe cryptography for NSF
and DoD. The research will further advance educational efforts in FIU, FAU, and
VT to broaden participation of women and other underrepresented groups in STEM
through curriculum development, REU programs, and PQSecure
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed waveform-agnostic adapter will be
compatible with U.S. DoD terrestrial and satellite communication protocols that
operate from HF up to the Ka-band and will be able to interact with indigenous
5G ground or space-based networks that operate from the UHF up to the Ka-band.
To trust the services provided by indigenous 5G infrastructure (treated as a
black-box), the proposed convergence research effort will carry out accelerated
research and development to enhance security and resiliency of end systems
connecting to 5G networks, leveraging zero-trust principles where possible. The
team’s workplan is organized in four technical thrusts: 1) Authentication of end
users and devices will be carried out by a universal radio adapter that combines
multi-band and multi-functional RF front-ends to connect to the black-box 5G
network; 2) Data integrity and confidentiality will be enhanced by strong
security protection at the physical layer (as a first line of defense) by
exploiting unique characteristics of the wireless communication channel, the
universal adapter hardware, and/or 5G core network as unique entropy sources; 3)
Low size, weight, power and cost (SWaP-C) implementations of post-quantum
cryptography (PQC) and standard ciphers will be adopted by the universal radio
adapter to enable interoperability with the existing and a future “quantum-
ready” 5G RAN/core and facilitate accelerated smooth transition to public-key
based mechanisms based on the latest NIST PQC standards; 4) Data hiding
techniques that securely embed data to popular application traffic of the 5G
network and hide the act of embedding will be implemented at the universal
adapter to disguise U.S. DoD end devices to simply undistinguished users of the
network. Overall, the project will contribute to enhancements to U.S. DoD end
devices to enable transformative outcomes in their connectivity, offering multi-
Gbps data rates, while meeting necessary security and resilience
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.