* 2226083
* EAGER: Cybersecurity Project
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,988.00

The American Indian Higher Education Consortium’s (AIHEC) Cybersecurity
Initiative provides the coordinating support, resources, and capacity building
strategies, needed by the nation’s 35 accredited Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs) to ensure that they have a sustainable and adaptable
cybersecurity environment to protect their institutions including their data-
intensive research and education programs. This effort addresses issues such as
data governance, compliance, data protection, and security and privacy
management capabilities. In collaboration with cybersecurity professionals
representing organizations at both the national and regional levels,
cybersecurity service providers, and industry experts, AIHEC is developing a
networked TCU cybersecurity community of practice (CoP) and a Networked
Improvement Community (NIC) as the seminal aspect of this effort to support
cybersecurity capacity building and sustainability. In addition to growing a TCU
CI/cybersecurity CoP and NIC, AIHEC is advising the TCUs in making informed
decisions when selecting providers and partners to support and strengthening
their cybersecurity position and reducing their risk profile. Experiences and
best practices are shared through the TCU CI/cybersecurity CoP, thus leveraging
TCU experiences and lessons learned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TCUs have small,
under-resourced IT departments too limited to assess, secure, and monitor the
network vulnerabilities that expose the education and research missions of the
institution. This state puts their entire curriculum, including STEM and
language and culture preservation, at risk for security breaches. As part of
this initiative, AIHEC is developing shared resources such as a TCU-specific
cybersecurity assessment framework and supporting the development of a virtual
Chief Information Security Officer (vCISO) and virtual Security Operations
Center (vSOC) at a TCU through the CI/Cybersecurity CoP. In addition to creating
a more secure and aware environment, these enhancements will allow TCU
administration, faculty and staff to increase their focus on the academic and
research missions of their institutions. A cybersecurity strategy that guides
the entire TCU community in a comprehensive short and long-term, cybersecurity
posture will lower the TCU community’s threat level. AIHEC is a member of the
recently NSF-funded Minority Serving Cyberinfrastructure Consortium (MS-CC) and
will be closely collaborating with consortium members in this
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.