* 2226398
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Cutting Improvements: FAIR Facilities and Instruments: Enabling transparency, reproducibility, and equity through persistent identifiers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Renaine Julian, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 111,330.00

This research coordination network (RCN) will advance the standardization and
adoption of Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) for research facilities and
instruments nationally. PIDs are widely seen as foundational to open science in
that PIDs uniquely identify various entities in the research ecosystem. While
many categories of PIDs have come a long way in terms of standardization and
adoption (examples: DOIs for publications, ORCIDs for researchers), this project
is focused on the need to advance the standardization and adoption of PIDs for
other categories of entities in the research ecosystem which have not progressed
as far, namely for research facilities and instruments. The scientific
communities which this RCN will support include the biomedical sciences, the
geosciences, informatics, and many or most other scientific fields which utilize
specialized facilities and equipment in the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While persistent identifiers are already being
assigned to facilities and research equipment in a few limited cases,
significantly more community adoption and standardization is needed to address
the entire research ecosystem. This project builds on activities already being
undertaken such as RRIDs (Research Resource Identifiers), and will convene a
series of workshops and stakeholder engagements to better understand the field
and current practice, develop principles of design for new PIDs, and work to
generalize these principles toward practical application, thereby aiming to
achieve tangible outcomes for open science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.