* 2226017
* Conference: Algebraic Combinatorics Virtual Expedition
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Oliver Pechenik, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 33,225.00

The Algebraic Combinatorics Virtual Expedition (AlCoVE) is an annual two-day
online conference for mathematicians studying the interplay between algebra and
combinatorics and their applications to other areas of mathematics and science.
The AlCoVE conference series brings together the algebra and combinatorics
communities in a virtual setting. The conferences aim to re-create as many of
the beneficial aspects of in-person conferences as possible, including mentoring
and networking benefits through virtual social events. AlCoVE strives to be an
inclusive, global conference that promotes collaboration and progress in this
field, while simultaneously increasing accessibility and helping to reduce the
carbon footprint of mathematics conferences. This award supports the conference
series in 2022, 2023, and 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AlCoVE 2022, held on June
6-7, 2022, features presentations on a wide array of topics in algebraic
combinatorics and its applications. These topics include enumeration, lattices
and posets, generating functions and q-series, symmetric function theory,
computational and enumerative algebraic geometry, polytopes and Ehrhart theory,
dynamical algebraic combinatorics, combinatorial optimization, and topological
combinatorics. There is a poster session for younger researchers to share their
work as well, together with dynamic social events to foster networking and
collaboration. The website for the 2022 edition is:
http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/~opecheni/alcove.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.