* 2226804
* MFB: NSF-BSF: Data-Adaptive and Metamorphosis Machine Learning Architectures for Generative Protein Design of Metal Biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joanna Slusky, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Dr. Joanna Slusky from the University of Kansas in collaboration with Dr.
Margarita Osadchy and Dr. Rachel Kolodny from the University of Haifa, Israel,
are designing protein-based biosensors for pollutants that could be used in
efforts create cleaner waterways. The technology undergirding the creation of
the sensors will include novel machine learning architectures. These new ML
architectures could be used to develop biosensors for other applications in
biotechnology more broadly. The research will create opportunities for
undergraduates from Kansas to learn about how nature controls metal binding, to
acquire knowledge and skills that span the intersection of biology and computer
science, and to participate in international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the use of existing
and newly developed machine learning architectures for the generation of new
scaffolds for biosensors, particularly metal sensing proteins. Membrane
β-barrels are ideal platforms for biosensors for a wide range of analytes
because of their shape, variety of radii, and the ability to proscribe chemical
moieties on the interior of the barrel. Moreover, because these proteins span
membranes, the act of analyte binding causes a measurable change in conductance
across the membrane, which can be used as biosensor output. This project thas
three ambitious ML objectives: 1) create a fold-specific language model using
less training data, 2) generate novel protein sequences with patch-based
metamorphosis, locally-aware iterative design, and 3) design and test protein
barrel candidates as biosensors for water contaminants. The research pursues a
new way to restrict attention for transformer-based language models, a new way
to traverse protein sequence space with a metamorphosis based generator, a
deeper understanding of membrane β-barrels, newly generated scaffolds for
biosensing, a deeper understanding of what makes some protein sites ideal for
metal binding, and a design method for proteins that could be used to identify
heavy metal contaminants in water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the
Israeli Binational Science Foundation. At the US National Science Foundation,
the project is supported by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, the Division of Information
and Intelligent Systems, and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.