* 2226888
* EAGER: Systems of Holographic Optical Tags for Scalable and Collaborative Mobile Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Matt Mutka, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,998.00

Mobile systems benefit from infrastructures that enable safe, reliable, and
scalable mobility. Within vehicular mobile systems, much research has considered
communication and system technologies in which vehicles collaborate to share
location and route planning information. These systems have strict constraints
for delay and reliability. The communication networks of the mobile systems
typically rely upon radio frequency-based approaches. Radio frequency networks
have limitations regarding high energy consumption, transmission rates, and
security attacks. To overcome these limitations, innovative optical wireless
communication (OWC) approaches have been introduced. OWC approaches show promise
due to their potential high data rates and range, security advantages, and low
cost, delay, and power consumption. However, most existing OWC-based techniques
for vehicular mobile system enable communication only in a single direction.
This reduces the communication field of view and therefore the ability to share
location and route planning information in a mobile system. The project’s
novelties are to explore new OWC-based techniques to improve capabilities for
communication in multiple directions at high data rates and provide techniques
for accurate positioning of mobile nodes to support scalable and collaborative
mobile systems. The project's broader significance and importance are improving
the capabilities of traffic control, and the collaboration of robots, drones,
and mobile vehicular systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to support reliable and scalable collaborative communication and
localization for mobile systems via OWC-based technologies with three research
components: (1) holographic optical tag design to enable smart collaboration
among mobile nodes for improved performance, such as more accurate positioning,
better decoding, full directional communication and higher throughput; (2)
distributed mobile localization via collaboration of low-cost holographic
optical tags to support real-time, dynamic, and scalable distributed systems for
mobile localization; and (3) lightweight middleware design for multi-to-multi
networking to provide full direction instead of monodirectional communication
and to form dynamic multi-to-multi mobile networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.