* 2226081
* Collaborative Research: Designing Polymer Grafted-Nanoparticle Melts through a Hierarchical Computational Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 02/28/2026
* USD 406,000.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems contribute funds to this award, which
supports research to develop an accurate hierarchical modeling approach aimed at
understanding the structural and mechanical properties of materials comprised
only of inorganic nanoparticles chemically grafted with polymer chains. Polymer
grafted nanoparticles represent a paradigm shift in how we fabricate, use, and
recycle plastics because these composites have the potential to outperform
traditional hybrids (i.e., physical mixtures of polymers and nanoparticles) in
terms of strength and toughness. This is because the polymers are directly
attached onto nanoparticles, thus ensuring that these materials constitute a
chemically fixed mixture of polymers and nanoparticles â€“ physical mixtures, on
the other hand, tend to demix. However, variability in the size of the
nanoparticles and their grafts, which is known as dispersity, results in unusual
rheological and fracture properties that remain poorly understood. The proposed
research will employ molecular simulations, theory, and machine learning to help
explain how dispersity causes these properties and how it could be further
exploited for discovering materials that surpass the current capabilities of
nanocomposites. These research ideas are closely coupled to educational and
outreach objectives to enrich the K-12 and undergraduate pipeline for STEM
students. For this purpose, the team will create online learning modules for
simulations, polymer physics, machine learning, and materials design. Other
activities include interdisciplinary training of graduate students through the
Predictive Science and Engineering Design Cluster at Northwestern University,
sharing of force field and software developments, software commercialization,
and new research opportunities for underrepresented student
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems contribute
funds to this award. The project addresses a critical knowledge gap in
understanding how nanoscale interfacial chemistry, confinement and structural
variations (grafting density, graft size and core size dispersities) in multi-
component polymer-grafted nanoparticles (PGNs) govern dry layer extension and
melt layer interdigitation, and consequently the emergent mesoscale ordering,
dynamics, and failure mechanisms of PGNs. A barrier towards understanding the
underlying molecular mechanisms is that existing computational paradigms, such
as molecular simulations, either lack the fidelity or efficiency for predicting
the structure, dynamics and hence properties of these systems. This issue will
be addressed through a new scale-bridging method that will further coarse-grain
PGNs to a nanoparticle level using chemistry-specific upscaling methods, and
then use complementary data from finer models at two levels of hierarchy to
inform Latent Variable Gaussian Process machine learning models. The adaptive
machine learning model will enable rapid query of PGN properties in unexplored
parametric spaces. The project encompasses three research thrusts: 1) Derivation
of PGN pair potentials for multi-component systems; 2) Investigation of particle
size and graft bidispersity effects on structure and rheology; 3) Development of
an adaptive machine learning model for multi-objective design of PGNs.
Ultimately, this novel framework will result in multicomponent PGNs that will
break strength-toughness tradeoffs that hamper traditional nanocomposites. These
research activities will also address open questions in materials informatics
such as incorporation of categorical variables representing chemical groups in
machine learning, finding optimal simulation batch sizes, and quantifying
uncertainty due to noisy measurements. Discovering PGNs that exhibit mechanical
property enhancements due to colloidal transitions is critical for them to
become scalable, processible, and broadly useful as nanocomposites. To enrich
the K-12 and undergraduate pipeline for STEM students, the team will create new
activities including online learning modules for simulations, polymers, machine
learning, and materials design. Other activities include the interdisciplinary
training of graduate students through the Predictive Science and Engineering
Design Cluster, sharing of force field and machine learning software
developments, software commercialization, and new research opportunities for
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.