* 2226613
* Collaborative Research: SitS: Collaborative: Long Range Wirelessly Powered Multi-variable Sensor Network for Continuous Monitoring of the Soil Health
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jaehoon Lee, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). An urgent need exists for developing inexpensive, long-term
deployable sensors that can monitor variable soil conditions in real-time.
Understanding the parameters that control the soil health is extremely important
in managing the growth and productivity of plants as well as in maintaining soil
health. One of the biggest issues associated with new sensors is delivering the
power needed to operate the sensors, especially if they are intended to be left
buried for long periods of time. This project aims to develop a multi-modal
integrated sensor system that can be completely buried 15 cm or deeper in the
soil for real-time monitoring of soil gas flows, such as carbon dioxide,
ammonia, oxygen, and nitrous oxide, that gives information about soil and plant
health. All the electrical power needed for the sensor operation, as well as the
signal communication from the sensor, will be delivered using a through-the-soil
(TTS) power transmission technique, where electrical energy is sent through the
soil, eliminating the need for wires, surface antennas, or embedded batteries.
Using TTS power transfer, an agricultural field can be permanently instrumented
with sensors without interfering with daily farming operations. Analyzing the
collected data will provide key insights related to soil health. This
collaborative project involving researchers at Tennessee Technological
University, the University of Tennessee Knoxville, and State University of New
York at Buffalo will produce new knowledge and engineering techniques that will
enhance the abilities of farmers to make better decisions in the growing cycle
of crops. This impact alone will reduce waste, improve crop yield, and
ultimately generate greater economic income for the Nation and its farmers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to conduct research
toward developing the next-generation of in-situ, networked, multi-modal
measurement systems for continuous and uninterrupted monitoring of soil
variables over variable space and time periods. Contemporary low-cost soil
monitoring systems are discrete and are incapable of detecting soil chemical
variables beyond pH. The first project goal is to develop a sensor system that
analyzes the vapor phase analytes outgassed during biological processes that
characterize soil health. The multi-modal sensor system utilizes three
orthogonal physical properties combined into a single platform to detect the
analyte vapors with high chemical selectivity and sensitivity in real-time.
First and second physical properties use arrays of receptor-immobilized micro-
cantilevers to preconcentrate and detect mass changes. The third orthogonal
method uses the same arrays to discern the molecular identity of adsorbed gases
using photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS). These chemically specific,
extremely sensitive, and highly compact sensors will be integrated with
conventional soil sensing systems that detect moisture, temperature, and pH to
create a multi-sensing probe. The second project goal is to power the sensor
system using the TTS power transmission technique capable of transferring energy
from an electrical power source to a plurality of multi-sensing probes over wide
landscape scale areas. The aim is to provide the sensor systems with a stable,
uninterruptable source of power to achieve a continuous sensor operation that
does not require maintenance and is not susceptible to interferences. The
wireless transmission will be accomplished by the excitation of a non-radiating
pulsed conduction mode of propagation at radio frequencies. The third project
goal is to analyze the data from the wirelessly powered, multi-sensor probe
network in order to build predictive algorithms needed to characterize soil
health and make critical growing decisions. The research goals of this project
will be transformative in broadening understanding of soil health and lead to
better environmental practices and enhanced agricultural production. The data
and knowledge uncovered during the project will have profound impacts in many
areas of science, engineering, and industry. The outcomes of this work include:
(1) A historical first in real-time collection of physiochemical specific data
in a high spatial and temporal density over a landscape size area and (2)
Demonstration of a completely new method of wireless electrical power
transmission over a landscape area. Such an engineering achievement will not
only have a transformative impact in soil science and agriculture, but in other
fields, including renewable energy, power distribution, and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project is co-funded
by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport (CBET) Division in
the Engineering Directorate, the Chemistry (CHE) Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Information and Intelligent Systems
(IEE) Division in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, and the Office of Polar Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.