* 2226078
* Upgrading the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Danny Scipion, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,265,342.00

The Jicamarca Radio Observatory near Lima, Perú is a premier ground-based
facility for studying plasma processes in the upper atmosphere near the magnetic
equator. Jicamarca is celebrating its 60th anniversary this year. Over its life,
it has undergone continuous renewal and so still represents the state of the art
in radio technology in most respects. Some of the systems at Jicamarca are
outdated, however, which impacts the scientific potential of the facility. The
work will expand this potential by acquiring a final tube amplifier, replacing
Jicamarca’s two tube-type driver amplifiers with modern solid-state units,
upgrade the Jicamarca ionospheric sounder, and replacing an optical digital
camera. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical upgrades will improve the resilience
and extend the lifetime of the observatory, while also dramatically enhancing
its capabilities to enable new measurement modes. These will include a
potentially transformative capability to directly probe the solar corona, an
extension of topside and inner-magnetosphere measurements to 10,000 km from the
current top limit of 6,000 km, and long-term measurements of plasma parameters.
These, in turn, will provide novel ways to study equatorial plasma processes
such as plasmaspheric refilling following solar and geomagnetic storms,
formation of the equatorial spread F, and storm-time equatorial electrodynamics,
as well as for operational space weather modeling and forecast purposes.
Jicamarca has two highly successful educational programs such as the Jicamarca
International Research Experience Program, a competitive program which is open
to international (non-Peruvian) students, and a STEM program intended for
Peruvian undergraduate students. The important broader impact of this project
will be an enhancement of STEM educational opportunities through the provision
of additional and novel research projects for the students and trainees. The
additional capabilities and measurement modes will also provide new synergies
with several satellite missions including the Constellation Observing System for
Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate 2 and the Ionospheric Connection
Explorer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.