* 2226281
* Broadening Participation in the AGU and CUAHSI Frontiers in Hydrology Meeting
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2022
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This award is supporting participation by students and early-career researchers
in the inaugural Frontiers in Hydrology Meeting to be held in June 19-24, 2022,
in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The Frontiers in Hydrology Meeting will convene the
broad water science community and advance the field of hydrologic science. The
meeting is being jointly held by the American Geophysical Union (AGU) Hydrology
Section and the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic
Sciences, Inc (CUAHSI). The meeting will bring together the water community to
share findings, develop new collaborations, network, and explore connections
between water issues and the human experience. The meeting brings together
hydrologists, engineers, social scientists, students, journalists, policymakers,
educators, urban planners, natural disaster professionals and others to better
understand water and the critical role it plays, in conjunction with the Earth
environment, in preserving a viable future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
will focus on topics of environmental justice and equity, managing scarce
resources, projecting future water availability and quality, and simulating
complex systems. These broad-based, critical topics will allow for extensive
discussions on the future of hydrologic systems in different areas of the globe
and bring in multiple affected audiences. This grant will support participation
by a diverse community of students and early-career researchers. The program
will be designed to include mentoring and networking opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference provides an opportunity for greater
participation from communities underrepresented in the field of hydrology,
especially those in the Caribbean and Latin America, as the conference will be
held physically in San Juan, Puerto Rico. It will also offer an opportunity for
students and early-career scientists to build their professional networks and
establish new collaborations. Several local field trips and other projects will
provide opportunities for engagement between meeting participants and local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.