* 2226453
* Disciplinary Improvements: AI Readiness, Reproducibility, and FAIR: Connecting Computing and Domain Communities Across the ML Lifecycle
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Karen Stocks, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,260,000.00

This research coordination network will build better practices based on the FAIR
data principles in multiple disciplinary communities, focusing on three themes:
FAIR in machine learning, AI readiness, and reproducibility. These themes were
chosen to address the urgent needs of researchers in the geophysical and
computer sciences. A key problem addressed is that machine learning models are
often disseminated with default “best” parameters (e.g. pre-trained models), but
lack documentation on model training, data preparation for training, and lacking
permanent identifiers. This hinders scientific reproducibility of machine
learning in the geosciences and often underestimates the variance in model
outputs. The project will build on prior successes in the geophysical community
and utilize existing networks to build relationships in this new research
coordination network, thereby creating a network of networks. Experts and
affinity groups related to machine learning will be convened to understand
emerging best practices, which tools and resources to leverage, and how to
stimulate experimentation that quantifies the relationship between the FAIRness
of data and how easily and efficiently machine learning algorithms can be
applied, as well as advancing reproducibility. Geosciences data repositories
will be better equipped to support their users in preparation, deposit, access,
and reuse of data using machine learning methods. The RCN will also develop a
roadmap that will serve as a guide for community-led efforts to spotlight
attention and funding in areas where an application of FAIR data principles and
open science in AI research is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
host community events and working groups to gather issues and practices for all
three themes. The target community is geophysical data archive providers, data
archives created by researchers themselves, machine learning scientists and
practitioners, high performance computing centers, existing organizations
revolving around FAIR data, big data, and AI. The team will coordinate community
activities and create a series of reports including both retrospective and
forward-looking guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.