* 2226875
* Collaborative Research: 2D ferroelectric nonlinear metasurface holograms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jie Gao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 222,122.00

Holography has become a promising approach for image recording and
reconstruction with a wide range of applications in many fields such as optical
communication, data storage, information security, medical diagnosis, and color
displays. Metasurfaces have been widely used to realize ultracompact and
efficient nonlinear optical holograms for the generation of complex optical
beams and holographic images. However, the existing nonlinear metasurface
holograms suffer from several issues such as low conversion efficiency, high
absorption loss, and large thickness, which greatly hinder their practical uses
in integrated optical devices. In this project, a new type of switchable
nonlinear metasurface holograms based on 2D materials will be demonstrated with
high conversion efficiency but only nanometer thickness. This research will
benefit many promising photonic applications in optical data memory and logic,
optical computing, quantum information processing, and flat optoelectronic
devices. This project also includes educational activities for training and
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, recruiting underrepresented and
female students, and participating outreach activities for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metasurfaces have been utilized to realize
nonlinear holograms for coherent generation of optical beams and holographic
images at new frequencies. However, the existing nonlinear plasmonic metasurface
holograms suffer from low conversion efficiency and high absorption loss, while
the dielectric metasurfaces have the thickness limited to several hundreds of
nanometers. The goal of this project is to explore a new type of atomically thin
2D ferroelectric nonlinear metasurface holograms with both amplitude and phase
modulations for achieving reconfigurable functionalities in optical beam
generation and holographic image reconstruction with high conversion efficiency.
In this project, the design, sample fabrication, and experimental
characterization of 2D ferroelectric holograms will be conducted to demonstrate
the production of nonlinear optical beams and the reconstruction of complex
holographic images. Several unique types of 2D ferroelectric materials are
utilized to construct the metasurface holograms with distinguished switching
functionalities in nonlinear responses. This project will reveal the underlying
physics of switchable light-matter interactions at the atomic scale between
structured light and 2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.