* 2226224
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Quantifying and characterizing the origin of Arctic Ocean methane from the Alaska continental shelf to the North Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Laura Lapham, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2024
* USD 33,403.00

Methane is relatively rare in Earth’s atmosphere but plays a significant role in
the global carbon cycle and climate change. It is therefore key to better
understand the distribution and behavior of natural sources of methane emissions
and how both may change in an evolving climate. In the Arctic, large reservoirs
of methane are currently trapped as permafrost (frozen soil) or gas hydrates (an
ice-like substance that contains methane in its structure) on Arctic Ocean
continental shelves. As the Arctic warms, permafrost and gas hydrates may
degrade, releasing more methane to the atmosphere. This project, part of the
United States’ contribution to the international Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS),
is determining whether rates of Arctic methane release from those natural
sources are being affected by the present warming by measuring methane in Arctic
Ocean from northern Alaska to the North Pole. The team is focusing especially on
how much methane released from the seafloor reaches the water surface and adds
to atmospheric methane. The team is sharing methane data and other results with
the larger US SAS effort and teaching community college students about seagoing
research methods and climate change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
testing the hypothesis that a warming Arctic Ocean may have accelerated the
release of methane from permafrost and gas hydrate dissociation in shelf and
slope sediments. The research team is measuring water column dissolved methane
concentrations and stable isotopologues, as well as continuous measurements of
methane in air underway along a transect from the Alaska Shelf northward. The
team members are investigating the sources and processes controlling the
presence of methane using methane 13C and 2H stable isotopes. Clumped isotopes
of methane in air are being analyzed on selected samples identified as possible
methane endmembers in the Arctic system. The project is a US contribution to the
international Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS) and is providing a baseline for
measurements in the future of Arctic conditions. The measurement of the stable
isotope 2H-CH4 in the Arctic Basin is the first performed in deep Arctic waters
and is greatly improving our understanding of the Arctic methane
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.