* 2226881
* Dynamic environments and the biomechanics of animal weapons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Christine Miller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,214,230.00

Male-male competition has captured the human imagination for centuries. In fact,
drawings from the Chauvet Cave in France, dated 30,000 years before present,
show wooly rhinoceros gouging each other with their prominent horns. This
ancient art depicts a common risk of fighting – injury. Many areas of the body
can be injured, and so can the weapons themselves. This project tests the
effects of dynamic fluctuations in the diet of wild animals on the structure,
use, and injury-resistance of their weapons. It employs a fighting insect, the
leaf-footed cactus bug, Narnia femorata (Hemiptera: Coreidae), due to the
potential for extraordinary insights relevant across the animal kingdom. Indeed,
a major goal is to provide broad biomechanical insights into the effects of
nutrition on form and function. As such it will provide fundamental knowledge
relevant to human health, conservation science, pest management, and much more.
Public outreach efforts by the investigators will include six live, online
scientific field trips for middle school students in rural areas of the United
States. This project will also support scientific mentoring and professional
development opportunities. For example, young researchers will be welcomed into
the laboratory into paid positions to gain valuable experience in biomechanics
and behavior. In addition, a scientific training exchange will be developed
between students abroad and the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexually
selected ornaments are well-known for their stunning colors and use in complex
displays. The expression of both ornaments and weapons is extremely sensitive to
environmental factors, but weapons are fundamentally different from ornaments.
While they may serve as signals to conspecifics like ornaments do, they are, by
definition, fighting structures; an important function lies in physical combat.
Thus, understanding the evolution of weapons will benefit from a biomechanical
perspective. This project weaves together biomechanics with tools from the
studies of ecology and micro-evolutionary biology, examining the role of diet in
the expression and evolution of animal weaponry. Specifically, the first aim
tests the effects of seasonal changes in nutrition on the structural integrity
of an insect weapon and its material properties. The second aim imbues the
discoveries of nutrition’s effects on weapon structure with behavioral
relevance, linking form to function. Notably, this work will not only be
valuable for our understanding of the development and use of weapons, but also
for figuring out the influence of nutrition on the insect skeleton more
generally. It is astonishing that we know so little about nutrition’s effects on
the growth and remodeling of the insect exoskeleton, especially considering that
insects comprise up to 80% of all animal species on this planet. Thus, the
relevance of this project will be broad, extending to fields such as insect
physiology, predator-prey dynamics, medical entomology, pest management, and
insect conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.