* 2226457
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Privacy-preserving Intrusion-resilient Secure Multiparty-computation-based Overlay (PISMO) for Secure and Resilient Communication Through 5G
* TIP,ITE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Linda Briesemeister, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 749,784.00

This project develops the Privacy-preserving Intrusion-resilient Secure
Multiparty-computation-based Overlay (PISMO) system for secure and private
communication through existing, non-cooperative 5G infrastructure. PISMO
transparently integrates into several widely employed commercial end-user
applications such as messaging and content sharing via authoring tools, e.g.,
Microsoft Office, email, and web-browsing. As several military, government, and
critical infrastructure operations rely on such end-user applications, PISMO
hardens them against threats. Considered threats range from unintended
eavesdropping to sabotaging cyber-attacks. This is accomplished while using
existing and affordable 5G communication infrastructure without trusting or
cooperating with the 5G operator. Deploying and commercializing the PISMO system
contributes to achieving greater national security and protection of
communication privacy, wherever such operations are carried out, nonetheless
always operating in a secure and resilient, yet highly functional and
maintainable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PISMO overlay consists of client
software provisioned on 5G end devices and server software deployed in clouds on
the Internet to form the backbone of PISMO; clients will connect via the 5G
wireless network to the backend servers. The project focuses on use-centric
design &amp; usability to converge the developed software components into an
easily usable, deployable, and ultimately transitionable system that leverages
modern cryptography (e.g., secure multi-party computation, private information
retrieval, and identity-based encryption) and advanced resilience and
reliability techniques for distributed systems and networks. In this research,
two user types are considered; an Administrator, who configures, deploys,
monitors, and maintains the PISMO overlay, and an End-User operating the PISMO
client on wireless 5G end devices. The research concentrates on solutions to
hard questions about configuring, deploying, and managing PISMO via three use
cases applicable to (1) critical infrastructure operations, (2) government uses,
and (3) military operations. These use cases will lead to precise definitions of
the human-facing components and procedures. The project’s scope also considers
deploying prototype implementations on testbeds in private and public clouds to
perform user studies capturing user experience (UX) elements and features. The
prototypes will enable the calibration of various automation opportunities that
the system offers in support of the Administrator’s task to define settings and
maintain functionality. Lastly, an integrated and deployed prototype solution
will meaningfully and practically demonstrate the advances in usability,
functionality, resilience, and maintainability that the research in this project
provides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.