* 2226589
* EAGER: Bioengineered Nanobarrier to Protect Against SARS-Cov-2 and Other Viral Infections of the Nasopharynx
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Isaac Asante, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has dramatically impacted the
way humans live and has resulted in more than 6 million deaths worldwide. This
project uses a topical barrier to enhance the defense capabilities of the lining
found in the nose, which is a highly novel method to prevent Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS CoV-2) infections. The aim of this
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to engineer a
nasal spray and new type of applicator that can deliver a special coating that
prevents viral and microbial infection. This user-friendly approach, if further
developed, has the potential to be effective in preventing SAR-CoV-2 variants
from infecting humans. Moreover, the innovative barrier could reduce the risk of
other airborne threats, e.g., could be rapidly employed during the flu seasons
or new emerging pandemics. The in silico computational models developed can also
be used to expedite the development of accurate and precise countermeasures. The
planned studies will provide opportunities to train engineering and biomedical
science students who work collaboratively through highly interdisciplinary
(engineering, molecular biology, virology and pharmacology) research studies and
will enhance ongoing education and outreach activities focused on attracting
underrepresented minority groups into these areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to engineer
an innovative, biodegradable, nanobarrier (anti viral coating) that is safe and
can be widely deployed to protect the public from SARS-CoV-2 infections.
Although traditional approaches like vaccines, mask mandates, and social
distancing are being used to prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19, long-term
compliance is a challenge. Therefore, a novel approach to infection prevention
is urgently needed. This project proposes a user-friendly nanobarrier designed
to prevent viral and microbial attachment and infection of epithelial cells by
enhancing the defense capabilities of the mucocutaneous lining found in
nasopharyngeal passages. The nanobarrier inactivates enveloped viruses by
sequestering essential cholesterols required for viral attachment, infection,
and transmission. This project has two major objectives: (1) to use
3D-simulation of the nasopharyngeal cavity to optimize the parameters (droplet
and delivery product characteristics) to guide the engineering of an applicator
for accurate deposition of the nanobarrier to areas most susceptible to COVID-19
infection, facilitating translation into preclinical models, and (2) evaluate
the efficacy of the nanobarrier in a validated coronavirus mouse model. The
final nanobarrier will be agnostic to SARS-CoV-2 variants and can be quickly
rolled-out to effectively prevent infection. The simulation approach used in
this project will serve as a platform to develop targeted interventions with
optimized delivery into the nasopharyngeal cavity. Additionally, this project
will expand knowledge and understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 variants infect as
well as their susceptibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.