* 2226423
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Secure Texting over Non-cooperative Networks and Anti-jamming Enhancement in 5G
* TIP,ITE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Brian Mark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

With 5G cellular networks being progressively deployed worldwide, ensuring
secure operation through 5G infrastructure is essential for the vast array of
applications across military, government, and private sectors. Convergence
research and development are required to accelerate the transformation of
technical innovations into viable 5G domain products. To address the
multidisciplinary challenges in convergence research for securely operating
through 5G infrastructure, George Mason University is partnering with Ericsson,
AT&amp;T, Michigan State University, and Morgan State University. Together we
intend to solve comprehensive technical and socio-economic challenges, to
achieve accelerated convergence. For this Phase I project, the team proposes
three research thrusts that will coherently address technical, economic, and
policy challenges: 1) secure texting through non-cooperative cellular networks,
2) enhanced anti-jamming capabilities for cooperative 5G networks, and 3) socio-
economic impact analysis of the proposed techniques. The anticipated
communication security and resiliency enhancements are essential for military,
government, and critical infrastructure applications, where stringent
information privacy and availability are required. Using critical infrastructure
modeling and simulation techniques, these technical solutions will then be
assessed in terms of their broader socio-economic impacts across a variety of
use cases for different 5G vertical sectors. The decision support analytics
produced will first help government and service providers prioritize which
techniques should receive enhanced resources, and secondly encourage vendors,
operators, and standards bodies to adopt and distribute these new security
features based on benefit-cost merits. Broadening participation activities will
target women and African-American students by stimulating their interest in
engineering, computer science, wireless technologies, cybersecurity, and
artificial intelligence, through a number of educational and outreach programs.
Outcomes from this project will be disseminated widely through data publishing,
tutorials, publications, and software toolkits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed secure texting solution adds intelligence and adaptability to text
devices that must covertly operate over untrusted radio networks including 5G.
Combinations of coordination, natural language processing (NLP), encoding,
translation, multiplexing and retransmission techniques are used to camouflage
and harden secure text messages amongst consumer messages spread over multiple
untrusted wireless networks. This solution shall improve the privacy and
reliability of sensitive text messaging over untrusted network environments
where other brute force approaches are not possible. It is backward compatible
with older generations of cellular networks. 5G spatial, time and frequency
diversity mechanisms will be utilized and customized to enhance low-probability
of detection/intercept (LPD/LPI) and anti-jamming capabilities of cooperative 5G
networks, including randomized dynamic resource allocation, diversified beam
switching, and multiple Transmission and Reception Point (mTRP)-based resilient
communication. Using infrastructure modeling and simulation techniques, the
socio-economic implications of the proposed solutions will be assessed. The
results produced by this analysis will be presented in terms of the potential
direct and indirect economic impacts for a business-as-usual baseline (with no
5G security improvements), versus a strategy of enhanced 5G wireless security
implemented using the techniques developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.