* 2226087
* III:Small: A novel machine learning framework for combating misinformation in real life
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Yan Liu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Widespread misinformation has been persistently observed on social media,
raising significant challenges to society. Misinformation involves rapidly
evolving topics and sophisticated coordination among bad actors. Existing
techniques to combat misinformation have achieved success to a limited extent.
They struggle to eliminate false and misleading content in a timely and
effective manner. Another challenge is the difficulty of quantifying the impacts
of misinformation. In this project, a novel machine-learning framework will be
developed by leveraging recent developments in machine learning. It will advance
the understanding of misinformation propagation patterns, produce effective
algorithms for misinformation detection, and help build a secure and trustworthy
cyberspace. A range of outreach activities will be pursued to broaden
participation in computing for women and other underrepresented groups.
Tutorials and courses will be provided to broadcast the research
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance both machine-learning
methodologies and social science insights, leading to effective solutions to
mitigate misinformation and manipulation in a timely, scalable, and effective
manner.Three research thrusts will be pursued in this project. The first thrust
develops a reinforcement-learning-based solution using news-source credibility
analysis to minimize human labeling efforts in constructing large-scale
misinformation datasets. The second thrust develops an unsupervised coordination
detection method based on knowledge-informed machine-learning models to identify
coordinated behaviors among bad actors. The third thrust develops novel
counterfactual analysis models to identify causal factors and evaluate the
estimated effects of misinformation. A collection of large-scale datasets of
misinformation on a variety of topics will be shared with the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.