* 2226565
* NSF Workshop Proposal to Develop a Summer Institute for STEM Teachers and Curriculum Development for a Novel 6-12 Grade STEM Program for a School of Environmental &amp; Coastal Stu
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Christopher Delia, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 99,869.00

Louisiana State University's (LSU) will offer professional development to
science teachers in a new school in East Baton Rouge Parish School System
(EBRPSS). EBRPSS is developing a “focus choice” grades 6-12 school that is
analogous to the LSU College of the Coast and Environment (CC&amp;E). The goal
is to develop a pre-college curriculum that will articulate with CC&amp;E’s
interdisciplinary Coastal Environmental Science B.S. Program, which is heavily
underpinned with rigorous STEM courses. CC&amp;E, in partnership with LSU’s
College of Human Sciences and Education, will help develop curriculum focused on
hands-on, place-based learning and provide EBRPSS teachers with professional
development opportunities that enable them to master the material that they will
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EBRPSS is fast-tracking this new environmental
school and aims to begin with a first cohort of sixth grade students in the fall
2022 semester. LSU faculty will develop a two-week Summer Institute Workshop
focusing on curriculum development and teacher professional development, as well
as assistance leading up to the first day of classes in August. The new school
is located 2.2 miles from the CC&amp;E campus, and a neighboring school is 93%
minority students. The new public school will educate a drastically underserved
population, offer students a strong science foundation, and engage them in local
environmental and geoscience topics. The overall aim of this “School of
Environmental Studies and Coastal Studies” is to educate diverse cohorts of
students who can matriculate directly to LSU, particularly in the College of the
Coast and Environment’s Coastal Environmental Science B.S. degree, or in other
LSU programs with an environmental focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.