* 2226332
* I-Corps: An Innovative Technology for Environmental Exposure and Respiratory Response Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Maryam Karimi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of compact, wearable, and user-friendly lung health monitoring
device that can keep patients out of emergency rooms and hospital beds and in
the comfort of their homes. The first commercial applications will focus on
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, and respiratory-
compromised patients whose symptoms are not well controlled and have severe
breakthrough attacks requiring medical attention. These patients are most likely
to be motivated to use wearable device for monitoring. This market may be
expanded to patients with other respiratory diseases and potentially to COVID-19
and long-COVID. The device has the potential to empower patients to better
monitor their respiratory health and change behaviors resulting in immediate
health benefits. There is also the potential for an occupational safety market
to monitor ambient air quality in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a wearable environmental exposure
and lung health monitoring device. The first prototypes have been designed and
developed and are currently in an inpatient trial at the University of Alabama
at Birmingham Lung Health Center. These prototype devices are collecting data
and connecting COPD and asthma patients to their health care providers which
will allow for a reduction of emergency room visits and hospital time. This
technology is a wearable device technology being developed to provide continuous
monitoring of a patient’s ambient environment (nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone
(O3), sulphur dioxide (SO2), and particular matter (PM) along with air
temperature and relative humidity), physical activity, body temperature, blood
oxygen level, respiratory function, the pace of movement, and geographic
location outside of the hospital system. The respiratory function data is
assessed using a peak flow meter. A built-in movement tracker allows real-time
spatial-temporal resolution data to assess the level of physical activity. The
collection of an individual’s global positioning system (GPS) coordinates
enables location monitoring in association with activity parameters for precise
sampling intervals. The data will be be displayed in a user-friendly app to the
individual, to help educate them on respiratory health and identify potential
triggers and to their health care provider for assessment and
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.