* 2226379
* Collaborative Research: Disciplinary Improvements: FAIROS-HEP, a Research Coordination Network for Particle Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* G.J. Peter Elmer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 440,666.00

The FAIROS-HEP research coordination network will foster the adoption of
practices and cyberinfrastructure to enable reuse and reinterpretation of high
energy physics (HEP) datasets. A key mechanism that the project seeks to
cultivate is that of “living publications”, distributed objects where the
description of scientific results, the data on which they are based, and the
computational procedures used to generate them are all available for
examination, reproduction, and reuse. This and other mechanisms which the RCN
would foster would facilitate distributed, asynchronous reuse of HEP research
products, by means of a combined infrastructure supporting publications, data,
software, analysis and workflow preservation. FAIROS-HEP builds on longstanding
collaboration among the stakeholders of the extended HEP community. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In the context of particle physics, a “living publication” will
provide: (1) published likelihood functions and statistical models that can be
used for combinations and parametric reinterpretation (which could include EFT
(effective field theory) analysis once the EFT operators have been specified),
(2) analysis workflows compatible with REANA (Reproducible Research Data
Analysis), (3) a recast interface to the analysis workflow that would allow for
kinematic reinterpretation (which is more general and encompasses all EFT
analyses as well as tests of theories that predict new particles directly
produced). The preserved analyses in (2) would also streamline the process by
which an experiment would like to fork an analysis and implement changes (i.e.
diffs) instead of starting from scratch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.