* 2226579
* GOALI: Advancement of Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording Enabled by Time-Resolved Magneto-Optical Kerr Effect Metrology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jian-Ping Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 410,232.00

Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording (HAMR) holds great potential for extending the
storage areal density of hard disk drives, which allows more information to be
stored in a hard disk of the same physical size. HAMR uses a laser to
temporarily heat the recording medium (the disk material) during writing,
allowing the use of media with high thermal stability at tiny bit sizes with
small grains. However, this thermally-controlled switching brings new thermal
management challenges, which require careful consideration of aggressive heat
dissipation in the HAMR design to ensure the high performance and extended
lifetime of data storage systems. This GOALI project aims to explore the thermal
and magnetic performance of HAMR materials for developing high-performance and
high-areal density HAMR devices. The collaboration between the University of
Minnesota and Seagate Technology will inspire interest in heat transfer, energy
conversion, and hard disk drive technology across a broader audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will study the thermal and magnetic
properties of thin-film samples made of HAMR materials, under systematically
varied temperatures and external magnetic fields. Particularly, the team will
focus on understanding the fundamental mechanisms of how temperature will affect
the magnetization dynamics in HAMR materials and thus the magnetic switching
processes, and vice versa. The outcomes of this project will not only address
the critical thermal challenges that currently limit recording device
performance and reliability, but also advance the fundamental understanding of
carrier physics linking temperature and magnetization. Such an understanding
will also be critical for improving thermal management in other giant magneto-
resistive devices and potentially advancing the new magnetic sensor
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.