* 2226348
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating Digital Twins in the Era of Big Data with Stochastic Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Eunshin Byon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2025
* USD 283,099.00

This project will contribute to the national prosperity by providing new
calibration methods to generate value-producing opportunities for digital twins
in many applications, including energy, healthcare, and manufacturing. A digital
twin is a digital representation of a complex physical system that can be useful
for monitoring, forecasting, and testing the system in a virtual world.
Parameter calibration of digital twins with observational data is one of the
most important steps in enabling them to closely replicate a physical system.
Today, advanced data sensing and collection technologies provide massive data
points from many components of a complex system. The success of this project
will provide a means of robust estimation by efficient sampling from these large
datasets, thereby significantly reducing the computational burden of
calibration. The outreach activities of the project will improve workforce
preparation through engagement with industrial practitioners, broaden
participation through involvement of underrepresented students in research, and
provide opportunities for K-12 students to learn about the field of data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative methods established during this
project for digital twin calibration will fully leverage the power of Big Data
while addressing the research challenges brought forth by the size and
complexity of the datasets. Specific research tasks include: development of
stochastic optimization approaches reconciled with statistical theories that
will optimally guide simulation experiments by identifying the best (smallest
most informative) subsets of data for computational efficiency; extending the
integrative optimization framework to be applicable for a wide range of
calibration problems, including multi-dimensional, functional, and time-variant
calibrations, with theoretical and practical implications; and seamless
incorporation of input uncertainty with optimization to dramatically enhance the
solution's robustness while maintaining computational tractability. The approach
will be validated through real-word case studies in building energy systems and
wind power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.