* 2226466
* MFB: Deep-Learning Enabled Structure Prediction and Design of Protein-DNA Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Frank DiMaio, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,498,460.00

In this Molecular Foundation for Biotechnology (MFB) project, Professors David
Baker and Frank DiMaio of the Department of Biochemistry at the University of
Washington, and Barry Stoddard of Basic Sciences at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Center together are developing new ways to model and design protein-DNA
complexes using deep-learning (DL) methods. To do this, they will develop three
DL-based models: (1) a model for prediction of protein-DNA complex structures
from sequence, (2) a model for sequence design of protein-DNA complexes, and (3)
a model for quality assessment of protein-DNA complex structure predictions and
designs. The DL models developed in this project will be leveraged in a pipeline
for design of sequence-specific DNA binding miniproteins capable of targeting
specified sequences of dsDNA. The use of the novel DL-based models in this
context will be useful for validating model accuracy and will have broad impact
as a powerful tool for designing protein-DNA interfaces for biotechnology
applications, such as the design of novel transcription factors, nucleic acid
modifying enzymes, and gene correction reagents. This project lies at the
interface of DL research, computational protein design, biochemistry, and
structural biology and will provide multi-disciplinary training for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs involved in the project. The
primary goals of their outreach and education programs are to attract young
people to careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and
improve training in biochemistry and computational protein design. The outreach
plan involves a multi-pronged effort focused on engaging undergraduates through
individually mentored summer research and a cohort-based undergraduate research
program that will run during the academic year. Both efforts will be focused on
training undergraduates in contemporary methods in computational protein design
and experimental methods for validating protein function, including the novel
methods developed in this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
develop a suite of machine learning/deep learning (ML/DL) techniques for
modeling protein-DNA complexes. New tools capable of inferring protein-DNA
complex structures, predicting the nucleotide specificity of DNA-binding
proteins (DBPs), and evaluating accuracy of protein-DNA complex models would be
invaluable in solving salient technological problems, such as developing novel
transcription factors. Current approaches lack accuracy or are computationally
intensive, primarily due to the difficulties in modeling indirect readout of DNA
conformational flexibility, hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions,
metal ion cofactors, and the highly solvated interfaces of protein-DNA
complexes. The specific goals are to develop DL-based methods for (1) Inference
of structure models of DNA and protein-DNA complexes from sequences and sequence
alignments, based on the recently developed RoseTTAFold model, an ML framework
for predicting protein structures; (2) A sequence prediction neural network for
designing sequence specific DBPs and predicting their specificity given protein-
DNA complex backbone information, and (3) An accuracy prediction model for
evaluating structural models of protein-DNA complexes. The three DL methods
developed in this project will be leveraged in the design of DBPs. Designed DBPs
will be experimentally validated in a high-throughput pooled format using yeast
display, cell sorting, and next-generation sequencing methods to approximate the
binding affinity of pooled designs. Designs showing DNA binding activity in
yeast display experiments will be further characterized for DNA binding affinity
and specificity using in vitro biochemistry techniques and the design models
will be confirmed with X-ray co-crystallization. Application of the ML models in
this design context will provide validation of model accuracy and result in a
powerful tool for designing protein-DNA interfaces for biotechnology
applications, such as the design of novel transcription factors, nucleic acid
modifying enzymes, and gene correction reagents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry (CHE), the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS), and the Division of Physics
(PHY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.