* 2226448
* SHF: Small: CT-DDS -- Scalable Concolic Testing of Parallel Applications With Shared Dynamic Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Although parallel programs deliver performance by exploiting parallelism
supported by a modern-day multicore machine, a cluster of machines, or a
general-purpose graphics processing unit (GPU), they are also prone to
concurrency bugs that are hard to uncover. To produce reliable parallel
software, powerful automated-testing techniques and tools must be deployed to
thoroughly exercise program behaviors to expose and then eliminate concurrency
bugs. The most powerful means for automated testing is concolic testing, which
combines program execution with program analysis (symbolic execution) to
automatically generate different program inputs to exercise different program
paths. Recent innovation enabling compiler-based symbolic execution has greatly
increased the efficiency of concolic testing. Thus, time has arrived to take
advantage of concolic testing in testing even more complex parallel programs for
a multicore, a GPU, and a cluster. The goal of this research is to generalize
concolic testing to test parallel programs on heterogeneous massively parallel
computing platforms by addressing two key challenges: how to automatically test
parallel programs that use concurrent dynamic data structures in which parallel
threads maintain shared state; and how to scale the efficiency of concolic
testing so that automated testing of parallel programs with large number of
threads can be made practical. Building such powerful systems will deliver
parallel software that is highly reliable. In addition, it will result in
training graduate students in an area of national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical aims of this project are divided into two thrusts. The first thrust
develops an approach for exercising the behaviors of parallel programs that
reveal concurrency bugs such as data races and program hangs. To exercise such
behaviors via concolic testing, this research will address the complexity of
generating non-conflicting concurrent data structures of those shapes and sizes
that enable parallel threads to interact in a manner that exposes concurrency
bugs like data races. Existing techniques are inadequate because their inability
to automatically explore concurrent data structure shapes severely limits
concurrent behaviors that can be exercised. The second thrust develops an
approach for improving the efficiency of concolic testing for parallel programs
with large numbers of threads. To avoid incurring repeated high cost of symbolic
execution, summaries that capture data structure shapes are maintained and then
reused during concolic testing. Thus, instead of repeatedly collecting and
solving constraints, a saved data structure of desired shape and size can be
quickly recreated. To deal with large numbers of threads, approaches employed
include: making the thread identifiers symbolic; and limiting expensive symbolic
evaluation to a single thread. The summaries also enable identification of
potential concurrency bugs that guide exploration of paths taken by concurrent
threads to either confirm or disprove potential bugs. The software developed
over the course of this project will be made available to other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.