* 2227650
* SemiSynBio-III: DNA Templated Chiral Metamaterials for Information Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

The rise of big data has increased the demand for technological innovations in
data storage while traditional electronics is reaching its physical limit. DNA,
an emerging data storage material, is a viable alternative to silicon-based
technology due to its high capacity and low operational energy. However, current
DNA storage technologies lack the structural access and allocated organization
of data encoded in DNA. The core operations require complex and slow writing and
readout processes such as sequencing, which leads to practical barriers in
speed, sustainability, and scalability. To address these challenges, this
project aims to develop the first DNA-encoded metamaterial data storage system,
which could give rise to a rewritable and high-speed integrated random-access
system. This project holds tremendous potential to transform informational DNA
materials into useful devices to enrich human capabilities from tiny memory with
unprecedented speed to ultra-fast optical computers and biosensors, benefiting
society and the economic sectors in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research project uniquely integrates powerful concepts
developed in the fields of DNA nanotechnology and metamaterials to construct a
novel platform for digitally coding DNA metamaterials. Information bits will be
designed, encoded, and decoded by the helicity or handedness with DNA origami-
enabled chiral meta-atom nanostructures. Biomolecular-based computation coupled
with metamaterial modeling will inform all the design aspects of the system from
molecular, meta-atom to system-level scales. Random access in such a system will
be achieved dynamically via subwavelength optical modulation coupled with DNA
templated patterning, providing high capacity, light speed readout capability
that breaks the limits in transient electronics. The success of the project will
significantly advance the fundamental understanding of biosciences, materials,
information science and technology, paving the way for the next generation of
bio-nano data storage and information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project was jointly funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
(MCB) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO); Division of Computing
and Communication Foundations (CCF) in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE); Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG)
and the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.