* 2227627
* RCN:CIP: Midwest Research Computing and Data Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Winona Snapp-Childs, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 09/30/2027
* USD 999,998.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) professionals underpin the nation’s academic and non-
profit research and development by the innovation and maintenance of
computational environments for science and engineering research and development.
CI professionals are employed at academic institutions throughout the country,
sometimes in groups of one to two people, and at some institutions in numbers
considerably larger. The CI professional(s) must be responsive and innovative
regardless of group size. And this pressure exists in a highly dynamic
environment of computationally-based research that encompasses new technology
needs almost daily, e.g. artificial intelligence (AI), edge/fog computing,
function-as-a-service of public clouds. The Midwest Research Computing and Data
Consortium (MWRCD) is the Midwestern hub of research computing and data
infrastructure professionals, and its purpose is to build a community among
cyberinfrastructure professionals who share a strong regional identity in order
to share information, solve problems, and advocate for important community-
driven needs. As a regional consortium, the MWRCD is positioned for equity; that
is, it better serves smaller, less well-resourced institutions. It is positioned
for impact for the CI professional as well, which it does through innovative
networking strategies, focusing on broadening participation across diverse
groups and institutions, creating resource documents on topics of interest, and
fostering new collaborations. Initial topics include FAIR data, AI
cyberinfrastructure, and return on investment of cyberinfrastructure. The
project is committed to data collection and evaluation that will contribute to
the broader study of the role of the CI professional in team
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Midwest Research Computing and Data
Consortium’s organization and plans are founded upon the Community Participation
Model in which the organization moves from principally serving as an information
sharing hub to achieving transformational objectives. To actualize the goals,
MWRCD will use a set of programmatic mechanisms, which prioritize inclusiveness
and broadening representation, which are referred to as programmatic
accelerators. These accelerators consist of a 1) Student Fellows Shadow program,
2) Residencies Program, 3) Professional Mentorship Program, and 4) Affinities
Group Program. Additionally, the materials to be developed and disseminated will
enable and empower research computing and data professionals to communicate more
effectively with key stakeholders. The theme of MWRCD efforts is that regional
stakeholders working together in a trusted setting can help each other and the
field. This is by working collectively on topics of mutual interest, by
onboarding organizations that find value in the mission of the organization, by
sharing information transparently, and by providing opportunities for
cyberinfrastructure professionals in collaborating organizations to contribute,
to be mentored, to belong to a cohort, and to become
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.