* 2227820
* 2022 Genomic Instability (GRS)-The Influence of Chromosome Architecture and Cell Cycle on Repair and Maintenance of the Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Chetan Rawal, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2023
* USD 9,120.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers to attend the 2022 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Genome
Instability (July 9-10, 2022 in Ventura Beach, CA). The GRS will be held just
prior to the associated Gordon Research Conference (GRC; July 10-15, 2022).
These two meetings bring together young and established scientists from multiple
disciplines who are addressing a broad range of questions about DNA repair and
genome maintenance, from tool development to mechanism and function. The GRS, in
particular, enables a diverse group of early career scientists to discuss
current research through seminars and poster sessions, exchange new ideas,
technologies and resources informally, and develop their professional network.
Hence this conference will facilitate training and professional development of
the next generation of scientists in this rapidly expanding area, including
underrepresented minorities. The GRS program includes a panel discussion on
career choices with accomplished scientists in different professions. The GRS
also serves as a career development experience for the co-chairs and organizers,
who are postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome maintenance and stability are
essential to cellular function, stable inheritance, and organismal phenotype.
The intricate monitoring, signaling and, when necessary, repair systems are also
important because their dysfunction leads to a wide range of important diseases.
The GRS and GRC serve as a vital link for investigators around the world to
share their latest, often unpublished discoveries, discuss pioneering ideas and
launch new collaborations. Topics at the forefront of biochemistry, molecular
genetics and cell biology of DNA repair pathways will be covered, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.