* 2227091
* CAREER: Versatile Wearable Robots for Rehabilitation of Children with Gait Disabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Hao Su, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 03/31/2025
* USD 381,052.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant seeks to enhance the
usability and comfort of a powered knee exoskeleton that is designed to improve
gait biomechanics and walking metabolic economy in children with cerebral palsy.
By leveraging novel actuators and wearable sensor technology, the PI will
develop an exoskeleton system that can "grow" in capability as the child grows.
The PI will also design a task-recognition system (intent estimation) that
facilitates high-level exoskeleton control. That high-level control is augmented
using a model-free adaptive controller that can provide user-specific joint
torque assistance. This project will promote the progress of science and advance
the national health by establishing theoretical foundations for - and a physical
realization of - a new approach to rehabilitating pediatric gait, one that is
safe, lightweight, compliant, smart, and able to be used in community settings.
An integrated research and education plan and innovative outreach activities
targeted to elementary- and high-school students will promote a globally
competitive STEM workforce and the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM. Efforts to further develop a "Soft Robot Zoo" will increase
public scientific literacy and engagement with
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to reduce gait impairments in
children with cerebral palsy using a novel powered knee exoskeleton that can
anticipate changing needs for joint torque assistance based on changing task
conditions as well as changing user intentions with regard to gait transitions.
Three main research objectives are researched: an optimization of human-machine
interaction using "quasi-direct drive actuated" wearable robotics; kinematic
activity classification and gait mode detection in children with cerebral palsy
using wearable sensor technology; and the development of a reinforcement
learning (RL-based) adaptive controller for assistive joint torque
personalization. Taken together, these research activities promise to enhance
human/machine collaboration in a real-world setting for children contending with
physical disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.