* 2227959
* Conference: Support for Early Career Participants in Conference on Uncertainty Quantification for Machine Learning Integrated Physics Modeling (UQ-MLIP)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Abani Patra, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2023
* USD 16,875.00

The 2022 Conference on Uncertainty Quantification for Machine Learning
Integrated Physics Modeling (UQ-MLIP) will be a venue for bringing together
leading experts, scientists, and young researchers from across the US, in the
domains of uncertainty quantification (UQ) and machine learning (ML) for physics
modeling in order to: (1) identify challenges and opportunities to advance the
field; (2) rapidly disseminate the latest advances in a single place; and (C)
provide networking and mentoring opportunities for early career researchers. The
conference will be held in Arlington, Virginia, August 18-19, 2022, and is
organized by a leading group of experts in UQ and ML for physics modeling. This
grant will fund students and a small number of early career researchers to
participate in the conference, to engage deeply with the UQ-MLIP research
community. The students and early career researchers will participate in panel
discussions, attend invited talk sessions, and participate in poster sessions or
present short talks. The conference will also advocate for the development of
shared datasets for shared community use for validation and algorithm
evaluation, under the auspices of the USACM (U.S. Association for Computational
Mechanics) technical thrust area of uncertainty quantification. The project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the
progress of science as it provides a forum to disseminate research efforts,
connect researchers, and train the next generation of scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference organizers are recruiting students and
early career researchers wishing to participate in the program from a diverse
set of institutions, and with the goal of a diverse set of participants.
Prospective participants will have to submit an application, and submissions are
evaluated by a committee for scientific merit and to promote diversity. Students
and early career researchers will participate in career panel discussions,
attend invited technical talk sessions, and participate in poster sessions or
present short talks on their research. The funding provided by NSF will have a
significant impact on the careers of the future generation of researchers in
uncertainty quantification, machine learning, and physics modeling, while
encouraging diversity in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.