* 2227301
* Mentor-Connect Forward: Leadership Development and Outreach for ATE
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Elaine Craft, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,796,313.00

This project will support community and technical colleges and their faculty to
submit proposals to, and maximize their benefit from, funding through the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Program. ATE grants increase faculty
ability and institutional capacity to address the need for a skilled technical
workforce. The persistent need for highly skilled technicians is recognized and
well-documented, but educational programs have been upended by disrupters like
COVID. Virtual instruction has become essential across all disciplines, and
overall enrollments have declined, as have college budgets. Meanwhile, the
critical and growing need for technicians in advanced technology industries
remains. Although the ATE Program is uniquely positioned to help colleges
address technician education challenges, colleges must develop and submit grant
proposals to access this funding. For the ATE Program to impact two-year
institutions of higher education (2-yr IHEs) and educate the skilled technical
workers needed by industry, barriers to becoming an ATE grantee must be
mitigated. Prior awards have made strides toward reducing barriers, engaging
more two-year college technician educators, developing STEM faculty leaders,
expanding mentoring capacity, and increasing impacts of the ATE Program. Even
so, there are still many two-year colleges that have not yet benefited from the
ATE Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentor-Connect Forward: Leadership Development
and Outreach for ATE (M-C Forward) will: 1) advance technician education in new
and proven ways by expanding engagement of geographically and demographically
diverse 2-yr IHEs and STEM faculty with the ATE Program; 2) stimulate use of
ATE-developed resources; 3) encourage and support the submission of proposals by
new and previous grantee institutions; 4) develop leaders and mentors among
those who receive ATE funding; and 5) support and guide new principal
investigators (PIs) to help them become successful grantees. The project builds
on successes and lessons learned from prior projects and leverages the work of
other funded mentoring projects. Peer mentoring and technical assistance will
leverage problem-based learning to engage college teams in sustainable, faculty-
lead improvement of technician education courses and programs. ATE Program
information and grant proposal instructions and development strategies will be
provided via workshops, webinars, online resources, and a help desk. A Mentor
Fellows internship program will build mentoring capacity in the ATE Program. An
existing Resource Repository will be enhanced by a new intake, review, and user
support system, and will benefit from contributions from other ATE-funded
mentoring initiatives. New instructional resources and support to guide first-
time PIs, PI 101, will promote leadership development, reduce the learning
curve, support improved project outcomes, and encourage development of
subsequent proposals. Mentor-Connect will be responsive to, and continuously
improved by, rigorous evaluation of all project activities. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.