* 2227479
* I-Corps: Hemp-derived advanced manufacturing of fabrics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Satyanarayan Dev, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of electrified fabric and protective clothing. The possible
applications may include uniforms for workers at hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, hotels, public transportation, and crowded public areas to reduce the
potential transmission of pathogens. For example, hemp incorporated nanofibrous
polyurethane membrane, prepared by electrospinning, could be employed as wound
dressings. The potential antibacterial properties of hemp, its porous physical
structure, air permeability, and absorbency capabilities may add advantageous
features to wound dressing. The cellulose fiber from hemp is used to make many
products, including jeans, shirts, dresses, hats, bags, ropes and canvas,
skincare products, building materials, and paper. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the potential development of an anti-microbial
fabric that can be woven into day-to-day wearable clothing, personal protective
equipment, or wound care dressings. The proposed technology may contain a
current-carrying mesh coated with tetrafluoroethylene and further coated with
active photocatalytic material to create hydroxyl radicals from ambient air.
Microorganisms, smoke particles, industrial pollutants, odor molecules, and
allergens could be structurally dissociated into protein fragments and natural
molecules after exposure to the electric field. The decontamination may be
amplified by either a negative or positive electrostatic charge to the suspended
particles as they encounter the technology, which may assist in migrating the
particles to the activated, dismantling mesh containing an internal, oppositely
charged attraction screen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.