* 2227763
* Collaborative Research: Physics-Informed Background-Oriented Schlieren Tomography of Wildfire-Relevant Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Samuel Grauer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2025
* USD 284,564.00

Wildfires are becoming more and more common as climate change renders much of
the world hotter and drier. Besides the destruction of natural resources and
animal habitats, wildfires that occur near human populations cause devastating
damage to structures, resulting in significant morbidity, mortality, and
financial losses. Wildfires are difficult to anticipate and control because they
are chaotic, three-dimensional (3D), and extremely sensitive to local
atmospheric conditions. Despite their importance to the characterization and
control of wildfires, the formation, evolution, and interaction of large-scale
vortices, streaks, and whirls in fires remain poorly understood. New measurement
strategies are needed to characterize and understand wildfire dynamics and
improve predictive models. This project will develop an optical sensor using a
network of cameras that can perform time-resolved, volumetric (4D) measurements
of wildfire-relevant combustion processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
develop, validate, and apply a novel, quantitative 4D flow visualization
diagnostic based on background-oriented schlieren tomography (BOST). By
employing a parsimonious representation of the flow field and developing a
physics-informed closure for tomographic reconstruction, the research will
produce accurate 4D reconstructions of laboratory-scale wildfire event
surrogates. Experimental reconstructions will be compared to simulations of the
same fires to understand entrainment/topology interactions. Existing BOST
algorithms solve a set of coupled inverse problems in multiple steps with non-
physical closures and use a coarse representation of the unknown field. The
developed method will perform these calculations in one step with an efficient
wavelet basis. Further, this work will produce a “physics-informed” BOST closure
based on the governing equations of fluid dynamics and combustion, enhancing
accuracy and facilitating the quantification of additional fields like
temperature and velocity. Simulations and measurements will be cross validated
using simple solid fuel fires. Moreover, the refined BOST sensor will facilitate
comprehensive characterization of fire dynamics in complex, wildfire-relevant
configurations for the first time, leading to a more complete
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.