* 2227513
* I-Corps: Energy conservation network software that simultaneously audits, monitors, and manages energy use in buildings in real-time
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Sukumar Kamalasadan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of an energy conservation network software for improved energy
management of commercial buildings. Buildings account for nearly 40% of the US's
total energy consumption. The proposed technology is software that
simultaneously audits, monitors, and manages a building’s energy use and its
distributed energy resources in real-time. The auditing application periodically
computes a comprehensive audit analysis based on the ASHRAE (American Society of
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers) standard, then
automatically recommends potential energy savings measures. The monitoring
application could provide device-level and aggregated real-time measurements of
all building power-consuming equipment. The management application could
accurately forecast building thermal comforts and optimizes building operational
power demands for efficient load shedding plans and demand response activities.
In addition, the applications are designed for easy control of all Distributed
Energy Resources (DERs) in any building. These functionalities may create
opportunities for energy savings, efficiency gains, and incentivized
building–grid operations, which may benefit utility providers and consumers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the potential development
of an energy conservation network software that may improve the energy
management of commercial buildings. The proposed technology includes three
functionalities including an auditing functionality using pattern recognition to
determine anomalies in building equipment operation and a database of major
equipment and appliance manufacturers to recommend replacements and compute
potential savings. Management functionality is based on an advanced building
thermal dynamics model and a model-predictive optimization algorithm that may
predict hour ahead thermal comforts and optimal temperature setpoints as well as
a simplified display of predicted building zone temperature. The monitoring
functionality employs smart equipment sensors in a configurable mesh design to
potentially provide real-time, device-level and aggregated monitoring of
equipment data using a simplified internet-based communication architecture that
eliminates proprietary equipment within the building automation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.