* 2227164
* Collaborative Research: Selective Extraction of Lithium from Seawater using Structurally Modified Metal Oxide Layered Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiaowei Teng, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2026
* USD 376,885.00

Lithium is a vital component of many modern energy storage systems, including
lithium-ion batteries. Demand for this critical mineral is growing rapidly,
coinciding with the clean energy transition, and will soon outstrip lithium
supplies at the current rate. Lithium production from land-based lithium sources
(e.g., ore and brine) may be insufficient to meet the anticipated demand.
Seawater is a promising, plentiful source of lithium, but recovering lithium
from seawater is technologically challenging. Current recovery methods are
limited by low extraction capacity, difficulty selectively separating lithium
ions from chemically similar ions found in seawater, and high operation costs.
Professor Xiaowei Teng at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and Professor
Badri Narayanan at the University of Louisville (UL) aim to address these
technological limitations by developing new classes of manganese oxide layered
materials for the selective extraction of lithium from seawater using
electrochemical methods. The investigators will integrate materials synthesis
and characterization methods with electrochemical performance assessment and
atomistic computational modeling to reveal how the material structure affects
the cation transport behavior. The research approach lies at the interface of
chemical engineering, materials science, computational chemistry, and
electrochemistry, providing a valuable opportunity for cross-disciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduate students. The project will also support
outreach activities to increase the scientific engagement of high-school
students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand the
interplay between dopants, defect chemistry, ion-hydration, and ion transport in
structurally modified birnessite (MnO2)-based layered materials on selective
lithium extraction from seawater. The research approach will combine wet-
chemistry synthesis, electrochemical experiments, operando X-ray
characterization, and a variety of atomistic simulation techniques to identify
the critical characteristics of MnO2-based electrodes that (a) favor insertion
of lithium ions while rejecting the larger competing ions (e.g., sodium,
magnesium), (b) promote kinetics of lithium-ion transport while suppressing
diffusion of competing ions, and (c) enable high-capacity lithium-ion extraction
at wide operation voltage windows while avoiding water dissociation. MnO2
structure, composition, defect concentration/distribution, nature of dopants,
and interlayer distance, as well as synthesis conditions, will be examined.
Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM will be recruited to
participate in the research at the WPI and UL laboratories. A summer
undergraduate student exchange program between the two laboratories will be
initiated to broaden studentsâ€™ exposure to new technical concepts and research
environments. High-school science teachers will be invited to complete a seven-
week summer research program to develop hands-on science learning pedagogy and
materials and improve scientific literacy and engagement among their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.