* 2227656
* RCN:CIP: A Connect.CI-based Community-Wide Mentorship Network (CCMnet) for the Advancement of Science and Engineering Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Kevin Brandt, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 12/31/2027
* USD 999,797.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) has become ubiquitous in science and engineering
research, partly due to the unprecedented acceleration and availability of high-
performance computing (HPC) capabilities enabling many breakthrough discoveries.
To advance scientific discovery, many researchers are faced with transitioning
their work from local machines or departmental servers to large-scale CI, which
requires developing new technical skills. Research computing facilitators,
research software engineers, and other CI professionals (CIP) are an essential
workforce needed to advise researchers on how to reshape the way they perform
research, optimize workflows, educate and assist in the use of new technologies,
and serve as information resources. However, it is a challenge for this
community to keep abreast of the extensive array of tools, techniques, and
specialized approaches needed to pursue today’s complex research questions. The
CIP community relies on peer-to-peer knowledge sharing; this valuable knowledge
is widely dispersed and difficult to find. A strong, collaborative mentor
network is critical to successfully sustaining and advancing the CIP workforce
to meet future scientific challenges. The Connect.Cl-based Community-wide
Mentorship Network (CCMNet) is developing this network of subject matter experts
from across the country, leveraging the Connect.Cl portal as the network's
central coordination hub. Through these efforts, CCMNet is strengthening
researchers’ and CIPs’ confidence in their abilities, enabling the exploration
of new questions, and facilitating more rapid scientific discoveries and
advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCMNet program is building a mentor
network that spans the broader CIP community by (a) developing a portal for
making connections and exchanging knowledge, (b) forming partnerships with other
mentor-centric programs in the community to advance support for all CIPs, (c)
reaching out to under-served groups to create a more inclusive and diverse CIP
community, and (d) developing best practices and guidance on mentorship for the
benefit of the entire community. These efforts bring novel structure and
consistency to the development of the CIP workforce, enabling a more advanced
CIP workforce better able to support today’s research needs, as well as
anticipate future needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.