* 2227178
* Accelerated discovery of nanotwinned alloy systems
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Andrea Hodge, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 10/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Part 1. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search and development of
new stronger and long-lasting metallic materials are of high importance for
applications ranging from space exploration to biological implants. Metals with
nanoscale features such as grain sizes and engineered grain boundaries provide
unprecedented control to improve a materialâ€™s behavior. A nanotwin is a type of
boundary at the nanoscale that can be introduced in a metal during processing,
deformation or by a heat treatment. Nanotwin microstructures can enhance the
strength, ductility, conductivity, thermal stability, and corrosion resistance
of a given material. Understanding which materials and compositions can form
nanotwins during processing is a very time intensive task when performed by
traditional research methods. In this proposal, new capabilities are developed
to allow the study of hundreds of compositions at once to link the probability
of developing nanotwins with material composition. This innovative approach
allows for faster, cheaper, and more effective discovery and deployment cycles
for new materials. Data from this project are used in computational classes for
machine learning for university students, thus seamlessly combining teaching and
research. Outreach collaborations with a local K-5 school provide positive
exposure and mentoring to our youngest future scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly nanotwinned (NT) microstructures, which are
composed of growth twins formed during the synthesis process, provide grain
boundary control and a heterogeneous microstructure which can improve a variety
of properties such as strength, ductility, conductivity, thermal stability, and
corrosion resistance. However, further understanding and the deliberate
implementation of NT microstructures has been hindered by a lack of fundamental
data on stacking fault energy (SFE), an intrinsic material property directly
correlated to twin growth. This proposal aims to overcome the prohibitively
large task of finding a SFE for every desired composition by implementing high-
throughput magnetron sputtering and combinatorial characterization and property
mapping that links twin formation with composition. This work focuses on
building materials libraries to connect compositions, NT microstructures, and
mechanical material properties which would greatly expand and expedite materials
design, by developing an experimental methodology that can be applied to any
alloy system. The broader impacts for this project include participation in
education and outreach programs targeting K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students with the goals of building a more diverse workforce and a sustainable
STEM pipeline at every level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.