* 2227916
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Diagnosing Intersectional Challenges for Equity in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Alexis Petri, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 11/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The Diagnosing Intersectional Challenges for Equity in STEM (DICES) project will
support a two-year self-study at the University of Missouri - Kansas City
(UMKC). The self-study aims to identify systemic barriers that affect the
recruitment, retention, and success of women faculty in STEM disciplines. UMKC
has recently reorganized, creating three new academic units, all of which
include STEM disciplines: the School of Science and Engineering, the School of
Humanities and Social Science, and the School of Education, Social Work, and
Psychological Science. The size and scope of this reorganization bring about a
unique opportunity for evidence-based change. The DICES project provides UMKC
with the requisite data-informed insight to implement amended policies by
identifying policies and procedures contributing to existing inequities. DICES
will also provide an opportunity to approach the work of creating new and more
equitable academic policies and procedures through an intersectional lens.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UMKCâ€™s broad goals for the DICES project are to (1)
Conduct a self-study to identify systemic barriers that affect the recruitment,
retention, and success of women faculty in STEM disciplines at UMKC. (2) Use an
intersectionality framework for the self-study. (3) Engage best practices on the
frontiers of institutional transformation related to STEM gender equity and
intersectionality through research, site visits, and consultations. (4) Apply
what is learned from the self-study and an innovative pilot study to improve or
replace current policies or procedures contributing to inequities and draft a
five-year strategic plan for their implementation and assessment. As part of the
self-study, UMKC will build a comprehensive dataset to clarify the reasons for
existing inequities and increase knowledge about them. The dataset will include:
(1) the distribution of STEM faculty by gender, title, and department, (2) the
career pathways and recognition for STEM faculty and how those pathways differ
by gender and other intersectional identities, (3) the distribution of resource
allocation to STEM faculty by gender, title, and department, including salary,
start-up packages, research space, graduate assistants, advising, workload
assignments and distribution, and (4) the changes to policy, procedure, and
other strategies UMKC can implement to promote gender
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.