* 2227905
* Travel: Student Travel Grant for 2022 Boston Differential Privacy Summer School
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Adam Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The widespread use of sensitive personal information to train data-driven
systems raises myriad challenges relating to privacy. One central question is
the extent to which the outputs of a system—summary statistics, decisions,
machine learning models, and more—reveal individual-level information.
Differential privacy has emerged as a central concept in addressing this
question. There is a broad and still growing body of research on differential
privacy, as well as a number of deployed differentially private systems in
industry and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide travel
grants for US-based students to attend the Differential Privacy summer school to
be held in Boston, MA, June 6-10, 2022, partly co-located with the Symposium on
the Foundations of Responsible Computing (FORC 2022), also held in Boston.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DP summer school will introduce students to a range of
cutting-edge topics in the theory and applications of differential privacy.
These include short courses on differentially private statistical inference, the
issues arising in practical deployments at national scale, synthetic data
generation, and algorithms for private processing of distributed data. There
will also be guest lectures on connections between privacy and other fields,
notably law and policy. Students will have the opportunity to work closely with
each other, professionals in the field, and the faculty on the short-course
topics via in-class interactions and problem-solving sessions. The summer school
will provide a unique opportunity to graduate students to learn the state of the
art in an important and rapidly developing field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.