* 2227961
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal transfer learning for enabling cross-country and cross-hemisphere in-season crop mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Crop production is a major industry in the United States (U.S.). In 2021, the
U.S. grain export accounted for over 40% share of international grain trade.
Millions of U.S. farmers depend on international market for living and
prosperity. However, the U.S. grain export is not only facing tough competition
from other export countries, but also impacted by grain yield in import
countries. In order to gain the competitive edge, stakeholders need to know as
early as possible where and how many acres each type of crops that have been
planted in a growing season around the world so that yield can be estimated,
production and demand balance can be assessed, and grain prices can be
predicted. This requires generating in-season crop maps of both U.S. and foreign
countries. The classic method to generate in-season crop maps needs a large
amount of verified information on crops (i.e., ground truths) to train
algorithms for classifying in-season satellite remote sensing images. However,
it is difficult or even impossible to obtain ground truths in foreign countries,
particularly in early season. This study proposes to develop a spatiotemporally
transferable machine-learning algorithm which will be trained with U.S. data and
applied to in-season satellite remote sensing images of foreign countries for
creating the in-season crop maps of the countries. Success of this project will
make the in-season crop mapping of foreign countries possible. The project will
significantly enhance the competitiveness and profitability of U.S. agriculture,
increase the food security of the world, and potentially bring billions-of-
dollars economic benefits to U.S. farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite remote
sensing with ground truth tagging is the current practice for crop mapping.
However, it suffers from two problems: 1) Unavailability of ground truth in
foreign countries; 2) Spatiotemporal intransferability of trained classifiers.
This study will design spatiotemporally transferable learning algorithm and
temporal learning strategy that would maximally transfer label data and models
from U.S. to foreign countries. The proposed method utilizes adversarial
training and contrastive learning. Through this two-player game, the feature
extractor produces domain-invariant features. A classifier trained on this
domain-invariant representation can transfer its model to a new domain because
the target features match those seen during training, thus bridging the gap
between times and locations. The U.S. trained algorithm will be tested in Canada
and Brazil to demonstrate its cross-country and cross-hemisphere
transferability. Scientifically this project will advance landcover science in
in-season crop mapping by offering a novel method of transfer learning, advance
machine learning in unsupervised domain adaptation across both space and time,
and offer new methods to derive spatiotemporally invariant features from time-
series remote sensing images. Socioeconomically this project will enhance
competitiveness and profitability of U.S. agriculture, increase food security of
the world, and potentially bring billions-of-dollars benefits to U.S.
farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.