* 2227425
* META-DDA: METabolic Activities of Diatom-Diazotroph Associations
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Keisuke Inomura, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,053,775.00

Phytoplankton are photosynthetic microbes that inhabit the surface ocean, form
the base of marine food webs, and drive the global cycling of elements like
carbon and nitrogen. To survive in regions with limiting nutrients for growth,
some phytoplankton have evolved symbiotic relationships. In many cases, it
remains unknown how the symbioses influence the survival of each partner or
their impacts on ecosystem function and cycling of nutrients. This project
focuses on the symbiotic relationship between two phytoplankton -- a single-
celled eukaryote diatom and a single-celled nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria called
a diazotroph. These diatom-diazotroph associations (DDAs) have broad geographic
distributions, provide bioavailable nitrogen to the biosphere via the fixation
of nitrogen gas, affect marine food webs, and influence the cycling of carbon
and nitrogen. Despite the importance of these symbioses, little is known about
their basic physiology and metabolism because it has been difficult for
researchers to grow DDAs in the laboratory. In this project, a team of
investigators from the University of Rhode Island is applying a method they
developed to grow DDAs in the laboratory and conducting experiments on the
effects of temperature and nutrients on DDA cellular metabolism. The newly-
generated laboratory data is informing the development of a computer model of
DDA cellular functioning that embedded in a simple ecosystem model to test how
different nitrogen sources and temperatures influence DDA ecology and ecosystem
function. The project is addressing fundamental knowledge gaps, leading to an
enhanced understanding of DDA geographic distributions and activities both in
today's ocean and in a future ocean with altered temperature and nutrient
fields. Broader impacts of this study include the provision of DDA cultures to
the oceanographic community, graduate student training, computational model
distribution, and outreach to the broader community. Graduate students supported
by the project are being cross-trained in experimental and modeling approaches.
Outreach to the broader community includes hosting a high school student intern
in the lab each year and the development of educational videos for the general
public and K-12 students. Collectively, these activities are designed to broaden
the public understanding of DDAs, a globally significant symbiosis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is examining the cellular metabolism and
physiology of diatom-diazotroph associations (DDAs) and evaluating their
ecosystem and biogeochemical impacts by addressing the following critical,
longstanding questions: 1) What is the cellular response of the Hemiaulus DDA to
different nitrogen sources? 2) How does the thermal niche of the DDA influence
nitrogen fixation, nutrient stoichiometries, and geographic distribution? 3) How
does DDA physiology and metabolism differ from asymbiotic diatoms, and what are
the ecosystem-level impacts of the symbiosis? Due to a scarcity of culture data,
major ecological models assume DDAs gain 100% of their nitrogen from N2,
although there is intriguing experimental evidence suggesting otherwise. If DDA
physiology is affected by different N sources, key assumptions in modern
ecosystem models will be altered, refining our understanding of the role DDAs
play in ecosystem and biogeochemical functioning. In addition to N sources,
temperature is an important regulator of cellular metabolism and a key variable
in ecosystem models. The team of researchers is examining the roles of each
partner in the symbiosis in setting the DDA thermal niche and examining
ecosystem-level impacts via modeling both in the present day and future oceans.
Finally, the impacts of the endosymbiont on the host genome, transcriptome, and
resulting physiology are practically unknown. Comparison of DDAs with asymbiotic
diatoms is providing new insights into the metabolic modifications of the host
and providing new understanding of DDAs as a symbiosis. Addressing these three
questions advances fundamental understanding of the impact of this widely-
distributed symbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.