* 2227834
* I-Corps: Polyelectrolyte multilayered surfaces for use in human mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (hMSC) manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Jorge Almodovar, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a scalable and controllable polymeric coating composed of natural
polymers to be used during the manufacture of therapeutically-relevant human
mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSCs). hMSC therapies have shown potential to cure
deadly diseases. However, hMSC treatments require large quantities of highly
potent cells. Industrial-scale manufacturing of hMSCs relies upon extracting
cells from a donor and expanding/multiplying the cells in bioreactors. The
proposed technology may be applied to current bioreactor systems used in the
hMSC manufacturing industry and may increase the therapeutic potential of hMSCs
while improving their yields. In addition, these technology may contribute to
hMSC-derived product quality and the viability of hMSCs during cell expansion.
If successful, the proposed technology may improve the hMSC manufacturing
process leading to more accessible hMSC treatments for patients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
surface coating to promote a scalable and controllable environment for the
production of human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSC) and improve the cell
manufacturing process. The goal is to improve hMSC behavior and function in
small and large-scale expansion platforms to improve the quality of cells for
end users. The proposed coating is composed of collagen and heparin and is
constructed via a layer-by-layer assembly process and has been shown to support
hMSC culture and increase cell viability. The technology may be applied to both
flat surfaces and spherical microcarriers. Microcarriers are used in suspension-
based hMSC cultures. When the proposed coatings are combined with soluble
interferon gamma, the immunosuppressive properties of hMSCs are significantly
enhanced, yielding a more potent therapeutic product. This technology increases
the cells' viability and improves their behavior and quality based on
immunomodulatory activities. In addition, the proposed technology modulates the
hMSC cells' response to soluble factors and improves their immunosuppressive
potential, which may lead to more efficient cell manufacturing and a better
quality cell product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.