* 2227474
* BRITE Pivot: Emergent Mechanics and Non-Hermitian Dynamics of Odd Elastic Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 538,294.00

Linear elasticity has been widely and successfully used to study the mechanical
behavior and properties of many solids. However, linear elastic solids are
mechanically passive and cannot do work on their surroundings. As an alternative
route, this Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award supports fundamental research to elucidate how
odd elastic solids, or linear elastic solids whose mechanical response is non-
symmetric, can exhibit unique dynamical phenomena previously seen in quantum
mechanical systems. Insights from this study will provide a fundamental
understanding of novel and distinct approaches to controlling, guiding,
redirecting, attenuating, amplifying, and using mechanical wave energy using
simple, elastic solids. Due to the interdisciplinary nature of this research,
this understanding may significantly impact a diverse suite of fields, including
multifunctional metamaterials, energy harvesting, soft robotics, condensed
matter physics, and vibration control. In addition, this award will support: the
inclusion of high school students in research, integration of research and
education for outreach to high school students, and the development of digital
educational content in mechanical engineering curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While linear elasticity focuses on solids having a
symmetric stiffness matrix, odd elasticity focuses on linear elastic solids
whose stiffness matrix is not symmetric. This research aims to elucidate the
fundamental structure-property relationships that enable a solid exhibit a non-
symmetric stiffness matrix, and furthermore, what role the interplay between
chirality and nonreciprocity has in governing emergent odd elastic behavior in
solids. By developing an anisotropic chiral, nonreciprocal elastic field theory,
the effects of both directional and chiral nonreciprocity on the mechanics and
non-Hermitian dynamics of odd elastic solids will be captured. This
interdisciplinary effort will bring new insights into the mechanisms by which
asymmetric elastic solids enable emergent dynamical behavior and properties that
are not possible in classical, linear elastic solids and
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.