* 2227298
* EAGER: A novel investigation of population and community temporal trajectories leveraging experimental disturbances from Konza Prairie Long-Term Ecological Research Network site
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sarah Supp, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 07/31/2024
* USD 194,512.00

Species do not live in a constant environment. Rather, each species exhibits
growth, reproduction, mortality, and movement patterns that are the result of
changing conditions. Natural and human-driven disturbances can have substantial
short-term or long-term effects on species populations, and in turn, on the
overall biodiversity within a system. Short-term disturbances, known as “pulse
disturbances”, can have rapid positive or negative impacts on species
populations, followed by periods of recovery. Long-term disturbances, known as
“press disturbances”, are chronic or ongoing changes to the environment that are
predicted to cause directional (increased or decreased) changes in species
populations and overall biodiversity. To fully understand the effects of
disturbance on biodiversity, it is necessary to distinguish the patterns of
species that are entering and exiting the community through time. Such a method
will allow identification of species that are becoming locally uprooted,
establishing, or exhibiting recurrent or random occurrence through time. This
study will use long-term ecological experiments on the effects of fire (pulse)
and grazing (press) disturbance treatments from the well-established Konza
Prairie Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) network site across plants,
insects, birds, and small mammals. The research will support undergraduate
research and education activities at a small liberal arts college and findings
will be shared through open access publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
investigates a novel classification methodology for sequential species presence
and absence (incidence) patterns and uses long-term control-experiment
comparisons with 15 or more years of data to test the level of ecological
disturbance needed for species to “switch” their incidence. The work will be
repeated across two main treatments representing pulse (fire) and press
(grazing) disturbance types, and will compare the findings across plant and
animal (insect, bird, small mammal) taxonomic groups. The research will generate
estimates of changes in population abundance, the proportion of years present,
and the incidence classification for each species population and compare among
the controls and disturbance treatments. Species-level data will inform
understanding of population abundance, persistence, and incidence trends, the
co-variation or decoupling of these three measures, and inform how pulse and
press disturbance regimes impact populations and ultimately community structure
and biodiversity. The incidence classification methodology is not system- or
taxa- specific and this research would provide a first test of the new approach
in disturbed systems that has the potential to uncover new trends not identified
using abundance or persistence methodologies alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.