* 2227315
* BRITE Relaunch: A Physics-Based Simulation Model for Exploring Community Resilience to Wildfires
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ann Jeffers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,974.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch award seeks to create a predictive computational
model for the ignition of buildings due to wildfires, which are a growing
national threat. Structural ignition is affected by radiation from the flames as
well as heat transfer from firebrands (i.e., embers). The latter has only
recently gained attention in the literature despite being a leading source of
structural ignitions due to wildfires. The present research seeks to formulate
and validate a robust, physics-based computational model that simulates ignition
from collections of firebrands on structural surfaces. The model will be
informed by prior experiments on full-scale structures and structural components
subjected to firebrand showers. Once the computational model is validated, it
will be used to study the vulnerability of communities at the wildland-urban
interface. The simulations will inform ongoing work on community resilience at
the wildland-urban interface, where homeowners and policymakers are faced with
(e.g., deciding what structural upgrades will have the greatest impact on
community resilience).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan involves a model
for the transport of firebrands from the wildfire using a probabilistic
multiphase Eulerian approach that offers better computational efficiency and
scalability for community-based simulations when compared to existing methods
that focus on Lagrangian particle tracking. In addition, the approach explores
the fracture and mass loss of firebrands under impact with roofs and walls using
the discrete element method. This new application of the discrete element method
will have significant advantages as well, including new formulations for heat
and mass transfer coupled with solid mechanics. The model will be validated
against prior experiments on structural components and systems. The high-
fidelity computational model is expected to yield new understanding and give
more accurate predictions of structural ignitions due to wildfire, leading to
greater community resilience and fewer losses in the event of catastrophic
wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.