* 2227551
* BRITE Fellow: Semiconductor Evolution via Manufacturing Innovation (SEMI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Adrienne Stiff-Roberts, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2027
* USD 999,314.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow grant supports research that contributes new
knowledge related to a semiconductor manufacturing process, promoting both the
progress of science and advancing national prosperity. While the total global
semiconductor market is strong and semiconductors represent an important US
export, the US share of global semiconductor manufacturing is predicted to
continually decline. As an approach to rebuild domestic semiconductor
manufacturing, the vision of this research work is to transcend the existing
paradigm of manufactured electronic materials being either organic or inorganic
and to embrace the versatility and functionality of hybrid semiconductors
(comprising both inorganic and organic materials). The evolution to hybrid
semiconductors could mitigate disadvantages that exist for any single material
type by combining the disparate characteristics of both constituents, and in so
doing, reinvent US semiconductor manufacturing. The potential for hybrid
semiconductors to incorporate multi-functionality, flexibility, transparency,
and sustainability in devices in new ways can enable next generation
electronics. Anticipated rewards of the manufacturing innovation required for
this endeavor align with national needs of enabling new domestic semiconductor
capabilities and developing a highly skilled and educated workforce. Guiding
principles to implement this vision include sustainability; diversity, equity,
and inclusion; and support of K-12 education to develop the human resources
needed in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin-film deposition of
heterogeneous systems comprising two or more materials with fundamentally
different properties is a critical challenge, yet this capability could enable
new hybrid semiconductor technologies. Existing state-of-the-art approaches to
film deposition of hybrid semiconductors primarily use solution-based
processing, such as inkjet printing. These approaches are subject to challenges
of composition control, achieving monolithic heterostructures, and compatibility
with a wide range of materials and substrates. This research is to translate
lab-based discoveries of a film deposition technique, resonant infrared matrix-
assisted pulsed laser evaporation or RIR-MAPLE, into a scalable manufacturing
technology. In the RIR-MAPLE process, target solutions or emulsions are frozen
such that sublimation of a matrix solvent (involving vapor-phase) releases a
plume of target droplets onto a substrate. To achieve an industrial-scale RIR-
MAPLE process that is controllable, reproducible, and high-throughput, this work
investigates the basic science necessary to transition RIR-MAPLE into a precise,
scalable method. This work explores monitoring and feedback via spectroscopic
ellipsometry; extends film thickness uniformity to larger area for higher
throughput; and determines maximum background pressure for controlled film
deposition. This research involves the study of complex materials, including
hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites, hybrid organic nanocomposites, and metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.