* 2227108
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Enabled and Digital Twin Interactive Robots for Facility Hygiene and Human Health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Shuai Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,971.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a mobile disinfection device. The COVID-19 pandemic, seasonal
epidemics of flu, and other infections placed heavy burdens on society. This
proposed technology may improve current cleaning and disinfection practices with
an intelligent robotic system. The proposed solution is designed to improve
cleaning and disinfection efficacy, enhance personal hygiene and public health,
and relieve the high workload and exposure risks facing cleaning and
disinfection workers. These benefits may reduce the facility operational costs
as well as opportunity costs from infection within facilities, and generate
positive societal and economic impacts. The proposed service business model may
facilitate the adoption of disinfection and service robots as a flexible choice,
creating new opportunities and serving broader areas in the post-pandemic
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled and digital-twin interactive robot that
adapts to ambient environments, social processes, and building dynamics for
automated, continuous, precise, and socially-friendly disinfection. The key
innovations include using a digital-twin based simulation and deep learning
environment to train the robots to predict and perceive contaminated areas for
precision disinfection at both the building and room levels. This research
improves surface disinfection efficiency and effectiveness. Pathogen infection
risks derived from data-driven modeling and simulation may provide a new stream
of information for robot navigation to prioritize disinfection routes. In
addition to the precision disinfection that specifically targets contaminated
areas, the robots will learn to understand the social contexts (e.g., human
activity and privacy within a room) to operate in the presence of humans without
interrupting normal activities and exposing harmful substances such as
ultraviolet lights to humans, enabling safe and socially-friendly disinfection.
Augmented by high-fidelity virtual simulations, imitation learning will be
developed to train the robots to learn the social and physical constraints and
adapt their disinfection maneuvers with respect to the context and object
geometry enabling complete, efficient, and safe disinfection. The technology may
enable a single smart solution to maintain environmental hygiene and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.