* 2227495
* BRITE Relaunch: Improving Structural Health by Advancing Interpretable Machine Learning for Nonlinear Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jin-Song Pei, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 370,102.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch award will focus on advancing interpretable machine
learning to match modeling accuracy with transparency. This will provide
structural engineers with a superior and trustworthy tool to model nonlinear
dynamical systems. Modeling the complex behaviors of structures and materials
under various types of dynamic loads remains a major challenge for smart
structures, structural control, nonlinear system identification, damage
detection, and earthquake engineering. Machine learning is becoming a popular
approach for meeting this challenge. However, there is a significant gap between
knowledge of the physics of these systems, the engineering practice design of
these systems, and the models produced from machine learning methods. Machine
learning lacks interpretability and transparency. This research project will
develop systematic solutions with reasoning based on the engineers’ knowledge
and training, physics-informed, and empowering the engineers’ judgment. This
research directly benefits society in terms of improving infrastructure health,
mitigating the consequences of earthquake, wind hazards, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds upon the project
leader’s past work to advance “nonlinear static function approximation using
interpretable machine learning”, given its direct use in approximating nonlinear
constitutive relations and its use in approximating nonlinear integrands in
ordinary differential equations for nonlinear dynamics. To achieve interpretable
and physics-informed machine learning methods, this research project will create
new algorithms and implementation procedures. Neuromanifold theories in advanced
applied mathematics will be employed to make the training process of sigmoidal
neural networks interpretable. Graph theory will be leveraged to create
knowledge graphs so that nonlinear static function approximation using
interpretable machine learning can be automated during initialization to
approximate nonlinear static functions and can be used for deep learning. In
addition to extensive cross-validations, a major application of the project's
approach will be investigated by using real-world data in a digital twin
setting, the state-of-the-art system-level modeling framework in structural
engineering. Also, a comprehensive laboratory demonstration and validation will
be carried out using timber beam-column joints to generate broad interest in the
broad relevance of nonlinear dynamics in structural
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.