* 2227842
* Observations and Micromechanical Modeling of the Behavior of Snow/Ice Lenses Under Load in Order to Understand Avalanche Nucleation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 574,545.00

The microstructural evolution of snow under a temperature gradient has been of
interest for many years since this can lead to persistent weak layers, which is
a possible cause of avalanches. Ice crusts can form on top or within a snowpack
from a variety of meteorological conditions, including significant melt/freeze
or freezing rain events. Once buried, they can persist throughout the entire
winter season and act as an ideal sliding surface for dangerous slab avalanches
in seasonal mountain snowpacks. These phenomena are important because the number
of fatalities from avalanches in the U.S. has increased annually since the
1970s. Avalanches can also have substantial economic impacts due to road
closures, the costs of rescue, and building damage. To understand avalanche
nucleation, snow and layered snow-ice specimens will be deformed in a cold room
while imaging with micro computed tomography. Macroscopic deformation
experiments on larger samples at both different rates and different temperatures
will also be conducted while imaging with a high-speed video camera. The final
deformed microstructures in both cases are imaged at high resolution using a
scanning electron microscope, which provides information on both the effects of
crystal orientation on deformation while clearly delineating one ice crystal
orientation from another. Based on the experimental observations, a multiscale
computational model is being built to understand crack initiation, crack
propagation, and deformation mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three types of
experiments are performed and are accompanied by micromechanical modeling. The
first experiment performs dynamic loading in an X-ray micro CT of non-
homogeneous snow samples in which there are differences in the layering in terms
of grain size, type, and bulk density to resolve how these differences influence
both the local and global deformation. Second, a X-ray micro CT is used to
examine snow specimens containing artificially-created ice lenses oriented
either at 90o or 45o to the loading direction. In addition to observing the
microstructure as a whole and determining a wide variety of microstructural
parameters that can be used to characterize the snow quantitatively, the
evolution of individual ice crystals to observe bond formation and bond-breaking
in detail are examined. Also, more macroscopic deformation experiments on 10 cm
cubes containing an ice lens at either 45 or 90 degrees to the loading direction
that are being strained at both different strain rates and different
temperatures on a servo-hydraulic testing machine located in a cold room are
performed. These specimens are being imaged using a high-speed video camera
during loading. The observations of snow under load and subsequent high
resolution SEM imaging are being used as input to build robust multiscale
computational models that describe the microstructural evolution of the snowpack
under load and the microscale deformation and failure mechanisms. The resulting
model, which will describe the deformation as function of loading rate and
temperature, and include the ductile-to-brittle transition of ice, will be
transformative for our understanding of the deformation of snow and for
avalanche prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.