* 2227930
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 IEEE Security Development (SecDev) Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Weihang Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This project supports student attendance at the 2022 IEEE Cyber Security
Development (SecDev) conference to be held in Atlanta in October 2022. Research
on software security usually focuses on detecting vulnerabilities in software
and attacks on resources. However, there is little attention to how programmers
can develop secure software from the ground up. This conference series on Secure
Development (SecDev) focuses on this important area. The 2022 IEEE SecDev
Conference aims to continue its mission of providing a forum where researchers,
practitioners, and decision-makers can meet to discuss ideas that focus on
building-in security into our systems. The support for the conference is
important for educating and training the workforce in this area and helping
provide a pathway to research careers. The technical advances presented by the
conference are critical to the development of secure software, which is
important to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SecDev encourages students to
consider big ideas that lead to a stimulating, thoughtful, and perhaps (gently)
provocative discussion. This project sponsors travel expenses for students to
attend the conference. Participation in the conference provides students with
opportunities to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field, consequently exerting a positive impact on the quality
of their research. The training and development of students in this way also
help widen the talent pool of professionals and researchers focused on
addressing the challenges of developing critical secure systems and services,
leading to potential new areas of inquiry in this domain. This project also
broadens the participation in the conference of underrepresented students in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.