* 2227766
* Collaborative Research: Ecological and biogeochemical role of Rhizaria in the oligotrophic ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Leocadio Blanco-Bercial, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2026
* USD 456,170.00

Rhizaria are large, single-celled organisms that contribute to chemical cycles
in the world’s oceans. Common Rhizaria (e.g. Acantharea, Foraminifera,
Polycystines, Phaeodarea) form mineral shells that are part of the ocean’s
strontium, silica, and carbon budgets, and they represent at least 5.2% of the
oceanic biological carbon reservoir in the surface zone. Better understanding of
groups of Rhizaria that are present, their biomass, and how their populations
change across different ocean depths is essential to model oceanic nutrient
cycles, but this information is poorly resolved or lacking for large Rhizaria in
one of the largest biomes on Earth, the central, low-nutrient ocean gyres. This
collaborative project involves a team of early career and more established
investigators, provides measurements needed to develop a model of Rhizaria
contribution to sinking nutrients in the deep ocean, and is adding to our
understanding of how nutrients move in the oceans and how changing environmental
conditions affect those cycles. It is generating large datasets that can be used
by oceanographic researchers and is delivering oceanographic, biological, and
data-science themed experiential learning opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study provides 1)
greatly improved estimates of total Rhizaria biomass in the oligotrophic ocean,
2) novel measurements of vertical distribution and environmental niche
characteristics of Rhizaria, 3) measurements of seasonal variation in Rhizaria
biomass and community composition, 4) identification of the environmental
drivers of seasonal and spatial variation in Rhizaria populations, and 5) a
model-based estimate of the contributions of Rhizaria to vertical flux into the
deep ocean. The investigators are using a combination of Niskin bottle sampling,
particle gel traps, net tows, and cutting-edge in situ imaging (using an
Underwater Vision Profiler, UVP5-DEEP) of Rhizaria to bypass limitations in
other sampling methods to produce accurate estimates of Rhizaria biomass.
Sampling occurs across a wide depth range (0-1200 m), at monthly intervals, and
in conjunction with a wide array of other oceanographic measurements collected
as part of the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS). UVP imagery data is
integrated with molecular identification of Rhizaria using community
metabarcoding, ZooSCAN imaging, and barcoding of individual Rhizaria collected
from net tows and gel traps taken in conjunction with UVP casts. The
investigators are using size-specific elemental analyses of Rhizaria and
seasonally and vertically explicit estimates of Rhizaria biomass to model
Rhizaria contributions to vertical flux. Along with data collected by the
Bermuda Atlantic Time Series and Ocean Flux Program, new data on Rhizaria are
being incorporated into a model of carbon and nutrient transfer into the deep
ocean. The model estimates three ways that Rhizaria likely impact the carbon
cycle -- by feeding on particle flux, by contributing ballast to marine snow,
and by sinking directly -- and shows how these might vary across space and time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biological
Oceanography, Chemical Oceanography, and Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.