* 2227928
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Creating a community-centered framework to address inequities in food-security in Alaskan coastal communities facing a changing climate
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Amanda Bishop, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,885.00

Accessing healthy food resources is a significant challenge for rural coastal
Alaskan communities, which are predominantly comprised of Indigenous Alaskans
who rely on subsistence foods that are nutritionally and culturally important.
Addressing these concerns is urgent, as food safety and security are
increasingly threatened by environmental toxicants due to climate change and
pollution, and requires approaches that enable communities to make proactive
decisions and respond to rapid changes in essential resources. Many food-safety
monitoring programs in geographically isolated communities currently rely on
contributory citizen science models, where citizen-collected samples are sent
off-site to academic or agency research labs for analyses. This model has been
shown to enhance participant knowledge and engagement, but it is prone to delays
in communicating results, and may magnify inequities, technological gaps, and
distrust. The project's vision seeks to flip this paradigm and create an
effective community-centered research partnership where all steps from
identifying the problem, to data collection, analysis, and processing, will be
led by and take place within the community through support from research and
technology partnerships. The proposed pathway will be applicable for a range of
geographically isolated, rural communities working to incorporate local and
traditional knowledge and scientific data on food safety into natural resource
management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THis research-centered pilot project
is a partnership between academic researchers and tribal governments in Alaska.
The Aleut Community of St. Paul Island (ACSPI) identified concerns surrounding
food security and safety as an area ripe for innovation and one which would
benefit from partnering with western scientists. To address our research
question “Does a community-centered citizen science framework address inequities
in food security, improve quality of life, and enhance resilience for Alaskan
coastal communities?” this project will (1) develop on-site research capacity
for ecosystem health monitoring through sustainable enhancements to existing
research infrastructure and technology, (2) expand community engagement in data
collection, analysis, and interpretation by leveraging “two-eyed seeing”
approaches to scientific training and educational programming, and (3) develop a
digital dashboard for data archival, accessibility, and sharing capacity to
facilitate information utilization and resilience, within and between
communities. This holistic program builds upon existing partnerships,
frameworks, and trust, which will enable us, during the Stage 1 planning grant,
to focus on expanding and refining our team, honing the training module design,
solidifying deliverables based on community needs, and ensuring successful
completion within the pilot project timeframe. This project is in response to
the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between
essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.