* 2227626
* SemiSynBio-III: Scalable Nucleic Acid Memory
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Tim Andersen, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Worldwide digital data generation is growing at a rate that rapidly outpaces the
capacity of current data-storage technologies. Over 150 billion terabytes a year
are predicted to be generated by 2025. DNA has emerged as a next-generation data
storage solution due to its high stability and high information density.
However, the potential of DNA-based information storage has not been fully
exploited due to the cost and energy required for DNA synthesis and sequencing.
In this project, self-assembled DNA nanostructures place DNA data strands with
nanometer precision in all three dimensions. The stored information is recovered
optically by time-resolved super-resolution microscopy. As a result, the need
for unique DNA strands is significantly reduced with a corresponding decrease in
the cost of synthesis. Furthermore, data readout is non-destructive and storage
volume scales beyond terabyte levels. This project develops and delivers
workforce development training at the interface of Synthetic Biology and
Semiconductor research. Students trained through this project will be immersed
in an interdisciplinary research team with expertise in Material Science,
Synthetic Biology, Computer Science and Electrical Engineering. The research
results will be disseminated through high-impact journals, premier conferences,
websites, and social media, and will be integrated into multiple courses at
Boise State. The research team will partner with the Boise State Institute for
Inclusive and Transformative Scholarship to recruit and retain students from
underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to advance
DNA-based information storage through robust data encoding/decoding algorithms,
deep neural network-based image processing, scalable synthetic biology, custom
imaging arrays, and an evolution-inspired sequence optimization algorithm. To do
so, a rotation-invariant data-encoding, error-correction scheme will be
developed along with a state-of-the-art deep neural network-based approach for
adaptive image processing, and a Bayes-optimal data recovery/error correction
algorithm to optimize probe localization and drift correction. Large custom DNA
“scaffolds” with orthogonal DNA staple strands will be created to construct
origami with more data sites per assembly. DNA scaffolds will be created to
allow multiple storage nodes to be built in a single “one-pot” synthesis. A
time-correlated super-resolution microscopy technique will be developed, which
seamlessly integrates super-resolution and fluorescence lifetime microscopy to
record interactions between dye-labeled imager strands and their sequence
complement in three dimensions. Custom imaging arrays based on state-of-art
single-photon avalanche diode technology will be designed and manufactured by
commercial foundry services to achieve 5 X 5 X 1 nm readout resolution. Finally,
an evolution-inspired sequence optimization algorithm will be developed to
optimize DNA sequences both for readout and origami synthesis. In doing so, this
work will increase information density that can be stored in DNA nanostructures
and the efficiency of read, which reduces the amount of DNA needed for large
scale data storage, improving both the scalability and sustainability of DNA-
based information storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project was jointly funded
by Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG), Division of Computing and Communication
Foundations (CCF) in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), and the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.