* 2227499
* Collaborative Research: Facilitating Supply Chain Trust via Micro-Surface Sensing and Vision-Enabled Authentication
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Chau-Wai Wong, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Counterfeit products prevail due to untrusted supply chains and have been
inflicting significant harm to our society at all scales, from public health, to
the economy, and to national security. Distributed ledger technologies such as
blockchain have recently been applied to provide unforgeable digital records and
to improve the trust of the global supply chains. Despite the improved trust in
cyberspace, duplication attacks in the physical world are still possible, making
counterfeits remain a serious concern, especially for products of high value.
Commonly used QR codes or low-cost RFID tags do not prevent counterfeiters from
linking fake goods to the distributed-ledger-based supply chain in cyberspace,
which compromises the trust of the overall supply chain. To address this
vulnerability, we propose establishing a secure cyber-physical link using
physically unclonable features (PUFs) of an item’s surface at the microscopic
scale. These microscopic features constitute a “fingerprint,” which can uniquely
characterize and identify the specific item being protected and can be captured
by consumer-grade cameras. This research project focuses on microsurface sensing
and vision-based authentication and offers a novel solution to complement the
existing blockchain-based countermeasures in supply chain management. This non-
forgeable cyber-physical link provides proactive authentication by supply chain
participants/end-users. Successful research in this area can mitigate the
illicit reuse of old electronic components and prevent counterfeit medicines
from reaching patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research effort aims
at investigating the scientific foundation and overcoming technological barriers
that utilize surface PUFs for linking the physical world to supply chains
securely and uniquely via ubiquitous mobile imaging. First, surface PUFs in
mobile imaging settings are examined to uniquely identify objects, with a focus
on designing efficient and scalable computer vision algorithms. Second,
microscopic-level light reflection models are established via physics-guided
signal analysis and machine learning approaches to extract surface PUF signals.
Third, the integration of the surface PUF verification with the blockchain-based
supply-chain information management system is explored and multiscale data
collections are planned. The proposed research is expected to advance the
scientific understanding of photometric behaviors of microstructures and result
in more accurate light reflection models at the microscopic scale via both
controlled experiments and machine learning. The information-theoretic modeling
of the PUF’s inherent randomness and channel randomness due to processing steps
can potentially help identify the bottleneck of the verification system and
improve its performance. The proposed ambient light decomposition and estimation
scheme facilitate a capability leaping of computer vision for authenticating
scenes at the microscopic scale. The proposed research program has the potential
to protect public health and national security via safeguarding supply chains.
The ubiquity of mobile devices multiplies the economic and societal impacts of
our research. The proposed program also seamlessly integrates research,
education, and outreach. It will prepare the future security-aware workforce by
fascinating them with cutting-edge research results via lectures, projects, and
global competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.