* 2227263
* Conference: Building on the promise of wind energy through advances in turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 48,940.00

Meeting global warming targets requires a roughly three-fold increase in wind
energy installation by 2030. Achieving this growth will require a rapid increase
in the number, size and capacity of wind farms and installations in locations
and operation under conditions that will push the limits of our current
understanding. The goal of the proposed symposium is to bring the wind energy
and turbulence communities together to discuss the advances in wind farm science
needed to meet these challenges. Close interaction among these communities is
critical in this regard, as fluid turbulence plays a fundamental role in wind
farms over scales ranging from blade aerodynamics and structural loading of
individual turbines to the interactions between the turbulent flow in the wind
farm array and the atmospheric boundary layer. The symposium will focus on
advancing the understanding of turbulence in wind farms. It will be held in San
Juan, Puerto Rico. The NSF support will aid in costs for graduate students and
junior faculty to attend the symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
symposium will have strong scientific and educational impacts as it seeks to
provide a unique cross-disciplinary environment for identifying the current
issues and new challenges associated with the role of turbulence in wind energy
for the next quarter century. The symposium will bring together students and
faculty experts to discuss state-of-the-art turbulence/wind energy research
using a range of approaches including modeling, experiments, and simulations.
Active participation of graduate students and junior researchers will engage the
next generation of scientists/engineers to tackle problems in these areas; and
to develop strategies and new initiatives for addressing the remaining
challenges to reaching the ambitious goals needed to meet climate goals. Peer-
reviewed contributions will be collected through a special topics volume in the
Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.