* 2227573
* BRITE Relaunch: Realizing the Benefits of Additive Manufacturing for the Microstructural Control of Polymer Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* David Roberson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,997.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch project will provide knowledge that will solve
critical engineering problems on the topic of reusable polymeric materials. The
work promises to improve reliability of materials for biomedical applications
and enable cost-effective water purification solutions. Central to the success
of this project is a new materials design approach involving 3D printing that
will be used to create plastic materials that can be easily healed when damaged.
The project will be performed at a minority-serving institution, providing
equitable and inclusive research and educational opportunities for groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. This project will also spearhead the Polymer
Pathways Program, an outreach and education effort that will be geared towards
the local K-12 population of El Paso, Texas which has a poverty rate greater
than the national average and a demographic that is over 80% Hispanic. A central
goal is to change attitudes pertaining to plastic materials from that of “use
and throw away” to that of “use, heal, reuse.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to change the paradigm of polymer materials
from disposable to reusable through additive manufacturing-enabled
microstructural control. This microstructural control will be used to tune the
shape memory and self-healing properties of polymer systems. This project will
utilize a materials design concept dubbed “quasi-self-assembly” where the
morphology of polymer phases is manipulated by the additive manufacturing
process of fused filament fabrication. This project will build upon prior
discoveries made by the PI which have documented that phase alignment in multi-
constituent polymer blends has an influence on shape memory performance. Two
main categories of materials will be used in this study; biocompatible polymers
and polymers that can be manipulated into ion exchange membranes by way of a
facile chemical process that functionalizes styrenic blocks. The knowledge
generated by this project will provide engineering foundations for future
impacts on a single materials design approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.