* 2227489
* BRITE Pivot: Advancing Knowledge in Water-Shell Structure Interaction Through Discovery of Efficient Hydrodynamic and Structural Thin-shell Forms
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Maria Garlock, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,262.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award funds research that has the potential to lead to
scientific discoveries in water-structure interaction to enable innovative
approaches to coastal resilience. The path to these discoveries establishes and
grows a new field, “aquatectural engineering,” which is represented by an
integration of three disciplines: structural engineering, coastal engineering,
and architecture. The design goals of aquatectural engineering are those of
coastal hazard engineering (safety, durability, and robustness), structural art
(efficiency, economy, and elegance), and sustainability (low environmental
impact). At its best, aquatectural engineering equals adaptable aquatecture,
which is characterized by no/low regret strategies (relatively low cost and
large benefits under predicted future climates) and has co-benefits (serves more
than one purpose). The research outcomes benefit society by enabling robust
designs of coastal structures while using less mass via thin-shell forms, and
designs that are potentially more elegant and less intrusive to the community
and ecosystem. In the field of structural engineering, a plethora of studies
have demonstrated the significant strength of thin-shell structural forms, where
“shell” refers to the inherent geometric curvature, and “thin” refers to the
large span-to-thickness ratio. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective is
to enable aquatectural engineering and adaptable aquatecture design goals
through the advancement of fundamental knowledge in water-shell structure
interaction using integrative approaches: hydrodynamic analyses, finite element
structural analyses, and machine learning tools. Specifically, the research will
discover efficient hydrodynamic thin-shell structural forms that have broad
application to coastal resilience such as seawalls, flood barriers, floating
breakwaters, coastal bridges, and coastal building facades, for example. Since
thin-shell structures could be susceptible to dangerous impulse (impact) forces
of breaking waves, the numerical approach includes Lagrangian-based multiphase
(water and air) smoothed particle hydrodynamic (SPH) models. These complex
models will be validated with experimental programs at small scale and large
scale. Machine learning methods will be used to (1) arrive at efficient
structural thin-shell forms given wave characteristics and (2) develop
predictive equations for the wave pressure on these forms. Overall, the project
will advance knowledge in the relationship between patterned thin-shell
structural shapes/forms and (non)breaking wave forces. In addition, this
research establishes a new interdisciplinary field, and demonstrates an
integrative approach to find optimized coastal structure forms and predictive
wave pressure equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.