* 2227037
* EAGER: Ideas Lab on Geomagnetically Induced Currents; Golden, Colorado; Mid to Late September 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 164,949.00

In partnership with the NSF, NASA, and the NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center,
UCAR Cooperative Programs for the Advancement of Earth System Science (CPAESS)
will support an Ideas Lab to offer multiple perspectives from various scientific
and engineering backgrounds to provide innovative approaches for new and bold
ideas for better prediction and mitigation of Geomagnetically Induced Currents
(GIC) that affect power grid operations, pipelines, and other technological
systems involving long conducting wires. The main goal of the Ideas Lab is to
bring together a diverse group of researchers, including modelers and
experimentalists, to form interdisciplinary teams that will develop innovative
and transformative approaches to strengthen the Research to Operations (R2O)
program on GICs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ideas Lab will support research and
engineering technology development efforts that will lead to new opportunities
in geospace and Earth sciences to better predict and mitigate GIC effects. It
will also involve innovative approaches in educating, training, and developing a
cross-disciplinary workforce with the relevant expertise spanning physical
understanding of the coupled Sun-Earth system, geological formation of the solid
earth, and engineering and operation of ground power grids and transformers.
UCAR CPAESS will host and KnowInnovation will facilitate the Ideas Lab for GICs
that will bring together approximately thirty-six scientists to look at
formulating new techniques and technologies to better predict and mitigate GIC
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.