* 2227556
* BRITE Pivot: An Integrated Theory of Continuum and Statistical Mechanics of Active Soft Matter
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Yashashree Kulkarni, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2026
* USD 409,795.00

Biological membranes are interfaces that separate cells and their internal
organelles from their environment. These membranes inevitably play a crucial
role in processes such as response of cells to mechanical stimuli, transmission
of messages through electrochemical signals, or exchange of nutrients. To date,
most studies have focused entirely on treating biological membranes as "passive"
membranes that exhibit fluctuations due to thermal vibrations of molecules only.
However, there is growing consensus that membranes are actually "active", which
refers to their ability to harness energy from an extrinsic source to execute
specific functions. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and
Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award supports fundamental
research in understanding the mechanics of active membranes and furnishing
insights into their role in critical biological phenomena. It is envisioned that
this endeavor will pave the way to better understand, control, and perhaps mimic
active biological matter for biotechnology and healthcare applications. The
research will also train graduate students in a multidisciplinary area at the
intersection of solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, statistical mechanics, and
biophysics. It will enrich the curriculum at the PI's institution where over 50
percent of the student body is classified as belonging to underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish a
rigorous framework of continuum mechanics for active membranes by integrating it
with non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. For decades, the field of continuum
mechanics has provided remarkable insights into passive membranes by utilizing
tools from equilibrium statistical mechanics which assumes the membranes to be
in thermal equilibrium. However, active forces drive a membrane away from
equilibrium. Furthermore, modeling of active fluctuations requires dynamic
analysis of membranes embedded in a fluid that dissipates energy. These factors
render conventional equilibrium statistical mechanics incapable of modeling
active membranes. This research seeks to develop a new integrated theory to
explain the mechanics of active membranes. Specifically, the PI will focus on
three phenomena that are ubiquitous in biology â€“ 1) entropic interactions
between active membranes; 2) role of active fluctuations in vesicle size
distribution, and 3) relaxation of electric fields in active membranes. The
theoretical framework developed here will open avenues for the modeling of more
complex biological phenomena by way of theory and computational methods and
provide routes for designing controlled experiments to understand active soft
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.