* 2227460
* Collaborative Research: Waveguide-Integrated Graphene Nano-tweezERs (WIGNER) for rapid sorting and analysis of nanovesicles and viruses
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2025
* USD 230,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project aims to design and demonstrate a sensing
platform which incorporates recent advances in both electrical trapping and
integration of optical circuits for rapid concentrating, sorting, and analysis
of biological nanoparticles. Viruses and cellular fragments extracted from
liquid samples of a patient (e.g., urine, blood, etc.) contain abundant
diagnostic information which can be used to detect and treat many diseases.
However, detecting a specific target bioparticle from a mixture of many other
particles in the sample complicates diagnostics. Current methods for isolating
the targe bioparticles often require time-consuming processes such as multiple
filtering or centrifugation stages, followed by amplification. Therefore, an
active biosensor which rapidly sorts, traps, and detects bioparticles based on
their size and physical properties would have significant impact on the field of
biosensing and medical diagnostics. Mass producing such sensors could reduce the
complexity, cost, and delay for patients undergoing medical diagnostic tests.
This project also provides mentoring and outreach opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students who are underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project will develop a
biosensor which can sort, trap, and detect extracellular vesicles (EVs) and
viral specimens by combining highly confined evanescent field excitation from
visible waveguides with dielectrophoretic (DEP) trapping using atomically sharp
graphene electrodes. To demonstrate this Waveguide-Integrated Graphene Nano-
tweezERs (or “WIGNER”) platform, the team will: 1) combine transparent DEP
graphene electrodes and silicon nitride photonic waveguides; 2) integrate
microfluidics for efficient aqueous nanovesicle sorting and trapping; and 3)
demonstrate rapid detection and analysis of single nanovesicles and viruses
using line-imaging optical scattering, fluorescence, and Raman spectroscopy. The
project aims to enable physiologically selective, multimodal analysis of
nanovesicles and viruses at speeds ~100× faster than conventional scanning
methods (i.e., confocal fluorescence and Raman spectroscopy). Project outcomes
will have immediate relevance for emerging applications in life sciences (e.g.,
elucidating cell signaling pathways), nanomedicine (e.g., dynamic antibody
binding response to lipid membranes used in mRNA vaccines), and disease
diagnosis (e.g., amplification-free viral detection).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.