* 2227069
* Collaborative Research: MUCUS: Measuring and Understanding the Cassiopea Use of Space
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* William Fitt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 12/31/2025
* USD 131,031.00

In recent decades over 50% of living coral reefs have been lost due in large
part to climate change and other anthropogenic factors. In contrast, jellyfish
are overpopulating part of the oceans with an increased rate of blooms since
1950. Mucus produced by jellyfish may allow them to colonize new locations,
thrive in warm environments, and provide glycoproteins for the surrounding
community. Although there has been significant work exploring the role that
mucus plays in vertebrate animals and how mucus affects microorganism swimming
at the microscale, our understanding of the mechanical properties of jellyfish
mucus, which may be up to tens of centimeters in thickness, is limited. The
broad goal of this project is to determine if the success of the jellyfish
Cassiopea and related species is due in part to their significant production of
mucus and, associated with it, venom within stinging cells released by the
jellyfish in structures called cassiosomes. This project supports
interdisciplinary training for a postdoctoral fellow, two graduate students, and
at least four undergraduates at the interface of biomechanics, mathematical
modeling, physiology, and ecology. Training includes opportunities for students
to connect with researchers at the Smithsonian Institution, the Key Largo Marine
Research Laboratory, and internationally in Japan and Brazil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While scientific studies and news stories increasingly
report on the reduction of distribution ranges for a number of marine species,
scyphozoan jellyfish, conversely, appear to be undergoing range expansions due
to increased bloom events. Temperature appears to be a major factor, enabling a
longer reproduction period, as are anthropogenic factors that result in an
increase in asexual reproduction. Increasing findings also suggest that
jellyfish mucus may confer an advantage by playing a protective role against
environmental stress and increasing temperatures while simultaneously enhancing
feeding efficiency. To understand how mucus aids in the success of Cassiopea and
other rhizostome jellyfish, the research team will use a highly
interdisciplinary approach that combines the following tools: (1) mathematics
and engineering tools to characterize the physical properties of the mucus and
the motility of plankton and cassiosomes within it, (2) eDNA, traditional
sampling, and the literature to benchmark how Cassiopea species distributions
are changing, and (3) Nanopore eRNA sequencing to characterize the venom and
other mucus proteins of interest and how expression of these proteins changes
over time and with seasonal temperature fluctuations. The team will then apply
these tools to (1) assess whether and how mucus reduces swimming speeds in a
variety of planktonic prey while permitting or possibly enhancing active
locomotion in cassiosomes, (2) determine the mechanisms by which mucus protects
jellyfish from foreign objects and irritants, and (3) evaluate if and how mucus,
cassiosomes, and nematocysts aid in the range expansion of Cassiopea by creating
dominant mono-specific or mono-generic communities. In addition to providing
interdisciplinary training opportunities for a postdoctoral fellow and graduate
and undergraduate students, the award supports an annual workshop on Cassiopea
biology at the Key Largo Marine Research Laboratory which will be expanded to
incorporate presentations and tutorials related to this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the BIO-IOS-
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics program and the GEO-OCE-Biological
Oceanography program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.