* 2227874
* Using Glycodendrimers to Elucidate the Importance of Multivalency in the Structures and Functions of Galectins
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Mary Cloninger, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 10/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Mary Cloninger from Montana State University to
develop sugar-modified highly branched compounds to study the important roles
that galectins play in cell-to-cell interactions. Galectins are carbohydrate
binding proteins involved in many physiological functions that involve how cells
interact and communicate with other cells and are linked to diseases such as
fibrosis, cancer and heart disease. A set of highly branched molecules, called
glycodendrimers, with varied numbers of sugars displayed on their surfaces will
be synthesized. These glycodendrimers will be used in biochemical, structural,
and cell biological studies to investigate the effects that carbohydrate binding
has on how galectins interact with each other and how these protein interactions
affect cell-to-cell interactions. Under this project, the PI will reach out to
students from diverse populations to bring these students into the Cloninger
research group through outreach programs with Flathead Valley Community College
(FVCC) and local high schools. In addition, Dr. Cloninger and her undergraduate
and graduate students will present their research to chemistry classes at four
local high schools and give interested high school students opportunities to
perform microscopy experiments at Montana State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although galectins play a critical role in
cellular recognition processes through their binding interactions with cell
surface carbohydrates, modulation of the interplay between their multivalent and
monovalent functionalities is not well understood. Moreover, whether galectins
from the three subfamilies have synergistic or distinct functions is currently
unknown. The proposed research will use glycodendrimers to better understand
galectin structure-function relationships. Lactose-functionalized
glycodendrimers are ideal macromolecules with which to study multivalent
carbohydrate-lectin interactions because both their size and the number of
carbohydrate end groups can be systematically varied. Thus, glycodendrimers will
be used to identify the role of the N-terminal domain in directing multivalent
galectin-3/carbohydrate interactions. In addition, glycodendrimers will be used
to evaluate whether galectins from the three subfamilies are working in concert
to achieve increased specificity and selectivity in their multivalent
interactions. Dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy and
fluorescence microscopy will be employed to visualize glycodendrimer-lectin
interactions. In addition, cellular uptake, and cellular aggregation assays
using a series of glycodendrimers binding to galectin-3 and to mixtures of
galectins will be performed. Elucidating the key principles that guide
multivalent interactions in complex environments is essential for understanding
the role of multivalent associations between cell surface carbohydrates and
galectins. In this regard, carbohydrate-functionalized dendrimers provide an
ideal platform for the requisite systematic study of the role of multivalent
interactions in carbohydrate-lectin binding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.