* 2227509
* BRITE Fellow: The Mechanobiology of Sex and Stress
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Beth Pruitt, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/29/2028
* USD 1,015,996.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow award is to advance the Nation's understanding of the
ways that male and female heart muscle cells handle stress differently. Recent
studies have revealed significant differences in male and female biology,
including disease progression and responses to stress in the heart. Importantly,
these differences are observed not only in whole organs, but at the cellular
level as well. The heart is the most mechanically stressed organ in our body.
Specialized heart muscle cells serve as the motor units driving each heartbeat
to pump blood throughout our bodies. While it is known that the hearts of mice,
men and women vary in important details like size, heart rate, and protein
composition, the fundamental mechanisms that cause these differences are not yet
identified. There is a lack in access to human heart cells for comprehensive
studies, mostly because these cells do not renew after biopsy, injury or
disease. In this project, new sources of human heart cells that represent the
diversity of society are developed and validated and their responses to
stressors are studied by involving engineering, biology, statistics, and
computer science. This multidisciplinary approach will support diverse workforce
development and create education and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students who will become the next generation of researchers and
science leaders. This project will highlight the importance of diversity in the
basic science and fundamental understanding of physiological responses by
disseminating data, models and best practices through publication and outreach
at scientific meetings and events in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, a lack of models, human cell lines,
and the methods to link cellular sex and mechanobiological stress responses
exists. This project aims to develop and validate protocols for generating human
heart muscle cells from induced stem cell lines obtained from a diversity of
adult donors. To learn how and why male and female cells handle stress
differently at the cellular level, these cells will be stressed with mechanical
and chemical means and observed as to how they respond and change their
structure and function, and further how they regulate key signaling proteins
linked to physiological stress. This research will provide new insights into the
interplay of differentially regulated sex genes and the integrated stress
response. It will also cultivate new insights into muscle mechanobiology and how
stress and sex cooperate to mediate cell maintenance and energy expenditures to
facilitate contractile function and cellular remodeling under stress. This
project will generate the aligned multi-modal data (images, videos, sequences),
experimental meta-data, and sufficiently aligned and annotated data sets across
a range of male and female stem cell lines that will be ultimately suitable for
machine learning approaches by the research community. These data will be shared
through publicly available repositories such as GEO, UC library archives, and
the BisQue (Bio-Image Semantic Query User Environment) platform hosted at UCSB.
The research outcomes and data will benefit researchers working on the
development of cell and tissue engineering models and their application to
preclinical biomedical inquiry. In the longer term, communities and groups that
are under-represented in current studies (women, racial minorities) will benefit
from the inclusion of representative cellular data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.