* 2227380
* I-Corps: Remote sensing technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Christopher Barnes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a scanless RADAR (RAdio Detection And Ranging) technology. This
scanless sensor has the potential to possibly integrate large areas, perform
faster scanning, focus on objects longer during tracking (especially in the near
field), and image with a multi-frequency system without the need for a moving
system. The ability to have multiple frequencies incorporated could be useful to
maintain the ability to image in degraded environments without compromising high
resolution. This innovation is expected to serve as a possible platform
technology and could provide enhanced sensing capabilities for markets including
autonomous vehicles, and medical devices for rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a novel remote sensing technique that leverages the benefits of both RADAR
(RAdio Detection And Ranging) and LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging). It
provides a technology that could provide a wide field of view, without the need
for a moving platform, at comparable resolutions to the current most advanced
RADAR techniques. Current solutions for high-resolution imaging include digital
beamforming and LIDAR. While digital beamforming can yield high-resolution
scans, it requires multiple pulses to scan an entire scene. Multiple sweeps of
the scene of interest are required for digital beamforming as narrow directed
beams must be used to get enhanced resolution. Digital beamforming contains a
blind spot close to the RADAR (i.e., in the near field) due to certain
assumptions that are made in its signal processing. LIDAR, which uses light
waves instead of radio waves, delivers high resolution due to its small
wavelength; however, these small wavelengths do not propagate through
environments as well as radio waves and thus perform poorly in atmospheric
conditions such as rain and fog. The proposed technology seeks to potentially
process waves of any wavelength simultaneously and presents a needed solution
for the integration of data obtained from different sensor types (e.g., RADAR,
LIDAR, and SONAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.