* 2227314
* Conference: Forest biodiversity response to changing climate across the Americas: Synthesis of long-term ecological data
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Lynn Christenson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

Forest communities are changing rapidly. It has been difficult to determine if
those changes are due to climate change or other factors like habitat
destruction. Many studies follow forest community change over short periods of
time, making it difficult to identify drivers of change. Long-term research,
often spanning decades at specific locations, provides local information about
species, individuals and environmental conditions. This workshop brings together
ecologists, data managers, and statisticians to harmonize data from long-term
research sites in forest ecosystems. Sites include those from the Long-Term
Ecological Research network, United States Forest Service experimental forests,
the National Ecological Observation Network, and National Park Service
biodiversity monitoring sites. The goals is to assess the long-term effects of
climate change on forest communities across the Americas that have not been
impacted by habitat loss. The data sets generated during the workshop are made
available through the Environmental Data Initiative. This workshop also provides
ongoing professional development for all participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
inter-disciplinary nature of the workshop fosters collaborations to alleviate
barriers for scaling the information from individual long-term ecological
research sites to the macrosystem scale. Such barriers still limit the scale and
scope of ecological research. The two-day workshop harmonizes data sets from
different locations as well as spatial and temporal scales to investigate the
effects of climate change on biodiversity in forest ecosystems across the
Americas. The resulting synthesis research paper describes how forest
biodiversity has changed over the past ~ 40 years and the role of climate in
driving those changes. This workshop brings together experts in the fields of
ecology, data management, statistics and climate change. Results include a
strong research network of ecologists that study a broad range of taxonomic
groups focused on understanding the long-term changes in forest ecosystems both
at local and continental scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.