* 2227071
* Multiridge Orographic Precipitation in Continental Mountain Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 666,969.00

Orographic precipitation refers to rain or snow that develops due to the uplift
of air moving over elevated terrain. This kind of precipitation is often thought
of in locations with sharp, significant elevation differences from near sea
level to mountain peaks, like the Sierra Nevada in California or the Cascade
Mountains in the Pacific Northwest. However, orographic precipitation can also
be created in other locations such as the Great Basin in the Intermountain West.
This study will investigate multi-ridge orographic snowfall enhancement in Utah,
where air flow is disturbed over multiple parallel mountain ridges. The main
impact of the project will be on the downstream potential for improved
forecasting of societally-impactful winter weather events. The project also has
a significant education and outreach effort, helping to train the next
generation of scientists and making science accessible to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance knowledge of the
processes that affect the fine-scale distribution and intensity of orographic
precipitation in continental multiridge mountain environments, focusing on the
eastern Great Basin in Utah. The research team poses two main questions: 1) How
do terrain-induced gravity waves influence the intensity and distribution of
precipitation generated during flow over broadly separated parallel mountain
ridges, and 2) What are the causes and mechanisms of northwesterly flow
precipitation extremes over the ridge-canyon orography of the central Wasatch
Range? Both questions will be addressed through a combination of observations
and numerical modeling simulations. Observational analysis will consist of a
radar climatology, use of reanalysis datasets, and new vertical profiling radar,
disdrometer, and precipitation observations. The numerical modeling work will
use the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model in normal and Large-Eddy
Simulation (LES) modes, and semi-idealized Cloud-Model 1 (CM1)
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.