* 2227381
* I-Corps: Stable and efficient organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) for applications in horticulture and architectural lighting
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Deirdre O'Carroll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of light sources that may improve indoor plant and crop growth for
horticulture applications such as indoor vertical farming and hydroponics.
Additionally, the proposed light sources could enhance architectural lighting by
providing a more natural spectrum of color. Conventional inorganic
semiconductor-based light-emitting diode (LED) devices usually do not have
uniform spectral intensity across the visible spectrum. For example, white-light
LED light sources used for lighting purposes can have a significant dip in
emission intensity in the green part of the spectrum (called the “green gap”).
Hence, objects illuminated by these LED lighting sources do not show true
colors. Organic light-emitting diode (OLED) devices, on the other hand, can be
produced with virtually any emission color with excellent intensity and
efficiency in the green and red parts of the spectrum. OLEDs have an emitting
layer containing an organic or organometallic material instead of conventional
inorganic compound semiconductors. However, one persistent issue with OLEDs is
in their blue emission component, which is less stable than red and green.
Furthermore, light extraction efficiencies are ~20-50% and have substantial room
for improvement. The proposed technology may address both issues by increasing
the stability of blue OLED emission and by improved light extract across the
visible spectrum. The proposed technology may produce stable light sources based
on sustainable, low-process-energy organic semiconductors that have energy
efficiencies comparable to traditional LED light sources, but with enhanced
spectral qualities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
potential development of technology to improve the efficiency and stability of
organic light-emitting diode (OLED) light sources. OLEDs have improved spectral
qualities compared to more traditional inorganic light-emitting diodes (LEDs);
however, their stability and efficiency are not yet optimal for commercial
lighting applications. The proposed technology may address the low stability and
efficiency of the blue component of light emission from OLEDs. Stable blue
emission is necessary for both architectural and horticulture lighting and
previous research indicates that the proposed core technology may increase the
stability of blue OLEDs by a factor of up to 3.6 compared to existing blue
OLEDs. Additionally, the efficiency of white OLEDs is not yet high enough for
architectural and some horticulture lighting applications where &gt;1,000 cd/m2
are required routinely. The proposed technology could improve OLED efficiency by
increasing light extraction, which may help address the efficiency problem.
Nanostructured plasmonic electrodes were designed that enhance the local
electric fields at visible electromagnetic wavelengths and may be tuned
depending upon the size and shape of the nanostructures. When the plasmon
wavelength overlaps with the wavelength of the light-emitting materials in the
close vicinity of nanostructures, it may provide faster and more stable light
emission. The proposed nanostructured devices using plasmonic electrodes could
have comparable electrical behavior to the typical planar metal electrodes but
show superior photostability and light extraction
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.