* 2227984
* I-Corps: Fabricating cable-driven robots
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Mircea Teodorescu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
to work alongside medical doctors to develop and produce a biomedical robotic
device for clinical settings. Emergency Cesarean section (C-section) surgery
rates in the United States have grown and existing alternative solutions to
cases of labor dystocia, like obstetrical forceps, have gone out of favor.
Current obstetrical forceps demand extensive training, the use of vacuum
extractors that fail to produce a vaginal delivery in up to 34% of cases, and
emergency C-section surgeries that are harmful if performed after a prolonged
second stage of labor. The team aims reduce delivery complications using
flexible, autonomous, obstetrical forceps. Biomedical engineering has made great
strides in creating novel instrumentation for numerous surgical procedures, yet
the push for design innovation in tools used for the child birthing process is
lacking. This application of medical robotics may save lives and ease the
overall process of childbirth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a novel fabrication process to model and 3D print
robotic features as a single piece, including all elastic, inelastic, and
conductive elements that comprise the robot’s body, actuators, and sensors.
Robots can leverage flexibility in complex environments to absorb external,
unexpected forces while maintaining the ability to manipulate objects firmly.
The developed fabrication method enables a customizable approach to creating
biologically-inspired autonomous systems, improving safety, comfort, and
efficacy when interacting with people in medical settings. Further, the
innovation of one-step fabrication works well for human interaction applications
because it offers designers ease and reproducibility in creating iterative
prototypes while still being robust enough to use for the production of the
final product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.