* 2227945
* NSF-BSF: Mechanism-Guided Design of Deoxydehydration Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Friederike Jentoft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 362,687.00

Chemical reaction of biomass-derived resources to give platform molecules that
can be used either as produced, or further converted into a range of chemicals
or fuels, is key to a sustainable chemical industry that minimizes carbon
emissions. Catalysis plays a key role in the valorization of biomass.
Deoxydehydration (DODH) is a promising class of chemical reactions for
converting biomass-derived diol chemicals to olefins – the latter having wide
application in chemical manufacturing, and currently produced primarily from
fossil resources. At present, the field lacks efficient DODH catalysts. The
study will advance fundamental understanding of DODH catalysis, and use that
understanding to design more efficient catalysts and ways of best deploying
those catalysts in real-world chemical manufacturing processes. The project
objectives will be achieved through collaboration with researchers at the
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa,
Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to gain
mechanistic knowledge and thereupon design catalytic materials for use with
various substrates and reductants, to develop advanced supports that can
efficiently "nest" the active moiety with no leaching, and to explore innovative
approaches to bridge homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis and combine their
benefits. Specifically, the project will leverage complementary expertise and
cultivate synergies between the international teams in the areas of catalysis
and kinetics, organometallic and inorganic synthesis, and catalyst
characterization. The collaborative experimental approach consists of four work
packages: (i) A new and detailed catalyst evaluation approach that replaces
overall yields by separately measured kinetics of the key steps in the
deoxydehydration cycle and incorporates analysis of the state of the active
metal by in situ spectroscopy, thus providing deep mechanistic insights; (ii)
design and synthesis of new, stable rhenium catalysts with strongly complexing
ligands, which may be organic redox-stable ligands for both soluble and
immobilized catalysts, or inorganic ligands belonging to a surface-phase
modified support; (iii) characterization of the developed molecular and
supported catalysts; and (iv) exploration of temporary and partial
immobilization of active moieties as a means to arrive at a homogeneous process
with the separation characteristics of heterogeneous catalysis. Taken together,
the research will identify new soluble and solid catalysts for deoxydehydration,
and new methods for benchmarking catalyst performance in complex multistep
cycles. More broadly, the results will advance the commercial prospects of the
target application, deoxydehydration of biomass-derived feedstocks. The new
supports and the methods to synthesize them will be applicable for other
catalysts and other chemistries, as will novel approaches to kinetics analysis.
Beyond the technical aspects, the project will provide training to both graduate
and undergraduate students in cutting-edge methods of catalysis and reaction
engineering, materials synthesis, and materials characterization. International
student exchange will foster cross-fertilization between the groups with respect
to materials design and synthesis, homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis and
kinetics, and in situ and operando methods. The researchers will integrate the
state-of-the art information into their formal teaching. Broadened participation
of underrepresented students will include recruiting of female undergraduate
students and contributions to two programs at UMass - SENGI and the Women in
Engineering and Computing Career Day - as well as outreach by the Israeli
collaborator to local high schools in Haifa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.