* 2227863
* SHF: Small: Little Tricky Logics: Misconceptions in Understanding Logics and Formal Properties
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,566.00

Formal logics are widely employed in computer science to precisely state a
user's intent. These can be used in many different ways: an existing system can
be checked to conform to these statements, or a fresh system can even be
generated that obeys these intentions. However, humans often have various
misconceptions about these logics, which taints any subsequent use of them: if
the logical statement means something other than what the human intends, then it
is not merely useless, it is actively misleading. The project's novelties are to
elucidate these misconceptions and to evaluate methods to correct them. The
project's impacts are in aiding education, in the creation of tools to help
authors, and also in the design of new formal
logics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, the project aims to investigate
misconceptions in three formal settings: Linear Temporal Logic, the Alloy
language (a first-order logic with transitive closure), and in basic structural
properties used widely in formal specification (such as transitivity). The
project uses a variety of methods to elicit misconceptions, taking into account
the need to overcome expert blind spots. The project also employs techniques
from the existing misconception literature to overcome the problems that it
finds. The resulting study instruments and techniques to address misconceptions
would be immediately useful in many settings, and the general flow of the work
would be broadly applicable to others who wish to reproduce it for their
preferred logics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.