* 2227933
* RII Track-4:NSF: Coupling Magnetism and Photoluminescence in New Lanthanide Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Thao Tran, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 200,611.00

The development of new materials with unique properties is the foundation for
new energy and information technologies. Despite tremendous progress in
developing such materials, scientists still seek to understand how the
fundamental physical properties are governed by the chemistry of multifunctional
materials. This project aims to establish a strong research program in advanced
materials design and development at Clemson University (CU) with the goal of
addressing these fundamental challenges to create novel systems with multiple
functionalities. The project will design, synthesize, and characterize new
materials to develop deeper understanding of how the fundamentals such as
chemical composition, atomic structure, and bonding determine optical and
magnetic properties. This work will be performed in partnership with researchers
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) – a world-class neutron facility. The
extensive collaboration between CU and ORNL will advance frontier,
transdisciplinary study of multifunctional systems in physics and chemistry
while educating undergraduate and graduate students about the connection between
the science and practice of advanced materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant professor and training for a graduate student at the Clemson
University. This work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Optically addressable lanthanide
magnets are at the forefront of new technological advances in quantum
information science and spintronics. While impressive achievements have been
made in the study of lanthanide (Ln) single molecular magnets, a significant
challenge awaits as to how luminescence and magnetism can be harmonized in
extended solid Ln materials. The goal of this EPSCoR project is to provide a
reliable set of fundamental chemistry–function guidelines in new Ln3+ materials,
resulting in optimal electron–phonon interactions, spin states, and coupled
degrees of freedom favorable to the co-existence of luminescence and magnetism
in a single system. The proposed research adopts a combined experimental
approach using state-of-the-art synthetic techniques, photoluminescent and
magnetic properties measurements, X-ray diffraction, and neutron scattering.
This project will enable the PI to develop a long-term collaboration between CU
and ORNL, which in turn will enhance the cross-disciplinary research activities,
expertise, and education for the PI’s research team and CU, and thus facilitate
the scientific advancement, workforce development, and economic growth in South
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.