* 2227624
* Conference:  Judicial Independence and Rule of Law Across the Globe
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Rhonda Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 21,950.00

Judicial independence and rule of law are pillars of liberal democracy.
Constitutional democracies around the world face powerful political forces
exerted by populist and nationalist movements and the authoritarian leaders that
these movements catapult into power. These same forces also target systems of
international governance, inducing governments to undermine the operation and
legitimacy of international tribunals if not withdraw altogether from the
treaties that give rise to these systems. Courts are expected to serve as
bulwarks against authoritarian and illiberal impulses, defend the rule of law,
and uphold constitutional and international rules-based orders. Understanding
how they can perform these essential functions even as courts, themselves,
become sites of populist, political contestation and targets of well-
orchestrated attacks is critical to protecting legal orders against populist
subversion. The international scope of the threat demands a scholarly effort
that transcends the context of any single country and also considers how the
erosion of judicial independence and rule of law at the national level affects
the future of a rules-based, international order that rests on the existence of
functioning liberal democracies. This effort requires the sort of robust
exchange that can only occur through in-person dialogue among a diverse array of
researchers who come from all parts of the world and that includes the
perspectives of early-career scholars and scholars from traditionally-
underrepresented groups as well as internationally renowned
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The populist threats posed to judicial
independence and rule of law in both the developed and developing world offers
an opportunity to examine the vulnerabilities and resilience of judicial
institutions in a wide variety of political systems. Scholars will convene under
the auspices of the International Political Science Associationâ€™s Research
Committee on Comparative Judicial Studies to examine how authoritarian and
populist pressures are challenging, transforming, and reinforcing judicial
independence and rule of law. Using law and social science approaches,
participants will examine these phenomena across a range of jurisdictions. They
will bring detailed, locally-informed knowledge to bear upon a set of core
questions concerning the nature of the populist threats, forms of attack, and
conditions under which these attacks succeed or fail. How do populist political
dynamics compare across countries, and what are the implications of these
differences for courts? Under what conditions do populists target courts and the
rule of law? What factors shape the forms of these attacks and the abilities of
courts to withstand them? And, how well do existing concepts, theories, and
research methods serve these lines of inquiry? This gathering provides a unique
opportunity to engage these questions from a distinctly comparative perspective
and generate insights into how judicial independence and the rule of law are
institutionalized, how they are threatened, and what can be done to counter the
threats. This collaborative effort will advance scholarly debates on how courts
respond to populist assaults and democratic backsliding as well as inform
efforts of court reformers, bar associations, and policymakers to institute the
changes needed to re-empower courts whose independence has been
breached.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.