* 2227402
* Planning Grant: Connecting Our Unit throughv Relationships and Allyships in Geoscience (COURAGE)
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Leilani Arthurs, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2025
* USD 271,731.00

The “Connecting Our Unit through Relationships and Allyships in GEoscience” or
COURAGE project is a planning-track project that will lay the groundwork within
the Department of Geological Sciences (GEOL) at the University of Colorado at
Boulder (CUB) for a future implementation-track project. The goal is to
transform the culture of the geoscience community by broadening participation of
graduate students who come from historically underrepresented or marginalized
communities in geoscience (HUCG) and building community partnerships for future
community-based research that contributes to solutions to the complex
environmental and societal challenges imposed by climate change. Recognizing
that efforts to broaden participation in geoscience depends on relationships,
this planning-track project will enact activities based on reciprocal
relationships that foster community building within GEOL and lead to
partnerships with local communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To facilitate the
alignment of relationships between geoscience faculty, graduate students, and
community partners for the future conduct of community-based research, the
proposed planning-track project will focus on building capacity among our GEOL
faculty, building community among our GEOL graduate students, building
relationships between faculty and graduate students, and building relationships
between faculty and community partners. Thus, the intellectual focus of the
proposed planning-track project is two-fold. First is to implement strategies
and activities to overcome apparent barriers to community-based research with
HUCG graduate students. Second is to undertake an introspective summative
evaluation to describe (i) how existing norms and practices for broadening
participation in GEOL evolve during the life of the project and (ii) the level
of readiness for undertaking a future implementation-track project or similar
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the life of the project, GEOL faculty
members and faculty members in other geoscience units will be impacted through
their participation in two professional development programs as well as all
geoscience graduate students through their participation in planning and/or
participating in mentoring activities, recruiting activities, and other project
activities. Furthermore, all GEOL faculty members are expected to be impacted by
their graduate students’ engagement in project activities. The project will be a
vehicle for open discussions and synergistic interactions between faculty and
graduate students around broadening participation in geoscience. The project is
also expected to impact ~10 faculty members and ~50 graduate students in other
geoscience units; 100s of individuals from the local community; and ~10 local
government agencies, private industries, and non-profit organizations. During
the life of the project, it is also expected that geoscientists at CUB will
connect with and develop relationships with members of local communities and
form partnerships that could lead to mutually edifying community-based research
that contributes to solutions to the complex environmental and societal
challenges imposed by climate change. The cumulative impact of the planning-
track project is to have the groundwork for geoscientists at CUB to pursue a
CTGC implementation-track project or similar activities in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.