* 2227256
* I-Corps: Image processing platform to identify photosynthetic pigment density to measure nitrogen content and manage fertilizer (Smart Sustainable Fertilizer Manager)
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Amir Khoddamzadeh, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to determine the fertilizer needs of potted plants.
Large-scale nursery production, a sizable component of the agriculture industry,
involves the use of containers to grow plants. An acre of land in nursery
production houses up to 300,000 containers, many of which receive excessive
fertilizer application. Nitrogen (N) is a macronutrient that affects plant
chlorophyll content, which may be used to define the growth status and leaf N
content in plants. The proposed technology may enable nursery producers to
determine the fertilizer needs of potted plants and help avoid overfertilization
and nutrient runoff. In addition, the proposed technology may promote plant
health and environmental sustainability as well as enable big data to be
collected from fertilizer practices in large and small
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a smart, sustainable fertilizer manager platform that uses image processing
and machine learning to measure leaf nitrogen content. The proposed technology
allows the use of any camera sensor to image and process leaf color to identify
the photosynthetic pigment density in a non-destructive way and compare this
measurement with the existing cloud data for analysis. Current fertilizer
management is typically based on published fertilizer recommendations, which
vary among plant species. The proposed design uses a single image taken by a
smartphone to give a recommendation on fertilizer needs for potted plants
(flowers and ornamentals). The image is scanned and analyzed, and the user
receives a message indicating whether a plant is deficient in nutrients. Core
machine learning is being used to train a model based on the “green value”
provided by completed and ongoing research projects. The technology's
Application Programming Interface (API) will be embedded in the
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.