* 2227544
* 2022 Device Research Conference
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Shaloo Rakheja, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This project will use NSF support to increase student
participation and enhance technical training at the 80th Device Research
Conference (DRC), which brings together researchers from around the world to
share their latest findings in the areas of electronic, opto-electronic, and
quantum-based semiconductor devices. The 2022 DRC will be held from June 26-29
at the Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. While in-person attendance is
strongly encouraged, the 2022 DRC will be available in a partial hybrid format
for those unable to travel. The DRC offers unique training and networking
opportunities, particularly to its student and young investigator attendees,
helping them advance their careers in materials science, semiconductor
technology, and device engineering. In addition, the DRC is committed to
fostering greater diversity and equity for all attendees and at all levels. By
stimulating an open and frank discussion of recent breakthroughs and advances in
electronic and photonic devices, the DRC will remove barriers for
underrepresented minority groups and support the NSF’s Diversity Mission related
to “preparing a diverse, globally engaged science, technology, engineering and
mathematics workforce.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The 2022
DRC will feature three plenary talks from world-renowned researchers in quantum
photonic devices, ferroelectric devices, and electronics for extreme application
environments. The conference will include presentations on devices for IoT,
spintronic devices, memory devices, RF and terahertz devices, thin-film devices,
and heterogeneous integration. In addition to plenary talks and oral
presentations, the 2022 DRC will offer a half-day technical short course in
“Cryogenic Computing Devices” taught by prominent experts from academia and
industry. The 2022 DRC will also feature two concurrent rump sessions titled
“The Intersection of Industry and Academia: Training Future Researchers” and
“What Should Be the Role of Computational Physics and Modeling in Enabling Next
Generation Devices?” to engage the audience in a vigorous and open discussion on
these important topics. To encourage student engagement, the DRC gives awards
every year for the Best Student Paper and the Best Student Poster. The
conference program, including the rump session and the short course, will
enhance the professional knowledge of all attendees. The information will be
disseminated widely through conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.