* 2227253
* Collaborative Research: A longitudinal study to test for the acclimation of individual trees to 4+ decades of climate change, and the consequences for tropical rainforests
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Kenneth Feeley, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2024
* USD 129,702.00

This project aims to improve our understanding of how Amazonian tree species
are, or are not, acclimating to climate change, and the consequences for species
performance and tropical forest dynamics. Understanding the capacity for
tropical trees to respond to rising temperatures will increase knowledge of how
environmental change affects rainforest species and will provide valuable
information that can inform predictions and management strategies. In this
project, researchers will compare key functional and morphological traits on
leaf samples collected from the same individual trees of numerous tree species
over multiple decades. If acclimation is occurring, researchers expect to find
that trees shift their leaf traits to offset the effects of climate change. This
will be one of the first multi-decadal studies of leaf functional traits
measured on individual tropical trees, thus filling an important gap in
knowledge about the ability of long-lived trees to respond to climate change, as
well as the consequences of acclimation for forest function and structure. The
results of this research will be integrated into diverse environmental education
and training initiatives to increase public awareness about the ecology and
conservation of tropical forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will census
four 1-ha forest inventory plots in the Tambopata region of southeastern Peru to
assess the extent of acclimation of diverse forest tree species. By comparing
census data with herbarium specimens of ~15 abundant focal tree species
collected in the 1980-1990s, the team has a unique opportunity to quantify
changes across decades. For each living source tree of these focal species,
researchers will collect multiple samples of young and mature sun and shade
leaves to create new herbarium specimens. Researchers will then measure a suite
of functional and morphological traits on both the new and historical herbarium
specimens of each focal tree. To better assess inter-tree variability and
control for trait vs. tree size relationships, researchers will collect
additional samples and measure functional traits on all other individual trees
of the focal species that they find growing in or near the Tambopata census
plots. Finally, researchers will also measure the same suite of morphological
traits on all available herbarium collections of the focal species from the
study region (southwest Amazon) over the past century in order to assess how
these traits vary spatially and temporally. Using the collected data,
researchers will analyze the relationships between climate and functional traits
and test if acclimation is related to individual and population-level responses
such as diameter growth, survival, and changes in relative abundance within
communities. The results of this research will be used to create teaching
materials and active education activities for k-12 students and will form the
foundation for new teaching exercises at the university
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.