* 2227275
* I-Corps: Analyzing Customer Behavior for Energy Usage Moderation
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Madhur Srivastava, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of an optimization algorithm that could identify energy consumption
patterns that may enable moderation and management of electricity consumption.
This technology could help in infrastructure planning, enhance customer
relations by understanding the customer's energy behavior, and provide
individualized or customized feedback to avoid circuit overload, power quality
issues, and power outages (blackouts) which are major problems for the
electricity utility and microgrid companies. There is an unmet need to
understand customer energy behavior patterns in different geographies and
demographics to help create informed decision-making on infrastructure planning
and deployment. In addition to application in electricity utility companies,
this technology can potentially be adapted for deployment in other applications
that require utility infrastructure planning and consumer behavior change, such
as gas and water distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a proprietary automatic multi-parametric
optimization and machine learning clustering algorithm that could forecast
upcoming load on the electrical grid. This is done by analyzing overall and
personalized energy consumption by consumers based on variables reflecting
localized geography, weather conditions, seasonal conditions (winter vs summer),
and time and day electricity consumption as well as demographics. Using multi-
parametric variables, a regularization-based optimization algorithm is developed
that decouples the contribution of each influencing factor in load consumption
to avoid circuit overload and power quality issues. To avoid blackouts, the
output of the multi-parametric optimization is combined with a proprietary
machine-learning clustering technique that analyzes the load consumption
behavior/ pattern in different demographics and maps behavior with the
population density to improve load forecast for better accuracy to avoid power
outages. The combination of multi-parametric optimization and clustering helps
to identify customer load patterns and hence could help in identifying highly
accurate load forecast for load balancing which will eliminate blackouts in a
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.