* 2227361
* Active Fluids in Externally Driven Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Powers, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 426,765.00

This research will develop the theoretical framework for the design and control
of active fluids. Active fluids are driven by energy which is added at the small
scale of the particles that make up the fluid. For example, the cytosol in our
cells flows because molecular motors consume energy-storing ATP molecules and
use this energy to slide rigid biopolymers past each other. This sliding motion
induces flows that can be used for cell crawling or the transport of biological
materials within the cell. There is currently great interest in developing
artificial active matter systems, such as a microfluidic device which pumps
itself. Understanding the hydrodynamic properties of active fluids is essential
if they are ever to be of practical use in medicine or industry. The focus of
this research is to mathematically model the flow of an active fluid when it is
subject to an externally driven flow, such as the flow driven by a pump. The
results of theoretical calculations will be compared with experiments to
determine the parameters that control the nature of active flow. This research
will support the scientific training of undergraduate and graduate students. The
PIs will mentor undergraduates from historically underrepresented groups in
engineering and physical science through the Leadership Alliance Summer Research
Early Identification Program. Topics related to this work will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate courses in engineering and physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are very few studies of active matter subject to
external flows. The goal of this research is to study the fluid dynamics of
active gels, i.e. active apolar filaments that are sufficiently dilute that they
tend not to spontaneously align and form a liquid crystalline phase. Linear
stability analysis and numerical computation will be used to study the activity-
driven flow transitions in active gels in two dimensions subject to external
flows of Couette, Poiseuille, and Taylor-Couette types. Simulations will be used
to explore the effect of confinement on active gels in lid-driven cavity flow.
Finally, three-dimensional channel flows of active gels will be studied, as well
as the drag forces and torques and spontaneous motion of objects in an active
gel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.