* 2227684
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the amount and functional significance of long-term stored-water in trees
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Ryan Emanuel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2023
* USD 171,554.00

Accurate modeling of water storage and fluxes in both natural and human-altered
ecosystems is critical to managing global water resources under current-day and
projected future climates. One important step towards accurate modeling involves
determining how much water trees store, and how the amount of stored water
varies through time and within tree organs. Another important step involves
determining how stored water, and variations in stored water, affect the
physiological behavior of individual trees and larger ecosystems. The
investigators in this project will measure the amount of water stored in
different organs of trees, determine how long water resides in these organs, and
evaluate how long-term stored water affects whole-tree water use. The data
collected will reveal novel information about how trees store and manage water,
which will ultimately allow prediction of tree water storage and water movement
through ecosystems in current and future climates. The study site in Idaho
broadly represents many landscapes across the Intermountain West. Results from
this study will be shared with local communities in the Snake River Plain
region, and activities will involve students and faculty members from Tribal
Colleges in the Pacific Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most models assume
steady-state water flow through the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum. However,
there is substantial storage of water in trees, and the residence times of water
inside trees ranges from days to months. The total amount of stored water in
trees and broader ecosystems, how long water resides in plants, and the
ecohydrological implications of tree water storage are still not completely
understood. Characterizing the duration of water storage and its impacts on tree
ecohydrology are critical for improving hydrological models. The data collected
in this study will be used to test the hypotheses that: (1) Water is stored in
trees for many days, with differences in residence time correlating to species-
and size-specific sapwood architecture and water-management strategies; (2)
Stored water will buffer declines in water transport as soil moisture
availability declines, at daily and seasonal timescales; (3) Inter-species
differences in water storage and transport-buffering strategies will translate
to differential responses in whole-tree water balance and fluxes due to changing
climate in modeled scenarios. The work combines stable isotope tracers
(deuterium), gas exchange, and hydraulic functional trait data collected in the
field with process- and trait-based modeling to determine residence times of
water in tree organs, how trees manage water storage and transport among organs,
and how water storage regulates whole-tree water relations at hourly to monthly
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.