* 2227285
* BRITE Pivot: Accelerating Manufacturing and Realization of Perovskite Micro-Light Emitting Device (Micro-LED) Displays through Data-driven Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Lih Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,999.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot grant supports research aiming to advance augmented-
and virtual-reality (AR/VR) display technologies through exploring new materials
and manufacturing driven by machine learning approaches. AR/VR technologies
connect people with the digital world through immersive experiences, and present
unbounded applications in many industries. However, these technologies face many
obstacles which hinder their prevalence, with one notable impediment being
optical clarity and resolution. To this end, the industry is actively investing
in micro-light emitting device (micro-LED) technology, which preserves the high
optical quality of emissive LEDs while reducing the pixel size by nearly an
order of magnitude over the current state-of-the-art. Nevertheless,
manufacturing of micro-LED displays through conventional semiconductor
fabrication processes is extremely time consuming and labor intensive, which
leads to prohibitive costs, yields, and production times. This award supports
fundamental research on new micro-LED technologies utilizing solution-processed
perovskite materials to overcome these challenges and optimizing the device
performance through machine learning. The project facilitates the acquisition of
knowledge in a new field, machine learning, to supplement established expertise
in perovskite optoelectronics. The vast scope of applications of AR/VR ranges
from education and healthcare to manufacturing and defense. Therefore, results
from this research benefit several U.S. industrial sectors, thus enhancing
national security and prosperity. The multi-disciplinary research entails hands-
on education and training experiences closely related to industrial
applications, while promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion in project
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While perovskite devices have quickly made
significant impacts in photovoltaics, their progress for light-emitting
applications has been lagging due to degradation of the materials and devices
under high electric fields. Enhancing perovskite LED performance requires
simultaneous optimization of material synthesis, device structures and operating
conditions. Machine learning (ML) offers the possibility of quickly converging
to a globally optimized result through a multi-variate data-driven learning
process. This project aims to develop a neural network-based ML approach to
facilitate manufacturing of perovskite micro-LED displays with high optical
quality and stability. Furthermore, the ML process is designed and executed with
the aim of optimizing perovskite LED output luminance and stability, with proper
input features. Through the researched project, features pertaining to
perovskite LEDs are identified and collected from various databases, and, along
with additional experimental data, are fed into the ML models, which drive the
solution processing of the perovskites. Additionally, a micro-patterning
technology is developed to address the challenge of patterning perovskites with
high resolution through photolithography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.