* 2227014
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Decadal Visioning for FY 2026-FY 2035
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jared Kosters, Nexight Group LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 233,430.00

The NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
awards, originally funded under the NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598 program
solicitations, will end on September 30, 2025. These awards, forming the NSF-
supported NHERI mid-scale facility, have provided the natural hazards
engineering (NHE) community with experimental, field, cyberinfrastructure, high
performance computing, and computational modeling and simulation resources to
conduct NHE research. This award, to Nexight Group LLC, will examine the
influence of evolving natural hazards engineering (NHE) research, the national
research infrastructure landscape, emerging technologies for resilient and
sustainable civil infrastructure, state of climate change, and other driving
forces on future NHE research directions, and will identify the research
infrastructure (i.e., experimental and field equipment, instrumentation, and new
experimental techniques and capabilities), cyberinfrastructure, and
computational modeling and simulation tools needed to conduct future NHE
research over the next decade, i.e., from fiscal year (FY) 2026-FY 2035. This
study will review the state of natural hazards knowledge in the current and
emerging areas of NHE research and research infrastructure and will generate
recommendations for a comprehensive vision and strategy for the next decade of
transformative science and engineering research and supporting research
infrastructure at the frontiers of civil engineering, computational and data
sciences, infrastructure materials, extreme natural hazard events, and other
emerging fields. The study will also examine new modes of access to physical-
and cyber-facilities by the NHE research community, and how these facilities can
support education, outreach, and pathways for diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI). The study can serve as input to NSF for designing research and research
infrastructure program support during FY 2026-FY 2035 and will define and align
NHE research to advance fundamental scientific knowledge in providing the nation
with resilient and sustainable civil infrastructure under extreme event
conditions. This award will contribute to NSF's roles in the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will gather input from the
broad NHE and other related research communities to develop a Decadal Visioning
(DV) Framework (FY 2026-FY 2035) for Grand Challenges research, research
infrastructure, education, and outreach needs to advance the sustainability and
resilience of the nation's civil infrastructure to natural hazard events. The
key elements of this project comprise four main tasks: (i) conduct a preliminary
assessment of the science drivers and current state of NHE research and research
infrastructure by establishing a Task Group from the relevant NHE communities;
define the vision, scope, and goals of the DV; and gather preliminary findings
for the research agenda and research infrastructure needs; (ii) engage
stakeholders to gather expert insights for organizing community-focused virtual
workshops and coordinate review teams for developing the DV Framework; (iii)
plan and facilitate collaborative community workshops to identify and prioritize
the Frameworkâ€™s key science drivers (i.e., Grand Challenges), research
infrastructure, education, and outreach needs; and (iv) develop the DV
Framework, including key graphical concepts and final briefing materials to
communicate the findings of the final DV report. The DV Framework report will be
archived and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.