* 2227268
* Impact of charge regulation on conformational and phase equilibria of intrinsically disordered proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,201,221.00

Cells are organized into distinct compartments, and many of these compartments
are defined by different acidity. An environment rich in protons can change the
charge on proteins in cells if the proteins have amino acids that are ionizable.
Changes to charge states of proteins that arise from the association or
dissociation of protons can control how proteins in cells respond to specific
types of signals such as environmental factors that induce changes to salt or
proton concentrations. Research in this project will leverage new methods to
study how specific proteins, known as intrinsically disordered proteins, are
modified by the uptake or release of protons based on the acidity of the
solution. Studies carried out as part of the project will lead to an improved
understanding of how alterations to charge states of proteins influence their
functions. This work is important because charge-mediated interactions are
central to a variety of protein functions including the recognition of one
protein by another. Given the unique nature of the technological advances that
are driving research in the project, there will be novel training opportunities
at the intersection of computation and experiment in the broad area of molecular
biophysics. Findings from the project will be incorporated into materials of
courses for undergraduates. Further, key personnel who are involved in the
project will work closely with students from inner city middle and high-schools
to explain how pH and a better understanding of acid-base equilibria will drive
new research frontiers that emerge from the project. The blend of computation
and experiment, driven in part by the development of novel computational tools,
including machine learning modules, will create new workflows for solving
challenging problems in molecular biophysics. These modules will be incorporated
into instructional modules for research trainees and students in molecular
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand how
the exchange of protons between ionizable residues and the accumulation of
solution ions around these residues contribute to the charge states and
conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Currently, our
understanding of the form, functions, and phase behaviors of IDPs is limited by
the simplifying assumption that charge states of ionizable residues are fixed by
the pKa values of model compounds. The proposed work rests on the principle that
conformational fluctuations engender changes to local microenvironments of
ionizable residues. These local heterogeneities can induce exchange of protons
among titratable sites. This can also induce preferential accumulation of
solution ions around ionizable residues. A key advance that drives the
investigations is the recent development of the q-canonical ensemble, which is a
formal and rigorous statistical physics-based description of the joint effects
of charge state and conformational heterogeneity. Importantly, an integrated
experimental and computational pipeline has been developed and this allows one
to leverage the structure of the q-canonical ensemble to quantify the effects of
proton association or dissociation, known as charge regulation, and its
interplay with the effects of solution ions through charge renormalization.
Approaches that rest on the formal decoupling between measurements of charge and
conformation, will allow for the incorporation of information derived from
potentiometric titrations and measurements of conformational or phase equilibria
into simulations. This, when anchored by experimental data, will lead to a full
description of the ensemble of charge state and conformations that are
accessible at different solution conditions. The approaches are novel, the focus
is unique, and the insights to be generated from the project are likely to be
unprecedented. This project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.