* 2227135
* Collaborative Research: Molecular and Nanoscale Structure and Interactions of PFAS at Interfaces and Mixed Surfactant Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Dmitry Bedrov, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 212,973.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), also known as “Forever Chemicals,”
find a wide variety of applications because of their high chemical and thermal
stability and their unique abilities to render solid surfaces non-stick,
stabilize foams for firefighting, and be immiscible with both water and
hydrocarbons. Released into the environment, PFAS bioaccumulate, resist
degradation, and can cause adverse health effects. These factors drive
initiatives to reduce future releases of PFAS and to sequester PFAS released in
the past. With a goal of developing knowledge that supports improved water
quality and the design of functional materials with tailored properties, this
project will investigate PFAS surfactants in aqueous solutions and at water-air,
water-oil, and water-solid interfaces. The project will develop fundamental
knowledge on PFAS properties that can positively impact the environment (use of
fluorinated surfactants more efficiently and in smaller amounts, remediation of
fluorinated surfactants), health (how fluorocarbon surfactants interact with
hydrocarbon surfactants and (bio)polymers), and technology (rational design of
new materials and methods for sequestering PFAS, and computational evaluation of
new chemical designs for potential replacements of PFAS in products). The
coupling of the materials-by-design research with environmental, health, and
societal impacts will be integrated into concerted efforts toward outreach and
education of scientists and engineers through the engagement of undergraduate
students in research and the development of new course
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
include fluorinated surfactants which find a wide variety of applications
because of their high chemical and thermal stability and their unique ability to
modify surfaces. PFAS surfactants can be extremely resistant to degradation in
the environment, can bioaccumulate, and may cause adverse health effects. This
project is a concerted computational and experimental effort that addresses
molecular, nano-scale organization of PFAS in bulk water and at interfaces. The
research is organized into three topics of study: (1) Competitive molecular
interactions and self-assembly of PFAS with other molecules present in aqueous
solution: mixtures of different PFAS, and mixtures of PFAS and hydrocarbon
surfactants. (2) Organization and interactions between PFAS and hydrocarbon
surfactants at the water-air and water-oil interfaces. Such fundamental
understanding of PFAS behavior at interfaces is crucial to advance their
replacement in key applications such as aqueous film-forming foams (AFFF), and
to optimize PFAS sequestration methods such as foam fractionation and aeration.
(3) PFAS interactions and binding to model solid surfaces that pertain to the
fate of PFAS in the environment and the replacement of PFAS that are used to
render surfaces non-stick. The project will generate new knowledge on
interactions and self-assembly of systems containing a distribution of PFAS and
hydrogenated surfactants; molecular scale insight of PFAS behavior at complex
liquid-liquid, air-liquid, and liquid-solid interfaces; and advanced
understanding of the role of PFAS surfactants in interfacial properties that
define a wide range of technological applications. This fundamental knowledge
supports improved water quality and the design of functional materials with
tailored properties. The coupling of materials-by-design research with
environmental, health, and societal impacts will form the basis of concerted
efforts toward outreach and education of early career scientists and engineers
through the engagement of undergraduate students in research and the development
of new course materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.