* 2227918
* Planning Grant: Collaborative Research: The WinG Collective: An initiative to support Women of Color in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2025
* USD 128,127.00

Climate change and environmental issues disproportionately impact low-income
communities of color, who are poorly represented in the Geosciences and
environmental fields. In particular, women of color (WOC) are currently the
largest group in California and projected to become the largest demographic in
the United States, yet are amongst the most poorly represented in the
Geosciences. This combination of issues forms a crisis in social justice,
contributes to rising inequality, and hinders creativity and innovation needed
in the environmental and climate workforce. The project leaders will create the
WinG Collective, a Women of Color in the Geosciences network that provides
community, belonging, access, advocacy, and resources to overcome the obstacles
to their success. Initially, the WinG Collective will focus on the University of
California and survey the experiences of WOC in the Geosciences. Then, the
principal investigators will design and implement a workshop to provide
professional development and a supportive community for WOC in the Geosciences.
Finally, they will summarize the findings and share with their campuses and
science community while also strategizing how to expand
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a multitude of studies that document
the inadequacies of the current academic system for people of color and
proposals targeted to improve retention of historically minoritized students.
This planning project is a grassroots approach to discern issues specific to WOC
in the Geosciences. The activities align and leverage existing programs; bolster
mentoring and training; and explore radical change that promotes the long term
success and health of WOC in the Geosciences. The WinG Collective will serve as
an incubator for scientific research and collaborations while also championing
agents of change with advancing leadership capacity, extending vertical and
lateral networks, and guiding best practices for community engagement. The
project leaders seek to advance WOC in the Geosciences with a holistic emphasis
that includes scientific endeavors and a mentoring network that spans the
vertical structure of academia and parallel systems within the University of
California system, with potential for longer-term adaptation nationally. Lessons
from this planning grant are ones that are relevant to support and advocacy of
WOC in the Geosciences nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.