* 2227062
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards optimal robot locomotion in fluids through physics-informed learning with distributed sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Cunjiang Yu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 298,710.00

Fishes are masters of locomotion in fluids owing to their highly integrated
biological sensing, computing and motor systems. They are adept at collecting
and exploiting rich information from the surrounding fluids for underwater
sensing and locomotion control. Inspired and informed by fish swimming, this
research aims to develop a novel bio-inspired cyber-physical system (CPS) that
integrates the ?physical? robot fish and fluid environment with the ?cyber?
robot control &amp; machine learning algorithms. Specifically, this CPS system
includes i) a pressure sensory skin with distributed sensing capability to
collect flow information, ii) control and learning algorithms that compute robot
motor signals, output by central pattern generators (CPGs) which receive
pressure sensory feedback, iii) a robot fish platform to implement and validate
the CPS framework for underwater sensing and control tasks, and iv) experimental
and computational methods to investigate and model the underlying fluid physics.
This CPS system will have immediate impacts on the core CPS research areas such
as design, control, data analytics, autonomy, and real-time systems. It will
also significantly impact a wide range of engineering applications which demand
distributed sensing, control and adaptive actuation. Examples include human-
machine interactions, medical robots, unmanned aerial/underwater vehicles, drug
dosing, medical therapeutics, and space deployable structures among others.
Leveraging the multidisciplinary nature of this research, this award will
support a variety of educational and outreach activities. In particular, a list
of activities in broadening participation in engineering will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project integrates multiple CPS
technologies to develop bio-inspired technologies for swarm control of fish.
These include inthanovations in a pressure sensitive skin project will first
develop a distributed pressure sensitive synthetic skin, which will be installed
on robotic fishes to map the pressure distribution on their body and caudal-fin
surfaces. The distributed pressure information will then be used in a feedback
control policy that modulates CPGs to produce caudal-fin motion patterns of the
robotic fishes. The control policy and the caudal-fin motion patterns will be
optimized via reinforcement learning first in a surrogate fluid environment and
then in the true fluid environment. The surrogate fluid environment will be
developed using data-driven non-parametric models informed by physics-based
hydrodynamic models of fish swimming, trained using combined experimental and
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation data. The above control-learning
methods will also be used to achieve efficient schooling in a group of robotic
fishes, individually controlled by a CPG, which interacts with each other
through surrounding fluids and pressure sensory feedback. The optimized
swimming/schooling performance of robotic fishes and the underlying physics will
be studied using CFD simulation. Together, this research will advance CPS
knowledge on: 1) the design and creation of electronic and sensor materials and
devices for robot skin applications; 2) the development of data-efficient,
physics-informed learning methods for robotic systems that operate in complex
environments, especially leveraging the recent progress on deep learning to
exploit the spatial and temporal richness of the pressure data for underwater
sensing and robot control; and 3) the flow physics and modeling of fish
swimming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.