* 2227939
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: GCR: Characterization and Robust Multivariable Control of the Dynamics of Gas Exchange During Peritoneal Oxygenated Perfluorocarbon Perfusion
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Joseph Friedberg, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 458,121.00

This Growing Convergence Research project addresses the critical societal need
to develop a lung-independent technique for providing respiratory support to
patients with respiratory failure from disorders such as COVID-19.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is the only such technique currently
available, but is an expensive and scarce resource with complications that
preclude it as an option for many patients, even when it is available. This
project will develop a “third lung” technology that achieves lung-independent
gas exchange by circulating oxygenated perfluorocarbon (PFC, a safe, inert
liquid with extraordinary gas-dissolving properties) through the abdominal
cavity. This is a convergent research project that integrates bioengineering and
control theory with physiology to create a technology with the potential to save
thousands of lives every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research results
supported with an NSF EAGER award demonstrate potentially life-saving degrees of
oxygenation and CO2 clearance. This project will push the research boundaries in
three specific directions: (i) the development of a multi-functional fiber-optic
sensor capable of measuring dissolved gas concentrations in PFC, as well as PFC
temperature and pressure; (ii) the use of both benchtop and animal experiments
to further characterize and model the fundamental dynamics of “third lung” gas
exchange; and (iii) the development of novel robust multivariable control
algorithms for the “third lung”, facilitating its potential implementation as a
routine adjunct in the treatment of patients with respiratory failure. This
convergent research portfolio will bring together a diverse research team from
the fields of biomedical engineering, sensing, automatic control, and medicine
in pursuit of research with high potential societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.