* 2227898
* EAGER: Formal Analysis of Stochastic Models in Systems Biology Under Uncertainty
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Krishnendu Ghosh, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,999.00

Biological system models comprise of multiple biological processes that are
stochastic and often, multiscale, processes executing at different time scales
such as communication of molecular processes with cellular processes. Formal
methods such as model checking have been used as a querying mechanism to
understand the details of communication of biological processes. The imprecision
and incompleteness of experimental data in system level modeling of biological
processes necessitates construction of novel theoretical framework and
algorithms for formal analysis. The project is timely and appropriate in
addressing the challenges of the state explosion problem in model checking
combined with construction of multiscale and stochastic models in biology under
uncertainty. The construction of novel model reduction algorithms for model
checking of multiscale and stochastic systems becomes essential for a rigorous
evaluation of queries represented in temporal logic. The goal of this project is
to create a solid theoretical framework for formal analysis of multiscale models
of stochastic systems and develop innovative models for efficient querying
mechanisms for biological processes under uncertainty. Tools developed in the
project will be open-sourced. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will
provide opportunities for undergraduates for cross-fertilization of ideas
between computer science, mathematics, chemistry and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of proposed work will push the limits
in modeling a large system under uncertainty for rigorous formal analysis and
modeling in systems biology. The goal of this project is pursued by the aims, i)
Develop theoretical formalism representing multiscale processes in stochastic
systems under uncertainty for formal analysis and ii) Create and evaluate
efficient algorithms for querying on models of stochastic systems under
uncertainty. Models of stochastic models under uncertainty will be created and
evaluated. The novel framework will provide succinct and precise models of
biological processes when combined with experimental data. The project will be
conducted at a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI). Educational materials
from the project will be used at different levels of undergraduate curriculum.
The project will provide research experiences through focused mini-course
projects in undergraduate classes with the goal of developing interdisciplinary
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.