* 2227160
* Collaborative Research: Highly Compact, Multi-port, GaN-Based Grid-Forming Inverter
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alex Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 280,000.00

Weather-related disasters are sobering reminder of the "growing pains" that
accompany the electric energy transition towards renewable generations.
Addressing such challenges will require renewable resources to be designed to
support the grid when needed instead of tripping offline during these times.
This will require a new grid-forming inverter technology. This project brings
together a joint team from the University of Texas Austin and the University of
Central Florida, to develop a high efficiency, high power density grid-forming
solutions to enable a more resilient grid. The team has previously developed and
verified several key innovations such as the basic grid-forming control, control
of multi-port inverter, and control of multilevel three port inverter. The
project supports US’s energy transition to a renewable energy-based future, and
it will enable higher penetration of solar energy into the grid by delivering an
integrated, efficient, and reliable solar plus storage solutions. This PV plus
storage microinverter systems will provide a reliable renewable energy asset for
the grid, thereby lessening the nation’s dependence on fossil fuels and creating
a grid that is more resilient and stable. The integration of the storage in the
microinverter itself could generate new business models, enabling the owner and
utility new degrees of freedom in grid control and energy flexibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in technological advancements in
grid-forming control methodology as well as the advancement of using wide bad-
gap GaN power devices based three port multilevel inverter. In terms of
frequency response, the project will study and valid a novel Adaptive Frequency
Position (AFP) concept which will move grid-forming control beyond the
traditional synchronous generation inertia emulation. Innovative three port
multilevel inverter topology will be studied and used to realize a high
performance GaN microinverter with PV and storage connectivity. The proposed
collaborative project will enable the team to work together to advance the GFM
controls beyond the basic functionality, study the stability when multiple grid-
forming and grid-following inverters work together, as well as to develop a GaN
based grid-forming microinverter and testbed. The main technical objectives
include: 1) Optimization of grid-forming voltage control loop bandwidth and
filter design. 2) Advanced functionalities for three-port microinverter with
black start, automatic islanding, MPPT, reactive power support functionalities
in addition to the frequency support; 3) Advanced control beyond inertia
emulation 4) Design of advanced three port microinverter beyond the state of the
art in microinverter technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.