* 2227338
* BRITE Fellow: Autonomous Systems that Accommodate Human Perception and Reasoning about Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Meeko Oishi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 04/30/2028
* USD 994,988.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow award will fund research that enables predictably
safe interaction between autonomous systems and humans in uncertain
environments, with applications in aerospace, manufacturing, transportation, and
healthcare systems, thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity, welfare, and defense. By sensing and reacting to their
environment, autonomous systems have the potential to help human operators
accomplish difficult, dangerous, or risky tasks more easily and safely. However,
when autonomous systems appear to be unpredictable, unreliable, or unresponsive,
they become hindrances, rather than a source of help. To prevent this outcome,
this project aims to develop an algorithmic design and control framework for
autonomous systems that successfully accommodates the inevitable
unpredictability of human actions, as well as the effects on human decision-
making of uncertainty in the dynamics and action of the system. A key element of
this framework is its ability to capture typical needs of humans to design
solutions from uncertain information, and under potentially conflicting
constraints, which meet desired objectives to the greatest possible degree. This
research is integrated with curricular initiatives aiming to promote culturally
responsive pedagogy and project-based learning in the training of students from
diverse backgrounds in human-centric design of autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to a stochasticity-based methodological approach for integrating
knowledge of human perception and reasoning about uncertainty into the design
and control of autonomous dynamical systems. To this end, new mathematical
theory and computational algorithms will be developed, based in control theory,
machine learning, and human factors. Such theory will address the handling of
arbitrary, non-Gaussian forms of stochasticity and rational and non-rational
decision models, with emphasis on computationally efficient controller
synthesis. The feasibility and mathematical properties of methods to
constructively accommodate human variability, and to be context-aware, will also
be explored. The developed algorithms and theories will be experimentally
validated in simulation-based platforms. This project enables the principal
investigator to leverage expertise in methods for assuring probabilistic safety
in stochastic dynamical systems and ongoing work on integrating cognitive models
in autonomous systems to pursue a high-risk vision for human-centric autonomy
with significant potential for transformational impact. It lays a foundation for
advancing culturally responsive teaching and research practices throughout the
engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.