* 2227703
* GRC 2022 Plasma Processing Science: Plasmas and Their Interaction with Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Lorenzo Mangolini, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

Plasma processing is a key technology in both well-established industries
(semiconductor processing, LED lighting) and in emerging applications
(pharmaceutical manufacturing, energy conversion technologies, agriculture). The
common thread that runs through these manufacturing processes is the interaction
between a plasma and the surface it modifies, with the range of surfaces under
investigation by the plasma community continuously increasing in variety.
Plasmas are now being used to process not only inorganic materials, but also
polymers, biopolymers, living tissue, low-dimensional materials such as catalyst
nanoparticles, liquids, and liquid droplets. The 2022 Gordon Research Conference
on Plasma Processing Science (GRC-PPS) will be held July 24-29, 2022, at the
Proctor Academy, Andover, NH to provide a unique environment for scientists to
discuss the unresolved issues in plasma-matter interaction. The meeting will
bring together experts in all areas related to plasma processing science,
covering theory, experimental methods, and advanced characterization techniques.
The conference will bring together leaders in the field, early-career
investigators including postdocs, and graduate students. While most of the talks
will be given by invited speakers, selected contributions from attendees will be
included in the program. The Gordon Research Seminar, which will take place
immediately before the conference, will provide a venue for early career
researchers to present and discuss their research. Gordon Conferences provide
ample time for informal gatherings in the afternoons and evenings, providing a
constructive atmosphere for brainstorming and creative thinking among the
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Plasma
Processing Science (GRC-PPS) “Plasmas and Their Interaction with Matter”
consists of nine sessions covering a broad range of topics, from plasma-liquid
interfaces to synthesis of novel materials and plasma-driven catalysis. While
the conference theme is the same as 2018 GRC-PPS, only two of the sessions of
the 2022 meeting overlap with those offered in 2018 – the choice to revisit
these topics was motivated by the continued relevance of plasma-driven materials
synthesis and rapidly increasing interest in plasma catalysis. The 2022 GRC-PPS
will highlight that the range of surfaces under investigation by the plasma
community is continuously increasing, providing new challenges and opportunities
to this broad discipline. This conference will bring together experts in all
aspects of plasma science, including theory, experimental methods, and advanced
characterization techniques. This conference and the associated Gordon Research
Seminar will provide an informal venue for discussing the most pressing
scientific issues in plasma processing science, facilitating the exchange of
ideas and establishing new collaborations. The societal contributions of plasma
processing science emerged with the development of modern semiconductor device
manufacturing etch processes, which in turn has enabled the information
technology revolution. Plasma processing science now encompasses applications in
energy storage and conversion, catalysis, medical treatment technologies, and
biomass and polymer conversion processes, underscoring the potential positive
impact of the GRC meeting on society. Moreover, representatives at all career
stages, from recognized leaders to graduate students, will have an opportunity
to share their insights into the most pressing issues in plasma science.
International participants with affiliations beyond academia will actively
contribute to this meeting. The conference organizers are committed to reaching
out to potential participants from underrepresented groups. The program includes
a Power Hour, designed to support the professional growth of women in the
scientific community. Moreover, the GR Seminar will provide unique training,
mentoring, and networking opportunities to early-stage
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.