* 2227399
* SemiSynBio-III: Precision assembly and electronic properties  of protein nanowire circuits using DNA origami
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,498,460.00

Microelectronics fabrication critically relies on using silicon substrates and
numerous masking/layering steps that bring serious drawbacks such as extreme
entry costs, high energy consumption, and finite limits on scalability and
device geometries that have nearly been reached, creating a gap in technologies
able to effectively address these issues. New materials, sustainable fabrication
processes, and novel circuit topologies are necessary to develop next-generation
electronic devices. This research will develop engineered protein nanowires
using bacterial pili that conduct electricity by precisely designing and
assembling structural scaffolds made of DNA, known as DNA origami. The
interactions of the nanowires with each other and their environments can be read
out using single molecule techniques and electronic methods developed for thin
layer assembled structures to characterize conductivities at the molecular
scale. The combination of these interdisciplinary advances will ultimately
enable the development of modular bioelectronic devices for next-generation
computing applications. This research will provide interdisciplinary
collaborative interactions and unique opportunities for cross-training students
participating in this project and will further extend the reach by training
undergraduates from each institution involved in the research to serve as
‘Ambassadors’ for outreach efforts. The integrated graduate and undergraduate
interactions will provide opportunities to host K-12 participation programs,
including training for secondary school teachers. By working across schools and
regions to share students, ideas, and best practices, this research program will
generate ongoing student and public excitement around new discoveries in
bionanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, long-range (&gt;10 nm)
electron transport is often achieved in assembled proteins rich in aromatic
residues or redox-active groups. From this view, conductive biological nanowires
hold strong promise for a variety of technological applications in next-
generation electronic devices. The bacterium Geobacter sulferreducens survives
largely through the reduction of inorganic metal-oxides in its environment and
efficiently transports electrons extracellularly via its type IV pili. Pili
conductivity has, in turn, been linked to a densely packed core of aromatic
amino acids that effectively allows electron hopping between residues. This
research will engineer the conductive pili of Geobacter using protein
engineering and synthetic biology methods to create protein nanowires whose
conductivity can be modulated through interactions with ligands and self-
assembly. The protein nanowires will, in turn, be assembled onto DNA origami at
a nanoscale resolution to create precisely structured circuits with defined
electrochemical junctions. Single-molecule electrochemical characterization will
allow for a detailed understanding of the underlying circuitry, which will, in
turn, lead to the development of basic design rules for bionanoelectronic
assemblies. Overall, this research will provide an improved understanding of
structural design, assembly, and electron transport mechanisms in biological
nanowires, including developing fundamental electronic parts, such as
transistors, and building these elements into useful devices such as
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project was jointly funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO); Division of Computing and Communication Foundations (CCF) in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE);
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.