* 2227265
* BRITE Relaunch: Leak-Proof Tubular Redox Flow Batteries for the Low-Cost and Fire-Safe Storage of Solar and Wind Energy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yong Gao, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 432,630.00

Lithium-ion batteries are the devices of choice for storing intermittent energy
from renewable sources. Unfortunately, the high production cost and low fire-
safety profile have limited our society's adoption of lithium-ion batteries.
Only about 20% of home solar panel owners have installed energy-storage devices.
This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch project aims to address this challenge by
developing low-cost and fire-safe iron-titanium redox flow batteries. The
envisioned batteries are about 30-40% cheaper than lithium-ion batteries, and
they do not possess fire-hazardous materials. The research will also be
complemented by establishing an industry-university co-education program that
trains undergraduate and graduate students, especially underrepresented minority
students, on industrial research and development. The project will have broader
impacts that can help mitigate the effect of climate change by reducing
greenhouse emissions, increase the adoption of clean energy, potentially create
highly paid manufacturing jobs, and train the next-generation workforce to work
in emerging industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two research and
development objectives. The first objective is to develop novel polysulfone-Zr-
based proton-conductive membranes that reduce unwanted metal electrolyte
crossovers. New dihydroxybenzene monomers tethered with a phosphoric ester group
through an alkyl chain will be synthesized, which can be co-polymerized with
bis(4-fluorophenyl)sulfone to yield phosphorylated polysulfones. Zirconium
barriers will be impregnated inside a phosphoryl polysulfone membrane by forming
water-insoluble zirconium phosphate complexes that reduce metal electrolyte
crossovers. The second objective is to test tubular cell designs for leak-free
redox flow batteries. A distinctive advantage of tubular flow batteries is that
the sealing length is significantly reduced compared to planar cell designs,
which decreases the possibility of electrolyte leaks. In addition, cell
manufacturing costs can be reduced as half cells or entire cells can be produced
in a single step. A co-extrusion-based fabrication technology permits continuous
industrial battery production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.