* 2227346
* NSF-BSF: New Approaches to Contacts to 2D Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Suzanne Mohney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 410,000.00

NEW APPROACHES FOR ELECTRICAL CONTACTS TO SEMICONDUCTING TRANSITION METAL
DICHALCOGENIDES &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New semiconductors such as two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides have great potential to advance energy-
efficient electronics and satisfy future high computational workloads. However,
the electrical resistance for current to flow through transistors fabricated
from these semiconductors still limits the performance of devices and circuits.
Therefore, researchers at The Pennsylvania State University, in collaboration
with counterparts at Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, will exploit
complementary expertise to gain fundamental insight into electrical contacts to
two-dimensional semiconductors. The insights they gain from testing hypotheses
about the origins of contact resistance will allow them to engineer contacts
with ultra-low resistance. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students by involving them in research relevant to industry and leading
laboratories around the world. The principal investigators will engage in
exchange visits for intensive planning and outreach activities to student
groups, including outreach to undergraduate honors students at The Pennsylvania
State University and middle school girls. Through their own exchange visits,
students will gain hands-on experience in complementary research techniques and
a global perspective on research. The project will have scientific and
technological impact in the fields of semiconductor devices and two-dimensional
materials. Considering the advantages and diverse functionality afforded by two-
dimensional semiconductors, they have the potential for enormous economic impact
through integration with existing, ubiquitous silicon technology. Other
technologies that may be impacted include transparent displays and flexible
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional semiconductors based on transition metal
dichalcogenides are ideally suited for short-channel transistors and energy-
efficient logic devices that can be integrated in a monolithic three-dimensional
fashion or used for flexible electronics. Yet one of the key challenges to
advancing this technology is contacting the semiconductors with low resistance.
Moreover, the metal/semiconductor interface plays a crucial role in determining
the carrier type in the channel of the transistor. Researchers at The
Pennsylvania State University and Technion–Israel Institute of Technology will
test hypotheses on the role of metal deposition, use of semimetals, and junction
formation on the resistance of contacts to atomically thin semiconductors. They
will perform experiments to separate the confounding effects of key variables to
gain deeper insight into the metal/semiconductor interface. Their work to
elucidate the physics of contacts will be aided by materials discovery of new
semimetals. The Pennsylvania State University will exploit decades of experience
studying interfacial reactions at contact interfaces, materials
characterization, and thin-film synthesis. At the Technion, research will build
upon recent insights on current transport in two-dimensional semiconductor
devices, including the design of specialized test structures to pinpoint the
origin of the components of resistance. By combining these strengths, the team
will develop a deeper understanding of Fermi-level pinning in contacts to two-
dimensional semiconductors and how to engineer contacts with unprecedented low
contact resistances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.