* 2227598
* SemiSynBio-III: Towards Understanding and Controlling Redox for Microbial Memory and INteractions - TURIN
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Modern electronics transformed our lives by allowing information to be
communicated through electromagnetic radiation and processed through integrated
circuits. Such electronic devices can transmit, receive and process digital
information rapidly, cheaply and without error. Biology is also expert at
information processing, typically communicating through various modalities
(e.g., electrical, mechanical and molecular), and processing through cell-based
“micro-processors” that are often embedded within multicellular systems (i.e.,
tissue or consortia). Such biological systems can process noisy information to
learn, adapt and store information for use by future generations. The long-term
vision of this research is the fusion of orthogonal information processing
capabilities in electronics and biology. This is denoted “bioelectronic
communication” and the team is developing a new way of facilitating this
transformative capability. Their approach exploits electron flow and it bridges
the gap that exists at the bio-device interface - electrons flow freely in
microelectronics but are transferred in networked oxidation and reduction (i.e.,
redox) reactions in biology. By developing redox-linked synthetic biology that
enables electron transfer to and from “smart” materials that, in turn, are
electroactive components microelectronic devices, the team has already built the
basis for opening new lines of bioelectronic communication. A unique feature of
their work will be the use of electronics to stimulate gene expression as well
as to “write” retrievable “coded” information onto the genome of microbes. There
are many opportunities envisioned for these capabilities. For example, with
“biohybrid” devices built to enable these capabilities, one may be able to
eavesdrop on and control our immune systems as they combat infections and guide
wound healing. These processes rely on redox communication. One may be able to
explore the molecular communication in the GI tract or in the rhizosphere, where
redox based signaling is also prevalent. Unraveling the complexities of these
systems will help address the challenges of human health, environmental
security, as well as food production and crop protection. The TURIN
multidisciplinary team is well-poised to not only develop the fundamental basis
for bioelectronic communication, but to catalyze its transformation into
practice through an extensive network of collaborations with industry and
governmental agencies (i.e., NIST, FDA). Importantly, efforts will include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students at the intersection of
engineering, computer science and biology, and the development of a new summer
school on redox-based bioelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projects’s long-term vision is the fusion of orthogonal information processing
capabilities of electronics and biology for the development of an emerging field
of redox-based bioelectronics. The overarching hypothesis of this research is
that the redox modality provides an unprecedented ability to interface biology
and electronics because: (i) electrochemistry provides electronic access to this
modality (i.e., redox signals can be readily generated and detected at an
electrode); and (ii) redox is a native biological modality by which cells
exchange information with their environment. The project offers several
important intellectual contributions across four Technological Focus (TF) areas.
The first TF will fabricate biocompatible materials (i.e., thin hydrogel films)
as an electronic layer that interconverts redox and electrical signals. These
will transduce electrode-imposed inputs into biologically-recognized redox
signals (e.g., H2O2, phenazines). The second TF will create communicating cells
capable of interconverting signals from the redox modality and a native
biological signaling modality (quorum sensing autoinducers) to enable
communication to a broader microbial population. The third TF will create
decision-making cells that can be instructed by electric inputs to observe their
context and perform context-dependent Boolean logic operations: either to write
to their genome (permanent memory) or to adjust consortium populations (we
hypothesize that population setpoints are a poorly-understood form of dynamic
memory). The fourth TF will integrate research activities using systems-level
modeling to establish metrics for the efficient flow of energy and information
through an electroassembled bio-electronic network. By physically and
computationally linking the components of these TF areas, biohybrid devices are
envisioned that open lines of communication between the biotic and abiotic
worlds. Further, the PIs will initiate a new summer school on redox-based
bioelectronics and systems and synthetic biology-based design, especially
targeting local undergraduate and graduate students, including those from other
minority serving institutions. Summer schools will rotate among the three
institutions and leverage the respective PIs' expertise and institutional
strengths at Maryland (Center for Minorities in Science and Engineering), GT,
and Wisconsin (WID Illuminating Discovery Hub) to ensure diverse participation
and quantified outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been
jointly funded by Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations (CCF) in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE), Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.