* 2227366
* GOALI: Understanding granulation using microbial resource management for the broader application of granular technology
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2026
* USD 526,083.00

The aerobic granular sludge (AGS) process has emerged as a promising biological
wastewater treatment technology that is energy and carbon-efficient with a
smaller footprint requirement compared to conventional activated sludge systems.
Despite these advantages, the implementation of the AGS process has been slow,
especially in the United States, due to several critical engineering challenges
including the lack of robust operational data and fundamental knowledge on how
to integrate the AGS process into flow-through reactor systems. In this GOALI
project, the lead academic institution (University of Utah) and the industrial
partner (DC Water) will combine and integrate their expertise, experience, and
resources to address these critical challenges. To advance this goal, the
academic partner will focus on the fundamental science of reactor operation,
bacterial community analysis in different granular reactors, and kinetic
analysis and modeling. The industrial partner will provide guidance and input in
the design of the kinetic experiments, kinetic data analysis, student training
and internship, and the translation of the research results to guide the design
of full/pilot-scale systems. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance
the design and implementation of granular activated sludge technology in flow-
through reactor systems. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of two graduate students
and two undergraduate students at the University of
Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the loose bacterial flocs of conventional
activated sludge systems used in most large-scale wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs), aerobic granular sludge (AGS) reactors rely on fast-settling, round,
compact biofilms called granules that circumvent the need to have separate
aerobic-anoxic-anaerobic zones. In addition, they do not require a secondary
gravity settler for a follow-up clarification step. However, the implementation
of flow through AGS reactors and their integration into large-scale WWTPs has
remained elusive due to a lack of robust operational data and fundamental
engineering knowledge. To address these critical knowledge gaps, this GOALI
project will generate validated kinetic data in sequencing batch and flow
through AGS systems as a function of two critical operational parameters
including temperature and food to microorganisms (F/M) ratio. The specific
objectives of the research are to 1) investigate and characterize the
granulation process as a function of F/M ratio and temperature in sequencing
batch reactors; 2) investigate the process of granulation in a continuous flow-
through reactor using optimal temperatures and F/M ratios that are selected
following the completion of Objective 1; 3) construct functional gene networks
existing in both granules and flocs under steady-state conditions and external
perturbations and connect these networks with reactor performance using
theoretical ecology and; 4) integrate findings into process design and
operational protocols for the optimal operation and maintenance of flow-through
AGS reactors in close collaboration with D.C. water. To implement the
educational and training goals of this GOALI project, the Principal Investigator
(PI) proposes to leverage existing programs at the University of Utah College of
Engineering Diversity Office to recruit and mentor undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to work on this GOALI project. In addition, the PI plans
to 1) integrate the research findings into existing undergraduate and graduate
courses in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the
University of Utah and 2) develop and deliver outreach activities based on
computer animations to demonstrate, for example, how contaminated water affects
water quality in receiving water bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.