* 2227794
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: A Novel Framework &amp; Toolkit to Measure Protest Legacies in Non-democratic States
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Pauline Jones, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 82,711.00

Large-scale protests are missed opportunities to improve our understanding of
why some cases of mobilization lead to renewed protest and unexpected regime
challenges and other cases it builds regime support. To understand these
different outcomes, this project shifts focus to protest legacies: their
sustained effects on regime legitimation strategies, societal capacity to
resist, and future regime development. To date, little research has been done to
examine the role of state narratives and disinformation following protest and
its effect on public opinion. This project develops a Rapid Response Toolkit to
study protest legacies in authoritarian states, highlighting the role of
information politics. Protest spread as grievances evolved to include political
frustration and, in some places, peaceful protest gave way to riots. Initially
the regime offered policy concessions, but when protest continued, the state
turned to repression. The project uses Toolkit measures to track top-down
strategies to restore order and citizens' reactions to regime efforts to restore
order. This new approach to studying legacies will provide a basis for
understanding the emergence of new protest cycles and continued regime
instability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project breaks new ground on
the study of large-scale protest by moving beyond the question of whether
protests result in regime change to analyzing the viability of state strategies
in response to mass mobilization. It uses a three-person leader-follower
signaling game, which enables the testing of propositions from two broad
approaches in the existing literature: (1) the State-centric Approach, which
draws from the literature on authoritarian state capacity and characterizes
protest as a crisis that the state must address to reestablish control, and (2)
the Protest Accumulation Model, drawn from social movement studies. Autocratic
states can react to protest by attempting to bolster their legitimacy through
institutional reform, policy change and by constructing and reconstructing
narratives about the protest events and the state's response to these events.
Individuals react by accepting or rejecting state narratives to different
degrees, affecting future societal protest capacity. The PIs' leader-follower
game predicts those responses. Utilizing recent mass mobilizations, the project
develops a Rapid Response Toolkit to enable scholars to study protest legacies
in authoritarian states, highlighting the role of information politics. The
toolkit travel across protest contexts to build a comparative data set of
protest legacies, defined as: state narratives about events, state policy change
to respond to protest, and social attitudes and capacity for renewed protest. As
mass mobilization in non-democratic countries becomes more common, an
understanding of legacies is critical to predict regime durability, market
disruptions, and future conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.