* 2227199
* Representation Theory, Calabi-Yau Manifolds, and Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Andrew Linshaw, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support the participation of researchers at the workshop
Representation Theory, Calabi-Yau Manifolds, and Mirror Symmetry to he held
November 28-December 1, 2022 at the Center of Mathematical Sciences and
Applications (CMSA) at Harvard University. Quantum field theory has led to a
unification of many seemingly disparate areas of mathematics during the past
half century, including geometry, representation theory, algebra, combinatorics,
and number theory. The purpose of this conference is to bring together active
researchers in these areas with the goal of strengthening ties, fostering
communication, and generating new ideas at the interface of physics and various
areas of mathematics. This proposal is part of an ongoing effort directed at
understanding all aspects of topological mirror symmetry and string theory at
mathematical levels of rigor, transmitting this understanding to both
mathematicians and physicists, and creating the infrastructure for intensive
interactions between these two groups within a single, flourishing subject.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mirror symmetry, discovered by physicists in the 1990s,
reveals a deep duality between symplectic and complex geometries. It transforms
Gromov-Witten invariants, which are difficult to compute in general, to period
integrals in complex analysis, which are computable and satisfy certain PDEs.
For a given Calabi-Yau manifold, it is a longstanding problem to construct its
mirror. The celebrated Strominger-Yau-Zaslow program proposed that a Calabi-Yau
manifold has a special Lagrangian torus fibration, and its mirror can be
constructed by taking the dual of the torus fibers. Vertex operator algebra
(VOAs) are algebraic structures that arose from conformal field theory, and were
axiomatized by Borcherds. Certain VOAs can be realized geometrically as algebras
of operators on the cohomology rings of moduli spaces. A key example is the
action of the Y-algebras of Gaiotto and Rapcak on the moduli space of spiked
instantons of certain toric Calabi-Yau threefolds. A vast generalization of this
picture has been proposed by Rapcak, Soibelman, Yang, and Zhao, and is based on
the action of the Hall algebra on the cohomology of moduli spaces. On the other
hand, the quiver formulation of some toric Calabi-Yau threefolds and their nc
deformations can be constructed from the Fukaya category via mirror symmetry.
Thus the Hall algebra action has an interesting meaning in symplectic geometry.
This conference will provide a forum for researchers in these fields to
communicate in the hope of resolving these conjectures and finding further
connections between mirror symmetry and representation theory. The workshop web
page is https://cmsa.fas.harvard.edu/homological-mirror-symmetry-
workshop/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.