* 2227497
* BRITE Pivot: Identifying Premature Deterioration in Cementitious Materials Using Volatilomics
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Jason Ideker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 01/31/2026
* USD 615,999.00

For millennia, the medical field has utilized the sense of smell for qualitative
assessment of health, but recent research shows we can tap into volatile organic
compounds, which create the odors that we perceive, for quantitative detection
and analysis. In this Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable
Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Pivot project, volatile organic compounds
produced by the microbes in aged concrete, both undamaged and undergoing
deterioration, will be analyzed. Cementitious materials are the most used
building materials in the entire world; twice as much as all other materials
combined. These materials can undergo premature deterioration and reacting to
that as quickly as possible can mean a successful remediation plan that ensures
the intended lifespan. This is a key part of meeting increasingly demanding
sustainability goals. Identifying volatile organic compound biomarkers of this
material’s health will lay the groundwork for the development of sensors that
can provide early warnings of deterioration, enabling more effective
remediation/repair strategies. Microbes may also be sensitive to environmental
stress (e.g., climate change), and a sensor based on microbial volatile organic
compounds could be used not only monitor infrastructure health, but to also
provide data to detect environmental stressors relevant to other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is for the PI to
pivot to the field of volatilomics for disease detection and bring back new
quantitative tools for diagnosing deterioration in the abiotic environment of
concrete. Volatile organic compounds metabolites, an oft unused resource of
chemical information that are produced by concrete-associated microbial
communities, will be used to detect and characterize concrete deterioration.
Scanning electron microscopy with energy disperse x-ray analysis, expansion
measurements, and visual observations will be used to confirm deterioration
mechanisms identified using volatilomics. Volatiles will be analyzed using two-
dimensional gas chromatography–time-of-flight mass spectrometry. To determine if
the volatile organic compound metabolites can distinguish between different
deterioration mechanisms, the data gathered will be analyzed using machine
learning (Random Forest). Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize and
compare sample classes. Volatile organic compounds data will be submitted to
Metabolomics Workbench for public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.