* 2227810
* Understanding the Rules of Life Program: Scientific Advancements and Future Opportunities
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kavita Berger, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 320,798.00

Life sciences have become a core part of public policy and scientific solutions
to address problems affecting nearly all aspects of society, including climate
change, defense, public health and medicine, clean energy and energy
independence, industry (i.e., the bioeconomy), agriculture, and sustainable
development. Convergence of the life sciences with other scientific disciplines
is a core enabler of advances across these sectors. In 2016, the National
Science Foundation (NSF) established a program on Understanding the Rules of
Life (URoL) to identify generalizable rules that govern biological systems at
micro- and macro-scales. With support from this award, the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Board on Life Sciences (NASEM) will conduct
a retrospective analysis of the URoL program. For this analysis, the NASEM will
interact with URoL principal investigators individually and in group settings to
understand the programâ€™s: a) achievements; b) integration of multi-disciplinary,
systems-level approaches; c) broader implications for studying highly-complex
systems, future scientific questions, and future societal needs; and d) the
production of generalizable rules that apply to different fields and scales. The
outcomes from these discussions will be include a proceedings, which will be
peer reviewed and published through the established NASEM processes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NSF URoL Big Idea challenged scientists across numerous
disciplines to identify rules that govern how biological systems function at
various scales and complexities, and determine which of those rules are
generalizable across systems. The assessment and synthesis activities supported
by this award are designed explicitly to: a) identify rules of life that apply
within systems of similar scale and complexity; b) determine which of those
rules also apply to systems of differing scales and complexity; and c) capture
the contributions from the multidisciplinary teams in URoL-funded research
towards providing insight into successful methods for collaborating across
scientific disciplines. NASEM has published several reports describing
convergence of the life sciences with other disciplines, which will inform
discussions with URoL investigators and the project outcomes. Critical themes
from unstructured and structured discussions will be captured to ensure that the
outcomes of the assessment are informative to NSF and the broader scientific
community. Furthermore, the knowledge gained about effective multidisciplinary
research environments will enable future scientists to establish and lead
multidisciplinary teams toward addressing future societal and scientific
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.