* 2227335
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (ACM/IEEE SEC)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Lanyu Xu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The proposal is to seek travel support for up to 20 students to attend the
ACM/IEEE SEC in San Jose CA from Dec. 14-17, 2022. This leading technical
conference is the primary venue for presenting new research results in the area
of "edge computing", a new paradigm in which the resources of a small data
center are placed at the edge of the Internet, in close proximity to mobile
devices, sensors, and end users, and the emerging Internet of Things. The
conference will consist of technical paper presentations, panels, PhD forums,
posters, and demonstrations. It will also feature keynote speeches from leading
researchers and practitioners in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation
in SEC 2022 and similar conferences are valuable and important activities of the
graduate school experience. It provides students with the opportunity to
interact with more senior researchers, and exposes students to leading work and
practical industry practices in this important area of research. This may have
an important impact on career development. The goal of the funds is to support
approximately 20 student participants at recognized US institutions of higher
education. Funds will be dispersed with preference given to students who would
not otherwise be able to attend the conference and students who are not already
scheduled to present a paper, paying particular attention to diversity and
relevance of the student's research interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.