* 2227964
* Collaborative Research: Higher-order processing in a peripheral neural structure of a nudibranch mollusc
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jeff Lichtman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2026
* USD 302,900.00

In neuroscience and in biology more broadly, universal principles are determined
by comparing a wide variety of different organisms. A tenet of neuroscience is
that higher-order computations are performed by neural circuits in the central
nervous system (CNS), not the peripheral nervous system (PNS). However, this
might not be universally true for all types of animals. This project examines
whether olfactory processing circuitry in a mollusc is found in the PNS rather
than the CNS, as it is in other animal phyla such as vertebrates and insects.
The project uses the nudibranch mollusc, Berghia stephanieae, which is a
charismatic lab-grown species that is an inexpensive alternative to many other
neuroscience laboratory species, thereby increasing access to research for
students. Berghia, like other gastropod molluscs has large, individually
identifiable neurons in its CNS. However, like its distant cousin, the octopus,
far more small neurons are located in its PNS, which contains peripheral ganglia
and sub-epithelial neurons. Anthro¬po¬centricism has biased researchers to
believe that the brain is more important than the periphery. However, this might
not be true for all types of nervous systems. Determining the extent to which
peripheral systems in molluscs perform computations that were thought to be
reserved for the brain could transform our view of what actually constitutes a
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to elucidate the neural
architecture and function of the peripheral rhinophore complex, which consists
of the rhinophore, a dorsal cephalic appendage used for distance chemoreception,
and the associated rhinophore ganglion. A connectomics and transcriptomics
approach will be used to determine whether there are glomeruli in the rhinophore
complex that are organized like olfactory glomeruli in the olfactory bulb of
vertebrates and the antennal lobe of insects. There are three objectives: 1) A
connectome of the rhinophore ganglion will be constructed from volume serial
electron microscopic images using machine-learning algorithms to determine the
neural circuit motifs that it contains. Customization of machine-learning
algorithms to the ultrastructural features of Berghia will facilitate
connectomics research in other molluscs. 2) An atlas of neuronal types will be
assembled, which will include neurons in the rhinophore complex and neurons that
input to it. Neural gene expression, determined from single cell RNA sequencing,
will be mapped using in situ hybridization chain reaction (HCR),
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and axon tracing. A web portal will provide access
to the annotated connectome and neuronal atlas, allowing researchers and
students to explore genes, neurons, and neural circuitry in Berghia. 3) The role
of the rhinophore complex in navigational behavior will be explored with
behavioral assays and selective lesions, taking advantage of Berghia’s
regenerative abilities. Laboratory courses developed using Berghia will allow
undergraduate students to label and image neurons with HCR and IHC and perform
behavioral experiments with automated tracking. This will enable students to
make discoveries and test hypotheses regarding neurons and neural circuits in
parallel to the discoveries made by laboratory
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.