* 2227320
* RAPID: Plains Indian Sign Language Documentation, Linguistic Database, and Dictionary
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Melanie McKay-Cody, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 04/30/2023
* USD 119,852.00

This RAPID project will create an accessible, annotated video database for five
endangered varieties of Plains Indian Sign Language (PISL) that have received
little attention in linguistic research. The database and PISL documentation
constitute an important intellectual contribution to academic fields including
linguistics, education, history, and sign language studies, while also making a
cultural contribution to Native peoples. The main output of the project is a
video dictionary to be maintained by the University of Arizona. Its
functionality will support comparative analysis between PISL types and with
other sign languages. The dataset of PISL lexicons and videos will be shared
with the tribes and available to scholars in American Indian studies,
linguistics, anthropology, and Indigenous education. It will also be distributed
to tribes to be used as educational material in a variety of schools and
settings across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve
documentation of tribal signs through the development of a video
dictionary/database. Researchers will compare older written documentation and
dictionaries from 1880 and 1929 with current signs. Tribal consultants from PISL
communities will serve as signers for the database. The database will be
annotated and searchable by (a) phonological parameter identifiers, (b)
etymological descriptions with the meaning of the signs, and (c) cultural
context based on the lives of Plains Indians/Indigenous people. The research
team's comparative study of these signs as presented visually and converted from
older written dictionaries into a modern digital archive will support the
identification of similarities and differences among historical and contemporary
signs. Many tribes have shared signs due to intertribal marriages and previous
lingua franca use across the Plains region. This project will enable the ability
to specify different dialects among these tribes, making this work a direct
contribution to new knowledge and an important resource for these tribal
communities. The master database will include signs from seven tribes (a single
combined dictionary) and will include a dialect filter specifically for Kiowa
signs in a second copy of the original database, leading to the production of a
Kiowa Sign Language-specific dictionary. This will serve as a model and build
capacity for future work by creating a larger database from which dictionaries
for individual tribes can be derived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.