* 2227248
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Software: Software Health Monitoring and Improvement Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Marouane Kessentini, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2023
* USD 73,760.00

Software underpins every aspects of modern life, with significant impact in
society. Poor quality software can cause huge financial losses, even threatening
people's lives. Software quality is even more critical within the scientific
community. The reproducibility of research results and sustainability of the
research itself, heavily depend on the quality of the software developed by
scientists, who usually acquire basics of software programming but are not aware
of the best design practices. As a consequence, several existing open access
scientific software packages are known to be hard to use and evolve due to their
poor quality, as highlighted in recent studies. This project will integrate and
enhance recent advances in software issue detection and refactoring techniques,
created by the PIs and sponsored by NSF, in order to serve diverse scientific
and engineering domains, detecting and fixing software quality issues
effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to bridge the gap between
software engineering community and other science and engineering community in
general. It will provide quantitative comparisons of software projects against
an industrial benchmark, enable users to pinpoint software issues responsible
for high maintenance costs, visualize the severity of the detected issues, and
refactor them using the proposed interactive refactoring framework. The proposed
framework will bring together software users and software developers by enabling
non software experts to post software challenges for the software community to
solve, which will, in turn, boost the research and advances in software
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.