* 2227919
* I-Corps:  Curing inherited diseases at the source through next-generation clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) systems
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Jennifer Doudna, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technologies that edit genes within living cells. Mutations in
critical genes are the underlying cause of many diseases, from cancer to
hereditary disorders, and repairing these mutations would significantly improve
patients’ quality of life. In addition, performing site-specific modifications
at unprecedented precision in the genomes of cells and organisms offers the
potential to revolutionize medicine, agriculture, biotechnology, and even basic
research practices. Human health has been the subject of most initial studies
as, for the first time, gene editing has curative potential in a wide range of
debilitating genetic diseases that are currently only addressed via decades of
costly treatment. However, current gene editing programs have been focused on a
confined set of genetic diseases, primarily driven by delivery challenges with
CRISPR-Cas9. Later-stage applications of CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing have been
largely ex vivo, with in vivo applications limited to more accessible organ
targets (e.g., eye, liver). The proposed technology has the capacity to reach
targets that to date have been a challenge to access and potentially cure
diseases for which there is significant unmet need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a genome editing platform that
circumvents current in vivo delivery challenges with CRISPR-Cas9. CRISPR/Cas9
requires multiple delivery systems to reach in vivo targets, which may lead to
high toxicity and death. The proposed vCas systems consist of miniature RNA-
guided genome editors distinct from Cas9, including the world’s most compact and
highly efficient CRISPR-Cas systems. At approximately half the size of Cas9,
vCas systems provide a template for next-generation genome editing tools that
may be easily packaged in safe and existing viral vectors to reach challenging
in vivo therapeutic targets. The proposed approach has been validated to
generate high editing efficiency in mammalian cells, and the extremely small
size of the components compared to existing technologies has the potential to
render previously untreatable genetic diseases more
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.