* 2227605
* BRITE Relaunch: Using Cell Shape and Cytoskeletal Organization for Understanding and Predicting Cellular Force Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ashok Prasad, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 586,722.00

Cells use pulling, or contractile, forces for many important physiological
processes. These contractile forces drive cell division and cell migration.
Cells of the immune system, as well as invaders like metastatic cancer cells,
use these forces to squeeze through tissue and even deform their own nuclei to
slip through tiny spaces. Methods to directly measure these forces have been
developed, but they are expensive, challenging, and have limitations. This
Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering
(BRITE) Relaunch project aims to develop imaging-based methods to estimate
cellular forces easier and cheaper than currently possible. The methods promise
to make these mechanical forces shaping healthy or diseased tissues more easily
measurable through the theoretical and experimental techniques to be employed.
Graduate students and undergraduate students will be trained in this research.
Additionally, new course material will be developed for traditional engineering
courses to enable students to develop an understanding of real-world problems
and societal goals. Simulations will also be developed as an aid to learning
science for high school, middle school, and college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will uncover the relationship
between cellular contractile forces and the organization of the filamentous
actin structure and will develop tools for predictive mapping of forces from
actin organization. Contractile forces are exerted by the cellular cytoskeleton,
and previous work has led to the hypothesis that measuring cytoskeletal
organization visible in fluorescence microscopy images may allow for the
prediction of these forces. This overarching hypothesis will be tested using
computer simulations, experiments, imaging and artificial intelligence methods.
The actin cytoskeleton will be simulated using specialized cytoskeletal
simulation software. By changing parameters and initial conditions, many types
of cytoskeletal structures will be generated, and forces exerted by motor
proteins on focal adhesions will be measured. The relation between cytoskeletal
organization and force distribution will be investigated using machine learning
methods. Cells will be cultured and plated on glass surfaces and imaged using
live- or fixed- cell actin and DNA stains. Cytoskeletal structure with and
without genetic perturbations will be imaged, and differences in architecture
identified and contrasted with simulation predictions. Forces exerted by the
cells on focal adhesions will be measured and the cytoskeletal structure in
these cells will be simultaneously imaged. Machine learning and high-dimensional
data analysis methods will be applied to understand the relation between forces
and cytoskeletal organization. Experimental results will provide feedback and
improved simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.