* 2227641
* BRITE Fellow: AI-Enabled Discovery and Design of Programmable Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2027
* USD 999,809.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow grant will establish a transformative data-driven
design framework enabled by artificial intelligence (AI) for the real-time
digital design and fabrication of programmable material systems (PMS). PMS are
emerging architectural structures made of smart materials that are responsive to
external stimuli (e.g., stress, thermal inputs, chemical changes, light, and
magnetic fields) and that can be programmed to transform between multiple
functional states. PMS have far-reaching, societally impactful applications,
including surgical robots, (bio)sensors, deployable satellites, mechanical
computing, and water and energy harvesting. The design of PMS is still in its
infancy, however, due to the complex underlying physics and high dimensionality
associated with the design of spatially varying materials, architectures, and
stimuli. To address these challenges, this project seeks to integrate disruptive
technologies across the multidisciplinary domains of design, mechanics,
manufacturing, materials, and data science to create a new AI-enabled PMS
digital design platform. In collaboration with Minority Serving Institutions
(MSIs), research results will be integrated into AI literacy programs and
activities for K-12 and college students. A wide range of diversity, equity, and
inclusion activities will also be accomplished, with emphasis on mentoring and
collaboration with junior faculty from underrepresented groups and enhancing
access to STEM pathways for underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
establish a novel data-driven design framework called ALGO (Acquire-Learn-
Generate-Optimize) that will accelerate the co-design of materials (M),
architectures (A), and stimuli (S) in programmable material systems (PMS). The
specific goals are to: 1) Create a shared PMS data resource to bridge knowledge
gaps across multiple disciplines and domains; 2) Develop novel statistical and
AI-based learning techniques to understand complex M-A-S interactions and derive
transferrable PMS design rules; and 3) Employ a “building block” approach to
create multiscale design strategies that combine machine learning with topology
optimization to achieve superior computational efficiency and unprecedented
performance for real-time PMS digital design. This research will provide a
paradigm shift that transforms existing techniques limited to the design of
single-material periodic structures into scalable data-driven design of
programmable multi-material systems with heterogenous materials and topological
architectures. While the PMS design testbeds used in this research will be
focused on Shape Transformation, Wave Guiding, and Surface Engineering, the AI-
enhanced learning and design automation techniques developed here will benefit a
wide range of physics-driven science and engineering domains. Exploiting
heterogeneity and programmability in material systems through intelligent design
will have long-lasting impacts on US competitiveness in developing innovative,
lightweight, portable, economic, and sustainable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.