* 2227383
* Restoring the Mechanosensation in Engineered Skin using Controllable Cellular and Extracellular Cues
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Metin Uz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2026
* USD 503,973.00

Mechanosensation is essential for perceiving the external world and social
exchange. The skin is our largest sensory organ and is densely populated with
nerve endings responsible for senses, such as touch, pain, pressure, and
vibration. The long-term goal of this project is to integrate sensory neurons
into bioengineered 3D skin constructs (BESCs) to enable studying skin
mechanosensation and regeneration using human cells. The growth, location, and
type of sensory neurons in BESCs will be controlled by locally providing
specialized proteins secreted by specific cell types of the skin, as well as
through localized electrical stimulation. This project will make a positive
societal impact in the long term by 1) providing a physiologically-relevant in
vitro model to a broader research community to study the innervation dynamics of
sensory neurons during development and wound healing; and 2) evaluating the
efficacy/toxicity of drug candidates using human cells. In addition, this
project will contribute to STEM education and workforce development by providing
research training and professional opportunities for students at all levels and
will significantly benefit students pursuing a career in the fields of
biomaterials, tissue engineering, and neuroscience. Training activities include:
a 4-week summer boot camp for graduate student training; a graduate-level
course; a Vertically Integrated Program (VIP) to integrate undergraduate
research; a 2-week summer research experience involving K-12 students; and a
2-day-long virtual summer symposium for training young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular and cellular mechanisms
underlying the specific types of mechanosensation are well-characterized. Yet,
there is limited knowledge about what determines and instructs the branching
patterns and proper innervation of somatosensory neurons (SSN) and sensory end-
organs in the skin to mediate mechanosensation. The goal of this project is to
induce and control the level of innervation in engineered skin through
spatially-controlled microenvironmental cues, including 3D-patterned dermal
extracellular matrix (ECM) conduits, follicular epidermal signals (e.g., hair
follicles), and Schwann cells (SCs) differentiated via wireless electrical
stimulation in defined patterns. Studies in Goal 1 will identify the ECM
molecules that promote or prevent SSN outgrowth and employ the identified
attractive/repulsive ECM cues in BESCs to guide the nerve endings to their final
destination. Studies in Goal 2 will use a hair-bearing BESC model and determine
the preferential innervation of the follicular (hairy) and interfollicular (non-
hairy) epidermis by different subtypes of SSNs. Studies in Goal 3 will leverage
electrical differentiation approaches to spatially control the Schwann cell fate
commitment in the 3D dermis to regulate local myelination and function of SSNs.
The key intellectual merit of this project for biomedical sciences is to
decipher the individual effects of cellular and extracellular cues on the
innervation and pattern formation of sensory neurons in the context of a 3D skin
microenvironment using human cells. This study will also contribute to
engineering by addressing a prevailing tissue engineering challenge of
controlling innervation in 3D skin models. The cue-driven strategy involving
environmental guidance signals and integrated wireless electrical biointerfaces
can further be adapted for spatially-controlled innervation and engineering of
other organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.