* 2227258
* Track 2: Assessing Student Satisfaction and Engagement in Teams (ASSET): An Empirical Review and Scale Development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Ohland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 490,174.00

Prior research suggests that group differences, such as gender, race/ethnicity,
and academic discipline influence the way that students perceive course
interactions such as teamwork. These differences may lead to inequities in team
experiences, student engagement, and learning for different groups of students.
It is helpful to the aims of NSF’s Broadening Participation in Engineering
program, to the field of engineering, and to society as a whole to better
understand these differences to provide better learning experiences for all
students in engineering and other disciplines. This project will identify how
these differences may be observed, provide instructors guidance in interpreting
those differences, and identify strategies to prevent, reduce, and remediate
potential negative outcomes. By studying team composition, rating patterns, and
team processes and outcomes across a range of academic disciplines, the team
will identify patterns that are unique to, or more prevalent in, STEM
disciplines or even specific engineering disciplines and their impact on student
engagement. Researchers will create a new survey instrument to measure
engagement that will enable faculty to measure the effectiveness of course-level
interventions to optimize their teaching resulting in more positive and
equitable team and course experiences for all students. It will also allow
instructors to identify and assist students who are less engaged or having poor
team experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will explore how
students’ team experiences may differ based on gender, race/ethnicity, and the
intersection of race/ethnicity and gender, English language skills, class level
(e.g. first-year students, seniors), and major (including sub-disciplines in
engineering). The team will begin by examining how students from different
groups experience team processes including task, relationship, and process
conflict, psychological safety, trust, cohesion, satisfaction, team viability
(willingness to work together in the future), and peer evaluations. This will be
accomplished using a large volume of data collected through CATME (a system
developed with NSF support) over a 17-year period from over 1.8 million unique
students of over 23,000 instructors at 2,566 institutions. The project team will
leverage the system’s existing data and ability to collect new data from a
large, multi-institutional, multidisciplinary user base. This will enable us to
examine potential systematic demographic or disciplinary differences in how
different groups of students experience team work and team processes. A second
contribution of this project is to develop and validate a direct measure of
student engagement that assesses the three aspects of engagement that have been
repeatedly found to matter: physical, cognitive, and affective. Existing
measures of student engagement that focus on external conditions or alternate
conceptualizations of engagement are not well-suited to examine how students’
team experiences affect their physical, cognitive, and affective engagement with
their education. A psychometrically sound measure of student engagement will be
developed that will be useful in studying the impact of pedagogical innovations,
including innovations addressing teamwork. A final contribution of the proposed
work will be to examine how student engagement is related to team processes,
students’ willingness to work together in the future, and peer ratings of
students’ teamwork contributions, as well as how the nature of those
relationships may vary for different groups of students. The project team will
collect new data to analyze these relationships, leveraging the efforts of
CATME’s use in large-enrollment classes to administer the measures. The results
will provide norm-referenced data to serve as a knowledge base for instructors
and researchers about group differences in team processes, peer ratings, and
student engagement; and the correlates of student engagement for different
demographic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.