* 2227991
* Collaborative Research: Inkjet Printing Framework by Droplet Impact-induced Ink Release from Liquid Crystal Receiving Substrate
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xiaoguang Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 06/30/2026
* USD 358,360.00

Inkjet printing technology is a widely utilized manufacturing method due to its
high precision and reproducibility. However, the current inkjet printing
technology is restricted by the limited choices of inks and requires additional
formulation steps to print composite materials, which limits its applications in
industry. This grant supports fundamental research that aims to create a new
inkjet printing method to encapsulate ink in a liquid crystal substrate and
eventually expands to a larger range of materials. If successful, the research
outcomes will enable printing of advanced materials, including organic
electronics for sensors and wearable devices, and benefit healthcare and energy
sectors. The outreach and education activities involve students ranging from
K-12 to undergraduate levels to stimulate interests in STEM fields, which will
train the next generation of manufacturing workforce and encourage the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional inkjet printing requires ink materials with
low viscosity and high ejection speed for the dispensing of ink droplets. On the
other hand, low viscosity leads to droplets splashing on the receiving substrate
and compromising the print resolution. As a result, there are limited
combinations of ink properties and operating conditions that are “printable.”
Instead of dispensing the ink droplet onto conventional solid surfaces, this
grant supports basic research that aims to understand the impact-induced ink
release mechanism for ink chemicals embedded in a liquid crystal film. In this
process, the ink is released onto the liquid crystal surface using droplet
impacts to enable the inkjet printing of viscous materials. Theoretical analysis
will be carried out to identify critical conditions required for the controlled
release of the embedded ink in the liquid crystal film. Critical parameters that
allow the design of the liquid crystal film and the control of the ink release
will be identified using experiments to understand the effects of Weber number
on ink release. If successful, this research will enable the printing of
materials with controlled thickness and dimensions that were previously
difficult or impossible to print, such as thermosetting and (semi)conducting
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.