* 2227273
* GOALI: Integrated Oxidation Vapor-gap Reverse Osmosis Systems for Water Reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* John Kenny, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

The American West is experiencing drought conditions worse than those seen in
nearly a millennium. Securing reliable water supplies is therefore essential to
ensuring the health and prosperity of the nation. Purifying wastewater (treated
sewage) so that it can be reused as a water source is a sustainable method to
increase water supplies and uses less energy than alternatives, such as making
drinking water out of seawater. To be safe for consumption, wastewater must be
thoroughly treated to remove all harmful contaminants, a practice that is costly
and resource intensive. This research project will develop a new treatment
system that combines oxidation and membrane processes to reuse wastewater more
efficiently. The work will determine how wastewater contaminants are removed in
a new membrane process and how using oxidation combined with membranes can
further improve contaminant removal. The project will also test the ability of
the new system to remove regulated compounds from actual wastewater in close
collaboration with Trussell Technologies, the industrial project partner and a
leader in water reuse in California. The project will build a diverse scientific
workforce by training students that will work as interns at Trussell
Technologies and learn about the societal importance of water reuse. Additional
benefits to society will be accomplished through education and training
including the mentoring of one graduate student at the University of Colorado at
Boulder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converting wastewater effluent into potable water
requires a high degree of pathogen and contaminant removal, which is energy-
intensive and costly. This GOALI proposal will advance a new membrane-based
reuse treatment train centered on vapor-gap reverse osmosis (VGRO) integrated
with strong pre-oxidation for fouling and organic micropollutant control. VGRO
is an emerging process that separates constituents by volatility, allowing for
near-complete rejection of non-volatile and semi-volatile contaminants poorly
removed by reverse osmosis, the conventional system for removal of benchmark
contaminants regulated in current reuse operations. Preliminary research on this
project also indicates that the membranes used in VGRO resist degradation from
strong oxidants (e.g., ozone, free chlorine), potentially overcoming a major
weakness of conventional reverse osmosis membranes. The scientific objectives of
the research are to (1) explore the oxidative transformation of model wastewater
contaminants and how this affects their rejection in VGRO, (2) determine the
impact of ozonation and chlorination on membrane properties and fouling
behavior, and (3) evaluate the performance of an integrated ozonation and VGRO
process against contaminant removal benchmarks while treating actual wastewater
reuse influents in close collaboration with the industrial partner, Trussell
Technologies. The industrial collaboration is essential for keeping the research
within realistic boundaries for reuse practices and they will be co-leading
tasks and mentoring students. Overall, the results of this work will advance
VGRO with oxidation as a potential alternative to current costly practices in
water reuse and improve the fundamental understanding of contaminant removal in
oxidation and membrane systems. The project will also improve scientific
literacy through an outreach program that teaches elementary school students
about water using dance and art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.