* 2227407
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Large, High-Performance Outdoor Shake Table 2022-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lelli VanDenEinde, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,984,693.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources is available at the NHERI web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to NSF's role
in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental Facilities will
provide access to their experimental resources, user services, and data
management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education awards. This
award will renew the operations of the large high-performance outdoor shake
table (LHPOST) Experimental Facility located at the University of California,
San Diego, to support research in structural and geotechnical earthquake
engineering. The LHPOST was recently upgraded through NSF award 1840870 to six
degrees-of-freedom (6-DOF) capabilities (LHPOST6) and can reproduce the surface
ground motions resulting from major earthquakes, including the three
translations and three rotations of the ground surface. The shake table can
support test structures with no height limitations and weighing up to 4.4
million pounds (20 meganewton). Building seismic-resilient and sustainable
communities requires understanding and reliably predicting the seismic system-
level response of buildings, critical facilities, utilities, lifelines, and
other civil infrastructure systems. The experimental research conducted on the
LHPOST6, together with computational models making use of the datasets collected
from shake table tests, will advance the science, technology, and practice in
earthquake engineering, leading to next-generation design codes and decision-
making tools that will increase the seismic resilience and sustainability of the
built environment. Experiments performed at this facility will have a
significant educational impact by providing life-size demonstrations of the
seismic performance of structural, geotechnical, and soil-foundation-structural
systems to graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students from diverse backgrounds,
and will also educate the public about the urgency of the nationâ€™s efforts to
develop effective technologies and policies to prevent natural hazards from
becoming societal disasters. The research activities will train next-generation
researchers, educators, and practitioners, who will be future leaders in natural
hazard mitigation. An active outreach program will include annual user training
and industry-academia workshops, Research Experiences for Undergraduates,
traditional and social media campaigns, webinars from users of the facility, and
computational challenges competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHPOST6 facility
will transform natural hazard mitigation research by enabling large/full-scale
system tests that will: (a) provide fundamental knowledge for understanding
complete system behavior during earthquakes, from initiation of damage to the
onset of collapse, including the effects of soil-foundation-structure
interaction, the contributions of lateral and gravity load-resisting systems,
and non-structural systems; (b) provide data for the development, calibration,
and validation of high-fidelity physics-based computational models, therefore
reducing future reliance on physical testing; (c) provide data and fragility
information, which with validated simulation tools, will enable the full
realization of performance-based design, the most rational/scientific way to
evaluate and reduce the risks of natural hazards on the community; (d) provide
validation tests for innovative structural systems and retrofit methods, as well
as new materials, components, and manufacturing/construction methods for seismic
protection; and (e) permit full-scale modeling of near-surface geotechnical
systems and exploration of geotechnical phenomena and soil improvement
techniques that cannot be explored at laboratory scale. The LHPOST6 will enable
researchers to investigate the combined effect of realistic near-field
translational and rotational earthquake ground motions on densely instrumented
large/full-scale structural, geotechnical, or soil-foundation-structural
systems, including the effects of kinematic and inertial soil-foundation-
structural interaction, nonlinear soil and structural response, liquefaction,
and seismic compression. Experimental data produced by the testing at this
facility will be archived and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.