* 2227054
* I-Corps: Vacuum Distillation and Desalination for Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Chao Zhu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a vacuum distillation technology for the extraction of
condensable liquids from wastewater leading to a possible significant volume
reduction and concentration in wastewater residue, which can then be used for
follow-up residue treatments in wastewater cleansing. The technology may also
recycle important non-condensable gases such as methane and carbon dioxide and
can be highly compact, simply structured without any moving or replaceable
parts, and operated without high-power requirements. The system can be low-cost
in design and operation and can be scaled up or down with high mobility for
applications in hard-to-access or extremely isolated
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology for the extraction of condensable liquids out of wastewaters that
would be otherwise difficult to separate using commercially available
distillation. Generally, wastewater contains various substances such as
dissolved minerals, metals, salts (that can precipitate on solid surfaces of
vaporization), corrosive liquids, and/or chemically active gases (that damage
fragile materials such as membranes and metals), and suspended micron-sized
hydrosols (oils and solids). The current commercially available distillation
technologies including membrane distillation and thermal distillation can have
limitations in dealing with these substances in wastewaters. The potential
technology could overcome some of the difficulties with current methods. The
core innovation of this technology includes spray flash vaporization with
active-vacuum extraction to allow for an intensified vaporization process in a
highly compacted system. The innovation is membrane-free and has no solid
surface of vaporization which could save material and effectively avoid surface
scaling or blockage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.