* 2227230
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Human Adaptation to a Variable Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Contreras, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 28,313.00

This dissertation research project is an anthropological archaeological
investigation of the diverse activities that resulted in human-produced earthen
mounds, their legacies, and assesses the environmental conditions in which these
mounds emerged. The research examines not only mound formation, but also the
material impacts of mounds on people and their surroundings. Understanding the
extent to which humans shape and experience lowland landscapes worldwide can
influence current political and societal management decisions, as well as help
future predictions and applications of historical and ecological knowledge. The
research explores the implications of the theoretical premise that people do not
just live through changing environmental conditions, but also constantly
navigate, understand, and negotiate the material traces of the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines how and why societies in the
past carried out certain activities that resulted, intentionally or
unintentionally, in the creation of earthen mounds in lowland environments. What
kinds of effects did changing landscapes and human experiences have on people
and their surroundings? The doctoral student is using geoarchaeological
methodologies consisting of a broad-coverage auger survey, and test pits, to
reconstruct the pre-mound landscape, and the history of mound-building in the
site. The timing and heterogeneity of site formation processes will be examined
through geographic information system (GIS)-based spatial analysis. A
strategically located excavation of a mound follows, which will provide detailed
data about its genesis and history, as well as the nature of the moundâ€™s
interaction with its immediate surroundings. The project ultimately generates a
geoarchaeological and anthropological approach to the diverse ways humans have
shaped themselves and their world, creating meaningful places. Such an approach,
which can be applied in other similar contexts worldwide, also provides
archaeology students with fieldwork educational and training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.