* 2227526
* SemiSynBio-III:  Hybrid cell-semiconducting polymer systems that decode cytosolic information using RNA-regulated electron transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Silberg, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Computers use two mechanisms to store data: read-only memory (ROM), which can be
written but not erased, and random-access memory (RAM), which can be written and
erased multiple times. Cells can also be programmed to store high density read-
only data by permanently modifying the genetic code, and they have the potential
to be used as sustainable data storage components for digital devices. However,
it remains challenging to store high density data in cells using RAM-like
approaches that allow for multiple write-read-erase cycles. In addition, there
are limited methods to read out stored biological information non-disruptively,
without affecting cell viability. To overcome these challenges, this project
will code information into different biomolecules within cells, including
synthetic RNA, which are retained within cells, and redox-active small
molecules, which can diffuse in and out of cells. Outside of cells, the
mediators will be detected using semiconducting polymers which represent
sustainable bio-materials. All of these components will be assembled to build a
hybrid biological-semiconductor system with high storage and communication
functionalities. This research will train doctoral students pursuing studies in
multiple disciplines to work effectively in interdisciplinary teams, and it will
educate scholars at community colleges about research and transfer
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to create
hybrid cell-material systems capable of high-density data storage in cells (100
bytes) using RNA, with facile read out through the bio-production of redox-
active chemical mediators. These systems will be created by programming cells to
synthesize mediator components, by using a facile low energy electrochemical
read out, and by decoding information from living cells in a manner that
minimizes cell fitness burdens and data storage failure rates. Additive
manufacturing approaches will be developed to achieve scalable and sustainable
biohybrid systems. Two novel forms of biological memory elements will be used to
create random-access memory that is capable of repetitive write-read-erase data
cycles. First, RNA memory will be created that codes data using a highly
designable catalytic RNA. Second, mediator memory will be created that can be
read out using a semiconductive polymer outside of cells. The proof-of-concept
bioelectronic system will be created using the model microbe Escherichia coli.
The modularity of the memory elements will then be evaluated in other gram-
negative microbes to establish how portable these approaches are across
different cellular chassis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been jointly
funded by Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations (CCF) in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE), Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.