* 2227897
* GP-UP: Immersive Connections in Geosciences: Paleontological Field Experiences and Bridges to Robust Career Training Opportunities
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Lucy Treado, University of Lynchburg
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2025
* USD 391,582.00

Despite relevance to economies and livelihoods, the geosciences remain one of
the least diverse disciplines in the United States. Specifically, racial
diversity in the environmental science and geoscience fields is staggeringly
low. To address this, the University of Lynchburg (UL), in partnership with the
Virginia Museum of Natural History (VMNH), will implement a project entitled
Immersive Connections in Geosciences: Paleontological Field Experiences and
Bridges to Robust Career Training Opportunities (the ICG Project). Building on a
longstanding partnership between UL’s Environmental Science Program and VMNH,
student participants will benefit from a complementary series of geoscience
field work and career training experiences, including excavation of dinosaur
remains in the field followed by an internship with VMNH, geoscience career
exploration, and broadly applicable career training. The target population for
the project will be rising sophomores and juniors who are low-income or are
members of communities historically excluded in geosciences. The project will
increase the overall number and diversity of undergraduate students in
geosciences at UL, thus contributing to a more diverse geoscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Immersive Connections in
Geosciences: Paleontological Field Experiences and Bridges to Robust Career
Training Opportunities (the ICG Project) is to increase the number of geoscience
majors and minors at the University of Lynchburg (UL), with an emphasis on
increasing the number of low-income students and students from groups
historically excluded in the geosciences. Student participants will benefit from
a complementary series of geoscience field work and career training experiences
including: 1) an immersive three-week summer paleontological field trip to
Wyoming for dinosaur excavation; 2) geoscience career preparation through a
mentored internship with the Virginia Museum of Natural History (VMNH); and 3)
broadly applicable career training and exploration provided by UL’s Career and
Professionalism Center. To foster participation, the project will be open to
students in any major; there will be no prerequisite classes; and financial
barriers to participating in the series of experiences will be eliminated. The
project will lead to a more robust, diverse, and inclusive geoscience workforce,
and it will strengthen and formalize an existing partnership between UL and
VMNH. More broadly, the project may serve as a model for future academic/non-
academic partnerships in the geosciences, and it may generate new interest in
geosciences among K-12 student populations, which could further strengthen the
geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.