* 2227444
* 2022 Chemical Separations GRC
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Joan Brennecke, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

Chemical separations are of immense and increasing importance in the modern
world. Separation steps are involved in producing every chemical product.
Unfortunately, the research communities working on chemical separations above
typically work in isolation. This conference, which will be the second in the
series, will bring together chemists, materials scientists and chemical
engineers working with a wide range of separations technologies. The ability for
attendees to hear from experts in a diverse range of applications domains will
be attractive to both seasoned researchers and early career professionals. The
conference program includes 21 invited speakers and 9 discussion leaders,
representing both chemical engineering and chemistry research. The invited
speakers come from academia, national labs and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference responds directly to issues
highlighted in the 2019 National Academies report “A Research Agenda for
Transforming Separation Science”. A key recommendation of that report is that
“The chemistry and chemical-engineering separation communities should seek
opportunities for substantive interactions that will inspire creativity and the
integration of concepts in research and education.” The GRC format achieves
precisely this goal, and does so under the aegis of one of the world’s most
respected scientific conference organizations. Chemical Separations is one of
the four major research areas in the Chemical Process Systems Cluster in the
Interfacial Engineering Program at NSF. The conference will contribute to
advancing the forefront of science and engineering by having presentation and
discussion of the latest fundamental discoveries and
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.