* 2227175
* Exploring the Limits of Scaling and 3D-integration for Edge-contacted Nanomaterial-based Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aaron Franklin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,671.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project aims to address longstanding questions
related to the electrical interface between semiconducting nanomaterials and
conducting metals. Nanomaterials show great promise for enabling a continuation
of Moore’s law, which relates to the increase in computational capability using
integrated circuits. By using nanomaterials for the semiconductor in
transistors, these core computing devices can be scaled to smaller dimensions
with increased performance compared to traditional semiconductors, such as
silicon. Yet, there remain many questions about how electrical current flow is
controlled between nanomaterials and contact metals. This project will bring
transformative change to the field by using custom-designed device structures to
study the behavior and control of electrical current at various metal-
nanomaterial interfaces. Using what is known as an edge-contact geometry, both
n-type and p-type nanomaterial-based transistors will be studied and ultimately
demonstrated in a 3D integrated circuit. The intellectual merits of the project
include addressing scientific questions related to how current is controlled at
metal-nanomaterial interfaces at scaled dimensions. The new insights generated
from these studies will advance the field of nanoelectronics through increased
understanding of the scaling limits and evidence for a new approach to achieving
3D integration of devices. The broader impacts of the project include the
advancement of devices for future integrated circuits and the engagement of
students underrepresented in engineering. The advancements in this project can
enable new integrated circuit designs for transistors to lower power consumption
in energy-hungry applications such as data centers. Through this project, two
graduate students from groups underrepresented in engineering will be supported,
along with several new outreach initiatives to involve K-12 and undergraduates
in the research effort. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials offer many advantages for use in
future transistor technologies. Yet, there remain scientific unknowns and
obstacles to the fabrication and integration of nanomaterial-based transistors.
This project seeks to address several longstanding questions related to metal-
nanomaterial contact interfaces for 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
and 1D carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Four distinct goals will be pursued, each
relating to a specific aspect of metal-nanomaterial contacts. The first goal
will be to address the question of whether contact gating in 2D transistors
influences the contact length scaling behavior. Virtually all devices to date
have included bottom-gate structures with the gate overlapping the source/drain
contacts. This produces a gating effect on the semiconductor beneath the metal
contacts and the influence of this effect has been hypothesized but never
experimentally studied – such a study will be pursued with a large set of
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) devices designed for characterization with and
without an overlapping gate. The second goal will be to determine the impact of
ambient air exposure during the fabrication of 1D edge contacts to 2D TMDs. Edge
contacts are the most scalable because they only interface with the nanomaterial
abruptly at the edge of the metal; however, there are very few reports of these
contact structures and these contain conflicting claims regarding the influence
of air exposure prior to metal contact deposition. A systematic and parametric
study will be performed on four distinct edge-contact formation processes using
2D MoS2 and Tungsten diselenide (WSe2). The third goal will be to develop the
first low-temperature (&lt;400 C) edge-contact formation process for CNTs, which
offer p-type devices that couple well with n-type MoS2 devices. Finally, the
fourth goal will be to integrate the edge-contacted n-type MoS2 transistors with
the edge-contacted p-type CNT transistors to demonstrate vertical monolithic
integration that is back-end-of-line (BEOL) compatible; what’s more this
demonstrated approach also cuts one masking layer out of the process by having
the edge contacts formed in the same step as the contact vias. Overall, the
results of pursuing these goals will be key scientific insights into metal-
nanomaterial contacts applicable to a broad range of device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.