* 2227183
* SHF:  Small: Multi-Version eXecution for Managed Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Luís Gabriel Ganchinho de Pina, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2026
* USD 540,658.00

Multi-Version eXecution (MVX) allows to run multiple versions of the same
program (variants) at the same time. MVX has direct applications in the broad
areas of reliability (many variants can tolerate one variant crashing), security
(a vulnerability exploited on one variant can be detected by the other
variants), and availability (one can perform a software update on one variant
while other variants keep executing). Unfortunately, current MVX cannot be
applied to programs written in managed languages, which make up the vast
majority of the programs used today. This project expands the applicability of
MVX to managed languages, thus making MVX applicable to the majority of programs
used nowadays. The project’s novelties are: (i) tools and techniques to apply
MVX to popular managed languages and programs written in them, such as Java,
Javascript, and Python; (ii) a direct application to apply MVX inside state-of-
the-art commercial internet browsers via the Javascript code that animates and
defines web pages; and (iii) tools and techniques to retrofit existing programs
with MVX support with minimal developer support. The project's impacts are: to
use MVX to improve the overall reliability, security, and availability of
software written in managed languages, which includes critical infrastructure
and modern internet browsers that millions of users in the US use every
day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current MVX techniques capture the interaction of a
program with the underlying Operating System. Such approaches fail for managed
languages, as managed languages have a rich runtime system with a non-
deterministic behavior not directly related with the program being executed
(e.g., when to perform Garbage Collection, when to perform Just-In-Time
compilation, and what code to compile/optimize). In this project, the research
team captures the interaction between the program and the language runtime,
which effectively lifts the level of abstraction of MVX and enables novel
solutions for well known limitations of MVX (e.g., multi-threading support,
divergence handling). The presented approach relies on semantics-preserving
automatic program transformations to enable MVX, and this project is divided in
three thrusts. The first thrust focuses on JavaScript as executed inside
commercial internet browsers. The second thrust focuses on Java and similar
languages (e.g., C#, Python), by identifying language-level abstractions to
capture via bytecode instrumentation and developing novel techniques to support
MVX for multi-threaded programs. Finally, the third thrust focuses on automatic
techniques that allow to execute divergent variants (e.g., two versions of the
same program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.