* 2227467
* BRITE Fellow: A New Paradigm of Equitable and Smart Multi-Hazard Resilience Modeling (ENSURE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Jamie Padgett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/29/2028
* USD 999,944.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow project seeks to disrupt and transform the way we
model infrastructure resilience and support just investments in infrastructure.
Reliable, effective functioning of infrastructure during and following hazard
events, like earthquakes, hurricanes, and floods, is essential to public safety,
economic vitality and quality of life. Risk-informed decisions that promote
resilience (or the ability of infrastructure to withstand, adapt to and recover
from such stressors) require confident predictions of system performance now and
into the future. However, this future brings uncertainties regarding dynamic,
evolving conditions; challenges with respect to a legacy of disparate impacts of
natural hazards and infrastructure (under)investment; and opportunities related
to smart systems and emerging data and algorithms. The new paradigm of Equitable
and Smart Multi-Hazard Resilience Modeling (ENSURE) provides the methodological
advances and contextual fabric for transforming infrastructure resilience
modeling to a practice that is both smart and equitable. Resulting benchmarks
and opensource tools not only propel research advances in this field, but can
benefit society through improved infrastructure safety and socially equitable
quality of service in hazard-prone regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
goals of this project are to: 1) Infuse intelligence into resilience modeling
(i.e., emerging data from smart systems and intelligent algorithms) to capture
uncertain, evolving conditions. 2) Uncover and overcome inequities in data and
algorithms that underpin such resilience quantification, essential to inform
just resilience enhancement. 3) Design and disseminate benchmark studies across
hazards, systems, and scales to evaluate the new paradigm of Equitable and Smart
Multi-Hazard Resilience Modeling (ENSURE). 4) Facilitate community-engaged
learning and implementation of ENSURE with a diverse team of students and
community partners, while having a lasting impact on student training and
broadening participation. 5) Initiate a virtual community of practice (VCoP) to
support networking, exchange, and mentoring related to advancement of female
faculty in the resilience modeling field. Overall, this high-risk, high-reward
pursuit formulates a new infrastructure resilience modeling framework that can,
for the first time, evolve with dynamic, uncertain conditions while uniquely
targeting socially equitable data collection and model performance. New
strategies will be posed to quantify and overcome the disparities not only in
resilient infrastructure performance across socially vulnerably populations, but
also inequities in our ability confidently predict this performance and support
just interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.