* 2227491
* BRITE Pivot: Growing Biological Methods to Improve Soil Behavior for Infrastructure Protection
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Brina Montoya, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 525,181.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot project will focus on exploring natural soil microbes
that can be harnessed to improve soil supporting civil infrastructure. The
performance of civil infrastructure is often limited by soft, loose, and/or
collapsible soil conditions. These issues are exacerbated by global climate
changes as additional stresses are imposed on our infrastructure. Therefore,
innovative methods are needed to support new or rehabilitated civil
infrastructure, and soil microbes may help address this issue. Microbes
naturally alter the subsurface, changing sand to sandstone over geologic time;
they also have the potential to create these changes over engineering time
frames. In order to use microbes as a natural, sustainable method to improve
soft soil, better understanding of the complex microbial communities in the soil
is needed. The outcomes of this work will advance the field of bio-mediated soil
improvement by characterizing soil microbial communities and exploring methods
to harness their natural processes to enhance soil behavior. The microbial
processes may also provide insight on mechanisms to capture carbon dioxide into
the soil. This may lead to the development of a soil improvement method that can
support infrastructure and sequester carbon dioxide, which would provide a
substantial benefit to society by simultaneously addressing climate change and
our aging infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research question
is, “Can we understand processes in existing microbial communities well enough
to harness them for soil improvement applications?” The research question will
be addressed by first identifying the active microbial communities within
relevant soil microcosms, and then by manipulating the geochemistry of the
microcosms to induce relevant microbial byproducts, such as mineral
precipitation or gas generation. An integrated meta-omic approach will address
the research question and develop a framework for site-specific bio-mediated
soil improvement; therefore, a pivot into meta-omics is needed. The pivot will
be accomplished through training in meta-omic approaches within a microbial
ecology-focused laboratory. The meta-omic approaches will be applied to various
relevant soil microcosms, coupled with physiological incubation experiments. The
ability of the identified indigenous microbial communities to improve soil
properties will be assessed through experiments and geotechnical testing (i.e.,
geophysical methods, triaxial and/or simple shear tests, and oedometer tests).
This work has the potential to bring about a new paradigm for infrastructure
support with the development of site-specific bio-mediated soil improvement.
Furthermore, the explored biological mechanisms could provide mechanisms that
not only reinforce the soil through carbonate precipitation but also capture
atmospheric carbon dioxide and sequester it into the
subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.