* 2227313
* Discerning Boron to Salinity Ratios in Arctic Marginal Ice Zones - BAMZ
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Penny Vlahos, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2025
* USD 288,672.00

The Arctic Ocean has an important role in regulating earthâ€™s climate. Though it
is only 3% of the total ocean it takes up 10% of the carbon dioxide we add to
the atmosphere every year. Though the Arctic has always had a permanent ice cap,
it is shrinking in size and by the year 2040 the permanent summer ice cap will
be gone. This implies that there will be an increased intensity in the amount of
ice that melts each year and there is little known about how the melting ice
will alter Arctic surface water chemistry. This study will sample Arctic Sea
ice, snow, and brine to map its chemistry profiles in the eastern Arctic with
the goal of making better predictions in the future Arctic environment as the
Arctic climate changes. The main focus is on the ice profiles of boron and
salinity which have a constant ratio in the open ocean, but this ratio may shift
in the marginal ice zone at salinities that are less than 30 g/kg and are
freshened by melt. This project will also create lessons that show how we use
chemistry to do this work and understand climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project joins the Atmospheric rivers and the onset of sea ice melt (ARTofMELT)
Expedition on the I/B Oden in May June 2023 to conduct sampling in the marginal
ice zone (MIZ), including ice cores and brine. The goal is to discern the boron
to salinity ratios of these unique systems and their impact on total alkalinity
and uptake of atmospheric CO2. The objectives include; 1) to determine the boron
to salinity (B/S) ratios in Arctic sea-ice and brine, 2) to determine the
carbonate system parameters in Arctic sea-ice and brine, 3) to compare the
profiles of all above parameters in annual vs multi-year ice and brine, 4) to
evaluate changes in these parameters over the ice-melt process at a given ice
station, and 5) to assess the impact on B/S ratios and total alkalinity in
adjacent meltwaters of the MIZ. Intellectual Merit: This study contributes to
biogeochemical, physical oceanographic, meteorological and climate change
research. The results of the B/S ratios will provide important corrections to
total alkalinity analyses in polar regions and improve parameterizations in
future Arctic CO2 uptake estimates and modeling efforts. Most notably, this
study will provide the first ever boron to salinity profiles in annual ice in
this region and the first multiyear ice profiles in any region. In addition, ice
and brine profiles of other biogeochemically relevant parameters will be
generated. It is expected that the results of this study will provide new
insights on the future biogeochemistry of the warming Arctic and Arctic CO2
uptake. Broader Impacts: Ten paired videos (from the cruise) and lesson plans
will be generated that target high school and undergraduate chemistry students
based on chemical concepts used in this research (equilibrium constants, acidity
constants, etc.). Following the cruise these will be posted on the project
webpage and shared with PBS Learning Media and other educational resource
platforms. All lessons will introduce the theme of Arctic ice loss. Researchers
will also continue to work with senior illustration students to create Arctic
sea ice retreat themed projects (books, posters, short animations) for the
broader public. This project will create opportunities for two female graduate
students, one of which will have the opportunity for international collaboration
in Boron analysis in Korea, and at least four undergraduate students from
minority groups through an REU program and the FirstGen program at University of
Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.