* 2227307
* BRITE Synergy: Chemically Resilient, Fouling Resistant Separation Membranes Manufactured Using Aqueous Phase Inversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 386,034.00

Polymer membranes are the modern technology used to remove particulates and
waterborne pathogens from dirty water and wastewater. During operation,
membranes get fouled and require regular physical and/or chemical cleaning,
which increases process downtime and causes membrane degradation. Additionally,
it is unfortunate that the modern process used to manufacture polymer membranes
relies heavily on toxic solvents and that the membrane itself does not prevent
the accumulation of particulates on its surface. This Boosting Research Ideas
for Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) award supports
fundamental research that integrates disaggregated prior results to manufacture
polymer membranes that resist fouling. The membranes will feature a new
chemistry that will enable an all-aqueous manufacturing process that does not
use toxic solvents. Selective polymer membranes that resist fouling are
preferred for wastewater treatment and water remediation applications, as well
as additional separation applications, such as industrial cleaning, food
processing, protein separation, and gene engineering. Therefore, results from
this research will benefit the U.S. economy, the environment, and society. This
research will educate, provide research experiences, and mentor a diverse
workforce at the emerging interface of chemical engineering, polymer science,
and microbiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the 1960s, non-solvent induced
phase separation has been used to manufacture polymer membranes, which are
essential in sustainable separation processes. Unfortunately, the manufacturing
process generates more than fifty billion liters of toxic solvent-contaminated
wastewater annually. This research provides fundamental insights into the
manufacturing of chemically resilient porous polymer membranes processed from
all-aqueous solutions of water-soluble charged polymers. Specifically, we will
(1) develop a mechanistic understanding of how to manufacture high performance
membranes from water soluble charged polymers, water, and salt; and (2) evaluate
the stability, performance, and fouling resistance of the porous membranes. By
conducting permeance testing in parallel to membrane manufacturing, we will have
a feedback loop between the chemistry, morphology, and performance of the
membranes. This research will establish an inclusive research team in polymer
membranes for water separations and also provide research opportunities for
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.