* 2227527
* BRITE Pivot: Investigating the Role of Collagen Piezoelectricity in Biomineralization Enhanced by Force Inputs
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Hanna Cho, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 556,014.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award supports fundamental research to answer the
question of how bone remodels itself into an ideal structure and material. Bone
is an extraordinarily ‘smart’ structural material, adapting its composition and
properties in response to external forces applied to it. By remodeling itself,
bone maintains its mechanically ideal design to support the skeletal system
throughout our lifetime. As such, a better understanding of the mechanism to
describe its adaptive behavior is extremely useful not only for improving
clinical treatment but also for mimicking its design strategy for various
engineering applications. This project will employ state-of-the-art techniques
matured in the field of micro/nano-technology to develop a multi-scale/multi-
physical method specifically designed to address this long-standing biological
question. The knowledge obtained from this study will provide strategies to
design ‘smart’ materials using piezoelectricity to direct mineralization. The
development of such smart materials could improve the safety, effectiveness, and
affordability of designs in diverse fields, including bone substitutes, bio-
materials, robotics, the automotive industry, clinical treatments, and
electronics. The project will support the local community, providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students and through the Korean-American
society. A mini-conference for high school and early college students will be
created as well as specific efforts in Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) at
the University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on discovering
bone’s mechano-transduction mechanism using changes in collagen piezo-
electricity during the process of mineralization. Collagen I is bone’s main
organic constituent and has a pivotal role in providing the structural template
for bio-mineralization. However, the underlying mechanism directing the
locations of mineral deposition are not known. The project will test the
hypothesis that collagen piezo-electricity guides the locations of mineral
deposition. The ability to convert mechanical stress into electric charge would
therefore be key to targeting the mineral constituents and modulating bone
stiffness. The team will design an experimental platform combining an advanced
Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) and a micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS)
loading device to image and biomineralization of collagen under physiological
loading to directly observe and investigate in-vitro mineralization correlated
with various conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.