* 2227185
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Small: An Integrated Reactive and Proactive Adversarial Learning for Cyber-Physical-Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kyriakos G Vamvoudakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The gradual deployment of self-driving cars will inevitably lead to the
emergence of a new important class of cyber-physical-human systems where
autonomous vehicles interact with human-driven vehicles via on-board sensors or
vehicle-to-vehicle communications. Reinforcement learning along with control
theory can help meet the safety requirements for real-time decision making and
Level 5 autonomy in self-driving vehicles. However, it is widely known that
conventional reinforcement learning policies are vulnerable to adversarial or
non-adversarial perturbations to their observations, similar to adversarial
examples for classifiers and/or reward (packet) drops of the learning. Such
issues are exacerbated by concerns of addressing resiliency as the use of open
communication and control platforms for autonomy becomes essential, and as the
industry continues to invest in such systems. Decision making mechanisms,
designed to incorporate agility with the help of reinforcement learning, allow
self-adaptation, self-healing, and self-optimization. This research will
contribute and unify the body of knowledge of several diverse fields including
reinforcement learning, security, automatic control, and transportation for
resilient autonomy with humans-in-the-loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, to counter action and observation manipulation as well as reward drops,
the principal investigators will leverage proactive switching policies that aim
(i) to provide robustness to adversarial inputs and reward drops in the closed-
loop reinforcement learning mechanisms, (ii) to increase the cost of
manipulation by deception, (iii) to limit the exposure of vulnerable actions and
observations, and (iv) to provide stability, optimality, and robustness
guarantees. Ultimately, the investigators will develop fundamental contributions
to each of the above-mentioned fields and amalgamate these fields to provide a
unique synthesis framework. The outcomes of this project will increase levels of
confidence in autonomous technologies from ethical perspectives by providing an
underpinning for curtailing accidents. The proposed framework can be extended to
other key enablers of the global economy, including smart and connected cities,
healthcare, and networked actions of smart systems while decreasing
environmental pollution and minimizing the adverse environmental impacts on
human health. The project will train the next generation of students from
various levels, ages, and cultures through well-coordinated, level appropriate
involvement in research and educational activities while providing a unique
opportunity for the students to appreciate efficient, autonomous, and low-cost
designs. This project will also contribute to future engineering curricula,
pursue a substantial integration of research and education, and provide
opportunities to engage students from the underrepresented
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.