* 2227246
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Opportunity to acquire continuous, high-resolution geochemical proxies for paleoclimate, paleoenvironment, and modern hydrogeology from CPCP cores
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 35,341.00

This project will generate a continuous record of chemical composition changes
through rock cores collected in Petrified Forest National Park as part of the
NSF-funded Colorado Plateau Coring Project. The study has three main objectives,
1) to develop an understanding of how changes in the chemistry of sediments
reflect changes in past climate from 200-million-year-old river and flood plain
systems, 2) to use this record to develop an understanding of the influence of
both CO2 and changes in Earthâ€™s orbital parameters on past climatic variations
and 3) develop a chemical dataset that will provide a baseline understanding of
the distribution of potential ground water contaminants (e.g., As, U) in
adjacent lands of the Navajo Nation and surrounding regions that draw water from
the cored strata. The data generated in this project will serve as the basis of
a project for a 2022 summer REU student from Navajo Technical University. In
addition, this project will support two early career scientists and two Columbia
University graduate students. Finally, the project team will develop curriculum
and outreach products through the Rutgers Geology Museum and facilitate
synergistic activities on related environmental issues in New Jersey and
Colorado Plateau regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Triassic Chinle and Moenkopi
Formations occupy huge areas of the Colorado Plateau and record the history of
Triassic environmental change on an immense alluvial plain and are famous for
their fossil record of the evolution of continental ecosystems including
dinosaurs and mammals. The physical, paleomagnetic, and geochronological
stratigraphy of CPCP-1 cores has been described in a suite of recent papers and
placed into a larger paleoenvironmental and global temporal context, but the
chemical stratigraphy of the cores has yet to be analyzed. Several small
projects have demonstrated the utility of such data, but the lack of synoptic
chemical datasets from these cores hinders their potential for both paleo- and
modern (including their impact on groundwater) environmental analysis. This
project will fill this deficit with the acquisition of continuous XRF chemical
data that will permit tests of hypotheses of orbital pacing of climate (long
eccentricity and inclination cycles) as recorded in these strata and of how
cyclical climate and the deep time hydrological history of these strata relates
to present stratigraphic distribution of potential geogenic contaminants and
their migration into present day aquifers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.