* 2227105
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: The Einstein Toolkit ecosystem: Enabling fundamental research in the era of multi-messenger astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zachariah Etienne, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 272,334.00

A team of experts from five institutions (University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, Georgia Institute of Technology, Rochester Institute of Technology,
Louisiana State University, and West Virginia University) are collaborating on
further development of the Einstein Toolkit, a community-driven, open-source
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem providing computational tools supporting research
in computational astrophysics, gravitational physics, and fundamental science.
The new tools address current and future challenges in gravitational wave source
modeling, improve the scalability of the code base, and support an expanded
science and user community around the Einstein Toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Einstein Toolkit is a community-driven suite of research-grade Python codes for
performing astrophysics and gravitational wave calculations. The code is open-
source, accessible via Conda (an open source package management system) and
represents a long-term investment by NSF in providing such computational
infrastructure. The software is designed to simulate compact binary stars as
sources of gravitational waves. This project focuses on the sustainability of
the Einstein Toolkit; specific research efforts center around the development of
three new software capabilities for the toolkit: &lt;br/&gt;• CarpetX -- a new
mesh refinement driver and interface between AMReX, a software framework
containing the functionality to write massively parallel block-structured
adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) code, and Cactus, a framework for building a
variety of computing applications in science and engineering;&lt;br/&gt;• NRPy+
-- a user-friendly code generator based on Python; and &lt;br/&gt;• Canuda -- a
new physics library to probe fundamental physics. &lt;br/&gt;Integration of
graphics processing units (GPUs) will incorporate modern heterogeneous computing
devices into the system and will enhance the capability of the toolkit. The end
product is sustainable through integration into the Einstein Toolkit, yet also
includes an active community maintaining and enhancing the foundational
components. Broader impacts are enhanced through training, documentation and a
support infrastructure that reduces the barrier to adoption by the community.
The team is also creating a science portal with additional educational and
showcase resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation's
Big Idea activities in Windows on the Universe (WoU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.