* 2227814
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long Term Establishment of Social Interactive Ties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Dilpreet Singh, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 12,528.00

This project investigates how social traditions may adapt long-distance
economies to local community structures. Previous research suggested that long-
distance economies generate inequality by creating opportunities for greater
wealth hoarding and status differentiation with prestige goods from distant
regions – thereby dissolving local community bonds. However, historians and
ethnographers have instead discovered multiple case studies of group-oriented
societies altering how long-distance economies interface to limit activities
such as wealth-hoarding and blunting the overall inequality. Archaeologists in
particular have found examples of major urban settlements involved in long-
distance economies that instead retained community-based social structures. Such
group-oriented societies are often maintained through regular community-building
practices steeped in values of tradition. While it was previously thought that
long-distance economies have a “homogenizing” effect, economy rarely overrides
tradition and both often intertwine to produce diverse social outcomes.
Investigating how long-distance economies localize in such societies will then
further understanding on the many possible trajectories cultures undertake in
globalizing spheres all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
specifically aims to examine the outcomes of community-building practices on the
localization of long-distance economies through mortuary ceramics. Ceramics
often index the circulation of goods in the archaeological record, and mortuary
ceramics specifically were often curated as prestige or ritual materials. This
project focuses on a region which over long periods of time was involved in long
distance trade. Associated mortuary traditions appear to have limited wealth
hoarding and status differentiation and instead encouraged community-building
dynamics through ceramic material. In collaboration with a research reactor,
this project will employ compositional analysis that differentiates ceramic
manufactures to examine how such ceramics circulated and were ultimately
deposited in tombs. The acquired data would then show who was involved in such
exchanges and ultimately allow for evaluation of how successfully community-
building practices helped preserve a group-oriented social structure in the
context of long-distance trade. The project data will also be used to prepare
public-facing visual materials that summarize archaeological research for
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.