* 2227704
* I-Corps: A Platform to Automatically Measure Users Susceptibility to Social Engineering Attacks
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of security awareness technology for corporate employees who are
susceptible to social engineering attacks; i.e., phishing attacks. To identify
those who are susceptible to phishing attacks, organizations typically self-
phish, which is phishing one’s own employees and seeing who responds.
Organizations concerned with cybersecurity may hire services or conduct phishing
campaigns themselves. Self-phishing may only identify those who are extremely
susceptible due to the relatively generic phishing emails that are typically
used during such campaigns. Organizations that use self-phishing to identify
susceptible workers may have a false sense of security. There is a continuing
need for a ways to identify workers susceptible to more complex phishing
campaigns. The proposed technology measures users’ susceptibility to phishing
attacks from publicly available information about those
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a technology platform to measure individuals in an organization that are
susceptible to phishing attacks. The proposed technology uses publicly available
information to quantify users’ personality traits, demographics, education, and
experiences that are known to predict phishing susceptibility. That
constellation of data is then used to compute an estimate how susceptible each
user is to a phishing attack. The proposed platform may enhance an
organization's efforts to identify individuals who would most benefit from
security awareness training. In addition, the proposed technology may have a
broad impact on enhancing penetration testing that targets people who are
operating critical infrastructure, i.e., the weakest links in security systems.
The project also may significantly impact the development of effective
cybersecurity education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.