* 2227707
* Understanding the Formation and Impacts of Warm-Season Trans-Atlantic African Dust Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Bing Pu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 360,739.00

Mineral dust is emitted from dry and sparsely vegetated land surface by strong
winds. In the atmosphere, dust particles modify radiation budget (via
absorption, scattering, and emission) and interact with clouds, affecting a wide
range of atmospheric processes. Each year a large amount of African dust is
transported toward the tropical Atlantic Ocean. The westward transport pathway
is regulated by atmospheric circulations and reaches its maximum northward
position in boreal summer, when the hot, dry Saharan dust plumes often drift
across the tropical North Atlantic into the Caribbean Basin and the United
States. Extremely high dust loadings over the tropical North Atlantic are
reported during some African dust outbreaks, along with high surface
concentrations of dust over Puerto Rico and the southern United States that
greatly degraded air quality in these downwind regions. While significant
progress has been made toward characterizing trans-Atlantic African dust plumes,
the causes and impacts of warm season extreme trans-Atlantic dust events are not
fully understood. For instance, it is not clear why enhanced dust emissions in
North Africa resulted in extremely high dust loading over the tropical Atlantic
in some years but not others. This project will use satellite products, ground
observations, and reanalysis to identify atmospheric circulation and land
surface processes that are responsible for the extreme trans-Atlantic dust
events and to examine how extreme dust plumes affect energy balance, clouds, and
air quality along their westward transport pathway. The relative roles of dust
emissions and transport in the formation of extreme trans-Atlantic African dust
plumes will be examined in both observations and numerical experiments using a
regional chemistry model. The proposed work includes scientific training for
undergraduate and graduate students and educational activities through outreach
events held by the University of Kansas Natural History
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Africa is a prominent global source of
atmospheric aerosols. Advanced knowledge of the variability, causes, and impacts
of extreme trans-Atlantic African dust events will allow better understanding of
the role of aerosols in the climate system, which is one of the major sources of
uncertainty in evaluating current and predicting future climate change. The
findings will benefit future studies of trans-continental dust events and air
pollution forecast in the United States. The project will integrate research
with education by engaging undergraduate students into the project and by
incorporating research activities and findings into undergraduate and graduate
courses. The project will support one graduate student and two undergraduate
students to train the next generation of climate and atmospheric scientists. In
addition, the investigators will participate in outreach events held by the
University of Kansas Natural History Museum to share the findings with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Climate and
Large-Scale Dynamics (CLD) and Physical and Dynamic Meteorology (PDM) programs
in Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences (AGS) as well as the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.