* 2227821
* ORE-CZ: Riverine Biogeochemical Export From High-Latitude Catchments: The Role of Glaciers and Extreme Hydrologic Events
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 199,879.00

Northern regions like Alaska are currently warming twice as fast as the global
average. This warming is melting glaciers, which changes the flow of water in
streams and can trigger the onset of flood events known as “outbursts” in rivers
beneath glaciers. Changes in the way that water flows through watersheds also
has implications for the quality of water being transported by rivers to the
ocean. This project will evaluate how changing glaciers influence the movement
of streamwater, nutrients, and minerals from watersheds along the Alaskan coast
to the nearshore waters in the Gulf of Alaska. Project personnel will sample
rivers with glaciers throughout the year and intensively during large storms and
“outburst” floods. The project will provide critical information about how
climate change will impact the flow of freshwater and nutrients into food webs
in downstream marine environments. This is important because the Gulf of Alaska
contains one of the most productive marine fisheries on Earth. The project will
also provide skills and training for undergraduate students at the University of
Alaska Southeast, providing them the opportunity to become the next generation
of earth scientists. Finally, project leaders and students will work closely
with the Mendenhall Glacier Visitor Center in Juneau to develop outreach
materials for educating visitors about the environmental impacts of glacier
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change, extreme events, and land-cover
transformation are triggering dramatic changes to the Earth’s critical zone.
Disturbances to the catchment hydrologic cycle, such as the melting of glaciers,
are particularly consequential because water is involved in all critical zone
processes. Therefore, understanding changes to the timing and magnitude of water
flow through catchments and its influence on critical zone structure and
processes, such as biogeochemical cycling, is central to critical zone science.
This project will use in-situ sensors and manual measurements to quantify yields
of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus as well as mercury in coastal watersheds of
southeast Alaska experiencing rapid glacier recession. Extreme hydrologic
events, such as atmospheric rivers and glacial lake outburst floods will also be
sampled intensively to evaluate their impacts on riverine biogeochemical
budgets. By sampling above and below a pro-glacial lake, we will also examine
the role that these ubiquitous features of glacier watersheds play in modulating
downstream flows of sediments and solutes. Undergraduate students from the
University of Alaska Southeast will be involved in all aspects of the project
including sensor deployment, data collection, laboratory analysis, and
presentation of project results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.