* 2227614
* BRITE Pivot: Engineered Extracellular Matrix Cues Affecting Endothelial Phenotypic Change
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ngan Huang, Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 608,000.00

Blood vessel cells known as endothelial cells can change to another type of cell
and contribute to vascular disease. This change is associated with plaque
formation within atherosclerotic vessels. A key component of blood vessels is
the underlying scaffolding structure that provides physical support and
instructs endothelial cells. It isn't known if the small-scale molecular
structure of the blood vessel affects the changes in cell type. This Boosting
Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE)
Pivot award supports research to discover new knowledge of how the mechanical
properties of the scaffolding structure influence endothelial fate. The findings
from this award may influence the design of new therapies to treat vascular
diseases. Therefore, the findings from this award will benefit our society by
advancing national health. The educational activities promote the development of
military veteran college students from underserved communities through lectures,
laboratory training, and summer research experiences that broaden participation
in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endothelial-mesenchymal transition
is a biological process in which vascular endothelial cells acquire a
mesenchymal identity. This transition is involved in cardiovascular diseases
such as atherosclerosis, in which endothelial cells give rise to smooth muscle-
like cells within the plaque lesion. How the biochemical and biomechanical cues
from the extracellular matrix milieu influences this transition is largely
unknown. The project will engineer microenvironments composed of combinatorial
extracellular matrix proteins to model that of atherosclerotic plaques in which
this transition takes place. The research objective is to apply multivariate
experimental design and analysis to quantify the role and interaction effects
among extracellular matrix components and shear stress on endothelial-
mesenchymal transition. Through this award, a deeper research program focused on
vascular mechanobiology in both technology development as well in the
application of single-cell transcriptomics and multifactorial analysis, will be
achieved. This award will form the foundation of a new research trajectory
focusing on the mechanobiology of extracellular matrix interactions for improved
understanding of cardiovascular disease progression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.