* 2227484
* SemiSynBio-III: Novel Memory Devices for High-Density Data Storage and In-Memory Computing Based on Integrated Synthetic DNA-Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Neela Yennawar, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,424,548.00

Non-volatile memory (NVM) devices are used to store data in smartphones,
tablets, computers, hardware for Internet of Things, wireless routers and
communication systems, and other electronic devices. In addition, NVMs also have
applications in computing hardware to accelerate Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning algorithms. However, currently available memory devices have
limitations and novel techniques for storing tremendous amount of data that can
surpass the density of data storage by a thousand-fold or more needs
investigation. Storing data in synthetic-DNA is a promising route as it is the
densest known storage medium with the information encoded lasting forever in a
conducive environment. However, purely DNA-storage is based on a chemical nature
that imposes its own set of challenges such as high-cost, read error, and
incompatibility with Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) integrated
circuits (ICs). The bottleneck with DNA-storage is its efficiency, as it is
million times slower than the timescales in a silicon memory chip. Considering
the time- &amp; effort-consuming coding/decoding process for typical DNA
molecular memory, as well as its volatile nature due to polymerization-based
sequencing-identified coding mechanism, simply using DNA as a medium for
information coding remains technically inefficient. The issues limiting DNA
usage for data storage can be addressed if an appropriate medium to host
synthetic-DNA can be synergistically designed to control subtle inter-molecular
interaction to generate multiple states and the devices based on this
biomaterial can be integrated with CMOS ICs. Organometallic halide perovskite
(OHP) semiconductors provide a promising host material to support DNA due to
process compatibility leading to the development of novel OHP-DNA-biomaterials
based high-density memory arrays. This research will address grand-challenges of
exploring novel concepts of integrating DNA-Semiconductor biomolecular complexes
for high-density data storage on traditional semiconductor platforms. The
project will provide significant opportunities for multi-disciplinary training
of graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds by developing a
new course to be offered at University of Cincinnati (UC) and Penn State
University (PSU) for advancing the next generation of computing based on
biomolecular complexes beyond just traditional semiconductors. Existing
University programs like G-FEST and NERDS will be leveraged to support high-
school and middle school outreach efforts at UC and PSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to develop
high-density memory devices based on hybrid OHP and synthetic-DNA biomaterials
and demonstrate its application for data-storage and In-Memory Computing (IMC)
in integrated optoelectronic systems with CMOS-back-end. DNA provides tremendous
opportunities to tune its properties by modifying the parameters such as base-
pairs, sequence, length, rotation, and crystallinity for electrical and optical
properties in a hybrid OHP-DNA memory device. Specific aims of the project
include: 1. Modeling, design, and synthesis of specific DNA sequences for
integration with OHP semiconductor; 2. Development of OHP-DNA biomaterials and
characterization; 3. Development of OHP-DNA-based high-density memory devices
and integration with OHP-optoelectronic systems and CMOS Back-End of Line
(BEOL). Collaborative team between the University of Cincinnati (UC) and Penn
State University (PSU) has expertise and state of the art resources necessary to
successfully complete the proposed aims. A successful completion will lead to
(i) fundamental understanding of communications between synthetic-DNA and OHP
and methods for tailoring OHP in conjunction with DNA engineering to achieve
high-density multi-state NVMs, (ii) routes to synthesize OHP-DNA biomaterials
capable of data storage, (iii) ICs with integrated OHP-DNA memory devices with
CMOS in back-end and approaches for computing and data-storage. These results
will have transformative impacts on providing novel DNA-based technologies for
future data storage needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been jointly
funded by Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations (CCF) in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE), Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.