* 2227080
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Toward Binary Neutron Star Mergers on a Moving-mesh
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Zachariah Etienne, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 226,347.00

The project will develop a computational code for modeling the mergers of
neutron star binaries. The new code will combine the efficiencies of a fluid
dynamics code and a numerical relativity code to produce a code that can more
quickly and accurately predict the expected optical afterglows from neutron star
binary mergers. This will help us to learn more about the origin of heavy
elements in the universe. The project will also support the development of
training materials for numerical relativity at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. The work will also be incorporated into the citizen-science project
"BlackHoles@Home" that is focused on gravitational wave astronomy. Public
outreach efforts will also be presented at the UW-Milwaukee planetarium. This
award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine the moving-mesh
hydrodynamics code MANGA with an efficient numerical relativity code SENR/NRPy+.
Each code relies on using an appropriate grid to model the physics. This project
will integrate the two codes to allow for a moving-mesh general relativistic
hydrodynamics code that will be ideal for studying compact object mergers. Upon
development of the new code, the project will apply it to models of binary
neutron star mergers with both polytropic and realistic equations of state. The
PI at UW-Milwaukee will give general presentations on neutron stars and black
holes at the planetarium and train a small number of undergraduates to organize
and run planetarium shows and special events. The PI at West Virginia University
will continue to support the Jupyter notebooks for SENR/NRPy+ as pedagogical
training tools for students in the field of general relativistic hydrodynamics.
Any improvements in SENR/NRPy+ produced in this project will be incorporated in
the planned "BlackHoles@home" citizen-science project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.