* 2227675
* From Vision to Impact: Propagating the Recommendations from the American Psychological Association’s Introductory Psychology Initiative (APA-IPI)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Susan Orsillo, American Psychological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,959.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the teaching of
Introductory Psychology as a core STEM course. High-quality STEM courses can
help to recruit and retain a talented, diverse STEM workforce and elevate all
students’ understanding of science as an essential tool that can be used to
address complex societal challenges. Introductory Psychology is the most popular
STEM course, with over 1.6 million students taking the course each year. The
American Psychological Association’s Introductory Psychology Initiative (APA-
IPI) includes a set of recommendations and proposed student learning outcomes
designed to transform the Introductory Psychology course. The goal of this
conference is to bring together educators and scientists in Psychology and other
STEM disciplines to develop a robust plan to put these recommendations into
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this conference will be early
adopters of the APA-IPI recommendations recruited from a diversity of
educational institutions (e.g., community colleges, 4-year institutions,
graduate institutions, minority serving institutions). Over a series of virtual
meetings, facilitated discussion will be used to achieve four objectives. First
is to distinguish the factors that have facilitated, from those that have
hindered, the propagation efforts of APA-IPI early adopters. Second is to
discover solutions that have helped early adopters overcome challenges. Third is
to identify the resources and supports adopters need to implement the
recommendations with fidelity. Fourth is to develop a propagation plan that is
aligned with users' needs. The knowledge generated through the conference will
be documented in conference deliverables (including a report and articles to be
submitted for publication in peer-reviewed scientific journals) aimed at
providing guidance to stakeholders interested in implementing the APA-IPI
recommendations, as well as scientists interested in improving methods that can
be used to effectively propagate educational innovations. Support for this
workshop comes from the IUSE: EHR Program which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.