* 2227729
* NSFGEO-NERC: The Blueprint for Marine Biomineralization in a Changing Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jennifer Fehrenbacher, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 153,568.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of
the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This
Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed
by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own investigators and
component of the work. This project will study shell formation in an important
marine organism, the foraminifera. Foraminifera are sand-grain-sized, shell-
forming plankton. They are common in the modern ocean and in the fossil record.
Their shell composition depends on ocean conditions during growth, and so their
fossils are used to record Earth’s climate history. Foraminifera shells also
play an important role in the carbon cycle. They are responsible for up to 80%
of the carbon that is deposited on the seafloor. Understanding shell formation
is important because changes in ocean warming and pH threatens foraminiferal
survival. However, foraminiferal shell formation is not well understood. In part
this is because the genome for these species is unknown. A genome is required to
identify proteins responsible for shell forming processes. This study will close
this knowledge gap by identifying key shell proteins in two species. The project
will grow specimens under conditions that mimic likely future climate and will
identify differences in shell proteins in response to growth conditions. The
results will provide a 'blueprint for shell formation' in foraminifera. The
genome and protein sequence datasets will be useful to researchers in marine
biology and chemistry, evolution, climate science, and material science. Broader
impacts include graduate and undergraduate student field research experience and
training. International participants will also gain experience growing
foraminifera in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project will establish the molecular biological controls of
biomineralization in two model species of single-celled foraminifera. This is
crucial for quantifying the marine calcite budget and assessing the impact of
calcification feedbacks on future atmospheric carbon dioxide, as well as
producing accurate interpretation of the foraminiferal shell geochemical archive
that underpins future climate change projections. Despite decades of research
into how foraminifera biomineralization, our understanding lags far behind other
marine calcifiers, owing to a lack of genome/transcriptome information that is
vital for identification of foraminifera shell matrix proteins (SMPs). SMPs in
the shell’s organic matrix layers trigger nucleation of calcium carbonate and
are responsible for shell formation and its geochemical properties. The
identification of SMPs will aid in our understanding of how biomineralization
will respond to future environmental change and thus it is imperative that we
resolve biomineralization mechanisms in these critically important marine
calcifiers. This project addresses that need. The interdisciplinary team’s
expertise will be capitalized to produce the genome and transcriptome data
required via Single Cell Sequencing and exploit innovative high throughput
microfluidic approaches to identify and characterize key SMPs in foraminifera
biomineralization. Foraminifera culturing experiments will be conducted to
investigate molecular/protein responses to different climate scenarios. The
project team combines a unique set of skills that enable us, for the first time,
to investigate all aspects of the biological control of the biomineralization
process within the foraminifera. By linking genes, transcripts, proteins, and
calcite formation our aim is to generate a ‘blueprint of biomineralization’.
Identifying these key molecules will provide the first ever opportunity to
identify any changes in the foraminifera SMPs in response to changes in
temperature and pH, and assess the vulnerability of foraminiferal
biomineralization to future climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.