* 2227609
* SemiSynBio-III: Power Management Strategies for Computing and Storage in Biological, Biohybrid and Synthetic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Martha Kim, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Power management is key to energy-efficient computing and data storage in
biological and synthetic systems. This project proposes an interactive approach
to study the specific issue of power management in computer systems nerve cells,
and emerging hybrid biocomputation devices. Power management refers to the
control of energy expenditures in response to demand. For example, a computer
may “go to sleep” when not in use, or an organism may reduce blood supply to a
dormant region of the brain. Advanced power management can deliver significant
energy savings in engineering systems. The project will study power management
in brain cells with the goal of discovering the natural strategies. The natural
strategies will be compared with engineering approaches for broader
understanding and emerging of new concepts, which will be tested in new bio-nano
computing and storage devices. It is expected these strategies will result in
better performance at lower energy consumption for biological information
storage and biocomputers. The team consists of a computer engineer, a biologist,
and a materials scientist and their students. An integrated approach to
educating K-12, undergraduate and graduate students at the intersection of
semiconductor technologies and synthetic biology will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining engineering strategies for power
management, testable hypotheses about biological mechanisms will be developed.
It is expected that the biological mechanisms, in turn, will point towards new
bioinspired engineering solutions. The project will define power management
strategies employed in neurons and glia (Theme 1), integrate power management
into bio-nano hybrid position-based computing devices (Theme 3), and develop
tools supporting the design, simulation, and verification of position- based
bio-nano circuits with integral power management (Theme 5). Successful
completion of the project will deliver an integrated perspective on the benefits
and ultimate performance limits of power management strategies, generate new
hypotheses and insights into the unparalleled energy efficiency of biological
computation, demonstrate advances in the engineering bio-nano hybrid systems,
and translate the insights into new solutions for semiconductor devices. An
integrated educational approach to enable diverse audiences of K- 12,
undergraduate and graduate students to acquire joint expertise in semiconductors
and synthetic biology will be developed. The proposed research has the potential
to benefit society by advancing our understanding of the mechanisms underlying
neuronal functioning, which will advance the prevention and treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases; by creating progress towards materials resembling
“living materials” in their ability to sense, compute, and respond; and by
reducing the energy requirements for data processing and storage, which
minimizes the rapidly increasing carbon footprint of
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been jointly funded by Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO), Division of Computing and Communication Foundations (CCF) in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.