* 2227756
* Role of Mitochondria as Intracellular Shuttles for Nuclear Gene-regulatory Transcription Factors During Pluripotent Cell Division and Fate Specification
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Dori Woods, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

In mammals, fertilization occurs through the joining of an egg and a sperm to
produce a single-cell zygote. This single cell divides a few times to form a
blastocyst composed of about 100 identical cells, but then a so-called cell fate
decision is made: some blastocyst cells will develop into the embryo, and the
others will develop into the placenta, which nourishes the developing embryo. A
long-standing question in developmental biology is “What factors in the early
blastocyst trigger cell-fate decision-making?” This project will explore the
hypothesis that the energy-producing factories of cells, called mitochondria,
guide cell-fate decisions by acting as shuttles for the delivery of factors that
drive alternate cell fates. New technology will be applied to compare
mitochondrial features--such as size, energy profiles, and protein makeup--in
mouse embryo versus placental cells. The results are expected to shed light on
key steps of cell-fate decision-making and uncover a previously unknown role for
mitochondria in this process. During this research, undergraduate and graduate
students from diverse backgrounds will participate in innovative training
activities using state-of-the-art scientific tools to forge new discoveries in
biology and technology, geared towards development of a deeper understanding of
how cell fate is regulated. The project also will implement an innovative team-
mentorship strategy to expand opportunities for undergraduate students
interested in pursuing Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics
(STEM)-based careers to engage in research, with a focus on student populations
who are historically underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering
the core mechanisms that direct cell fate remains a high-priority research area
in organ development, function, aging, and disease. The first cell fate decision
in mammals, which drives formation of the inner cell mass (destined to become
the embryo) and the trophectoderm (TE; destined to become the placenta), occurs
during the later stages of preimplantation embryogenesis. Although several
models have been offered to explain how this process is orchestrated, the
identity of the actual initiating driver(s) of embryonic cell lineage
specification remains unknown. One of the earliest fate-determination signals
identified thus far is TEA Domain transcription factor 4 (Tead4), which
activates transcription of genes required for TE identity. Supporting its
critical role in cell fate specification, disruption of the Tead4 gene in mice
generates morulae that fail to generate TE, resulting in embryonic lethality.
With Tead4 being identified as one of the, if not the, earliest signal(s) in
embryonic cell fate decision-making, it remains unclear how Tead4 function is
restricted only to those cells destined to form the TE. This project will
combine a technological advancement in mitochondrial subpopulation analysis with
a mitochondrial lineage-tracing approach to test the hypothesis that
differential allocation of mitochondrial subtypes, which differ in their
biochemical properties as well as in their proteomic landscapes--including Tead4
internalization--during embryonic development drives cell lineage fate
determination. By testing the significance of mitochondrial subtype
heterogeneity and inter-organelle communication to TE versus ICM specification,
this project will assess if mitochondrial heterogeneity guides cell fate
determination, perhaps through an as-yet undiscovered role for mitochondria as
transcription factor ‘shuttles’ during asymmetric cell
divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.