* 2227975
* ORE-CZ: Ecohydrological Controls on Soil Respiration and the Apparent Respiratory Quotient Across a Dynamic Storage Gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* John Knowles, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 10/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Soils contain more carbon than vegetation and the atmosphere combined, and soil
respiration describes the transfer of soil carbon to the atmosphere via plant
roots and microbes. As air temperatures rise and water availability changes,
changes in the soil respiration flux represent significant potential feedback to
the greenhouse effect and the magnitude of future warming. Accordingly, this
project will take advantage of soil carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen data
provided by the NSF-funded Dynamic Water Critical Zone (CZ) Thematic Cluster to
quantify the variability of soil respiration and the fate of soil-produced CO2
with respect to changes in soil development, vegetation, and topography that
mediate water availability across representative semi-arid montane elevation and
climatic gradients. The research will support career training and learning
experiences for graduate and undergraduate students at California State
University, Chico, which is a federally designated Hispanic-Serving Institution
(HSI), a Primarily Undergraduate Institution, and where more than 50% of the
student population are first generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A “bedrock to treetop” CZ approach considers feedbacks
between soil, water, landscape position, and living organisms at Earth’s
surface. Dynamic water storage - water with intermediate residence times -
sustains CZ function between precipitation events, and is critically important
to soil respiration and carbon cycling. As a result, the main objective of this
research is to quantify the importance of dynamic water storage to the integral
CZ functions of soil respiration and the Apparent Respiratory Quotient (ARQ)
that determines the degree to which soil-produced CO2 is respired directly to
the atmosphere versus transported laterally or vertically with infiltrating
water. The investigators will specifically test the hypotheses that (1) soil
respiration and the ARQ will be proportional to the volume of dynamic water
storage in the root zone, and (2) that dynamic water storage capacity will
interact with complex terrain to determine the variability of soil respiration
and ARQ over space and time. Because research activities will be replicated and
integrated across multiple watersheds, they will allow for evaluation of the
transferability of process-based information, toward a more comprehensive
understanding of CZ carbon cycling with direct implications for the climate
change mitigation potential of semi-arid montane ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported with co-funding of the HSI
Program which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.