* 2227063
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Cardiotoxic Drug Screening Using Bioprinted Myocardial Tissue Model with Self-Sensing Capacity
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Cunjiang Yu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,743.00

Cardiotoxicity represents a major segment of drug toxicities, so there are
considerable concerns about the cardiovascular safety profile of drugs used for
non-cardiovascular medication. Conventional drug screening approaches, such as
using a 2-dimensional cell culture and animal models, have notable limitations.
Approaches are needed to fabricate cardiac tissue models that more reliably
reproduce human physiology with respect to their structure and function. For
cardiotoxicity assays it is equally important to monitor the behavior of the
model tissue in response to drugs, ideally in a label-free and non-invasive
manner. The goal of this research project is to develop an engineered cardiac
tissue model for cardiotoxicity screening that will facilitate drug screening
and personalized medicine. The design of the 3-dimensional model involves
cardiac tissues that are embedded with soft and stretchable microelectronics
that can continuously measure cardiotoxicity within the tissue. The outcomes of
this project could lead to significant cost reductions for drug development by
accurately predicting human responses to drug candidates. The research also
could help reduce the use of animal models for drug screening. The project will
provide opportunities to promote STEM education for K-12 students, especially
those from under-represented groups, and to disseminate science and engineering
knowledge to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
develop a multi-material, stereolithographically-bioprinted cardiac tissue model
with embedded soft and stretchable microelectronics. The main research idea is
that seamless integration of mechanically matched soft microelectronics and
bioprinted cardiac models will allow for continuous, in situ and intra-tissue
measurements of cardiotoxicity in real time and in response to pharmaceutical
compounds. The project participants will conduct experimental and analytical
studies to design, optimize, fabricate, characterize and validate the hybridized
cardiac tissue model. Specific steps include 1) optimizing the design and
fabrication of the engineered microvascularized cardiac tissue model to achieve
structural and functional similarity to its in vivo counterpart, 2) designing,
analyzing, fabricating, and testing soft, stretchable microelectronics, 3)
integrating the soft microelectronics with the bioprinted cardiac tissue to form
hybridized cardiac tissue model, and 4) studying the screening of a panel of
drugs with induced electrophysiological and mechanical beating signals from the
intra-tissue microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.