* 2227347
* EAGER: Exploring the RNA World and the RNA-peptide world hypothesis using a novel Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry (DCC) system
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* George Fox, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The universal biomolecule RNA possesses dual abilities to serve as a repository
for genetic information and to catalyze reactions. These properties make RNA
unique and different from the other two biomolecules, DNA and proteins, which
led to the idea that an early ‘RNA World’ may have existed. An alternate
hypothesis is rapidly gaining traction – that RNA and peptides both contributed
to early molecular evolution by mutually supporting each other. Understanding
the potential events that might have occurred in an ‘RNA World’, or ‘RNA-
Peptide’ world, is important to understand the origins and early history of
life. A novel Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry (DCC) system will be employed to
address how RNAs recombine when subjected to cycles of cleavage and ligation
under laboratory conditions. The work will be carried out at the University of
Houston, a minority serving institution. Undergraduate students will be trained
during the course of the project and have the opportunity to co-author
publications. Additionally, the project will support public education and
outreach on topics related to the origin and early history of living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the DCC system, one enzyme (benzonase) cleaves
RNAs, resulting in products with a 3’ hydroxyl and 5’ phosphate, which are then
ligated by another enzyme (T4 RNA ligase). This system will be employed to
evaluate the competing RNA world and RNA-peptide world theories. If a
dynamically changing population of small RNAs continues to change independently
in the absence of amino acids/peptides, it would support existence of an
extended RNA World. If instead, the presence of peptides and/or amino acids
significantly impacts the RNA sequence diversity, it would suggest a rapid
transition to an RNA-Peptide World could have occurred. The findings will
advance understanding of the role of RNA (and peptides/amino acids) in the
origins of life besides providing a novel and unique approach to exploring RNA
sequence space. For example, such a system applied to sequences from RNA viruses
could shed light on the dynamics of RNA genome
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.