* 2227223
* I-Corps: An Intelligent Re-Design Recommender System for Additive and Hybrid Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Kemper Lewis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a potentially novel, robust, intelligent, and automated
assessment and re-design global evaluation system that provides precise feedback
on components’ printability for advanced manufacturing. Such evaluations could
reduce mistakes and printing failures, potentially avoid costly trial-and-error
exercises, and remove biases and inconsistencies that arise from inefficient or
manual evaluation processes. This system allows for potentially effectively
organizing assessments and can avoid costly computations and modifications. This
capability, therefore, could prevent the waste of energy, time, and financial
resources imposed by current manual assessments of components’ printability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
novel re-design recommender system that may allow companies with large
inventories of existing parts to quickly assess the feasibility of employing
additive manufacturing for each part and to implement necessary re-design
approaches as appropriate. The technology encompasses multiple intelligent
assessments and re-design methodologies, as well as a fully automated correction
system that rectifies the geometries of problematic components and converts
designs to be advanced manufacturing compatible. These re-design solutions can
potentially provide successful geometries for 3D-printing components using
different techniques. Lastly, this technology can present a novel design
recommender system that intelligently analyzes an extensive database of closely
related components for advanced manufacturing using machine learning techniques
to provide effective design recommendations for those component clusters whose
current designs are deemed inefficient for advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.