* 2227578
* GOALI: SemiSynBio-III: Moving Millions of Droplets at Megahertz Speeds: DNA Computing, DNA Storage, and Synthetic Biology on an Industrial Platform for Digital Microfluidics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Marc Riedel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,996.00

Ever since Watson and Crick first described the molecular structure of DNA, its
information-bearing potential has been apparent to computer scientists. With
each nucleotide in the sequence drawn from the four-valued alphabet of A, T, C,
and G, a molecule of DNA with n nucleotides stores 4 to the power of n bits of
data. In principle, DNA could provide a storage medium that is many orders of
magnitude denser than conventional media. Spurred by the biotech and pharma
industries, the technology for both sequencing (reading) and synthesizing
(writing) DNA has progressed rapidly. Nevertheless, a large gap remains between
what is theoretically possible in terms of reading/writing speed and what has
been demonstrated in practice. The industrial partner in this research, Seagate,
is developing an electronic platform to close the gap. The goal of the academic
team is to explore alternate applications of the technology that Seagate is
developing. These range from novel ways of performing computation on data stored
in DNA, to manipulating synthetic cells, to engineering bioreactors. Throughout,
the academic team will strive for a high level of public engagement. Planned
activities include initiating policy discussions, particularly regarding
artificial life and biosafety, and engaging high-school students in biochem
"maker" culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal pertains to a state-of-the-
art system for DNA storage based on digital microfluidics. Such technology
manipulates small droplets on a grid via electric charge. The electronics
perform a variety of complex operations to assemble DNA: merging, splitting,
heating, cooling, mixing, and purifying. The academic team will explore a scheme
for computing on data stored not in the sequence of nucleotides of the DNA but
rather in topological modifications to the strands: breaks in the phosphodiester
backbone of DNA called "nicks" and gaps called "toeholds". In prior work, such
computation has been demonstrated by nicking DNA with enzymatic systems such as
CRISPR/Cas9. In this work, DNA with the requisite nicks and toeholds will be
assembled directly on the electronic grid. The academic team will also explore
applications in synthetic biology, including cell-free protein expression,
liposome encapsulation, and RNA engineering directly on the electronic grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project was jointly funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO); Division of Computing and Communication Foundations (CCF) in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE);
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.