* 2227112
* Taking On the "Curse of Dimensionality" in Chemical Kinetics: Complex Chemical Reaction Prediction Using Manifold Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Dmitrij Rappoport, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 418,678.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Dmitrij Rappoport of the University of
California, Irvine aims to make computational discovery of new chemical
reactions and optimization of known reactions faster and cheaper. While the
demand for efficient and economical ways of making chemical
compounds—pharmaceuticals, organic light-emitting diode (OLED) materials, and
many more-is only increasing, systematic search for these synthetic methods
remains a challenge. One major obstacle is fundamental: the number of possible
pathways that a chemical reaction may take increases exponentially with the
number of atoms, making it impossible to test them all even with the most
powerful computers. In order to tackle this “curse of dimensionality”, Rappoport
will develop methods to recognize low-dimensional structures in the abundance of
possibilities, removing information from computational models that is unrelated
to chemical reactions. Taking advantage of machine learning methods of
dimensionality reduction to distill enormous data sets into compact
representations, this research will enable modeling and discovery of complex
chemical reactions for green chemistry and heavy metal-free catalytic processes.
With its emphasis on data science and machine learning techniques to explore
chemical reactions, this work will introduce the next generation of physical
scientists to the tools and techniques of data science and helps to improve
their data literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this CTMC award, Dmitrij
Rappoport will develop methods for constructing low-dimensional coordinate sub-
manifolds from potential energy surfaces of chemical reactions using non-linear
dimensionality reduction and discretization techniques. This new set of
computational tools is designed to complement the existing semilocal transition
state search methods and to explicitly address the problem of high
dimensionality of potential energy surfaces. Non-linear dimensionality reduction
techniques separate reactive and nonreactive degrees of freedom and thus create
computational models of chemical reaction mechanisms that are computationally
efficient to sample and lend themselves to definitions of similarity between
reaction mechanisms in terms of changes in bonding. These low-dimensional
computational models will be used by Rappoport to make machine learning–based
predictions of chemical reactivities that avoid the fundamental limitations of
methods that operate on the full high-dimensional potential energy
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.