* 2227016
* NSF-GACR: Atoms to nanoparticles to atoms - predicting evolving catalyst activity under inherently transient  conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Chris Paolucci, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 422,695.00

Metal-exchanged zeolites are common catalysts, used in applications ranging from
fossil fuel and biomass hydrocarbon transformations, to CO2 capture, and
mitigation of diesel engine exhaust emissions. Describing the active sites for
many of these reactions, under reaction conditions, remains elusive, thus
limiting improvements in catalyst design. Depending on the reaction conditions,
ion-exchanged metal atoms, solvated ions, dimers, trimers, small clusters, and
nanoparticles have all been invoked as active catalytic sites. Further, for some
reactions, several of these species may co-exist. The overarching goal of the
project - an international collaboration with the University of Chemistry and
Technology in Prague, Czechoslovakia (UCTP) - is to characterize and predict
changes in the type and amount of active catalytic species in metal-containing
zeolites during dynamic catalyst/surface changes under reaction conditions, and
thereby assess the molecular origin for changes in activity. The resulting
insights will lead to improved catalyst designs enabling more efficient use of
expensive noble metals, improved energy efficiency of catalytic processes, and
increases in catalyst durability and time-on-stream. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop and use methodologies to quantify different types of copper
(Cu) and palladium (Pd) species in zeolites, and how they are impacted by
typical reaction environment conditions and temperatures. These two metals were
chosen, along with SSZ and BEA zeolites, due to their use as selective catalytic
reduction (SCR) catalysts and passive NOx adsorbers (PNA), critical technologies
in emissions control catalysis. Probe molecule reactions, as well as infrared
and X-ray spectroscopic techniques, will be used to isolate individual Cu and Pd
moieties. Example probe reactions include CO titration of multinuclear Cu sites,
NO+NH3 titration of ion-exchanged Cu, and NO adsorption to titrate ion-exchanged
Pd sites. Various reaction conditions will be studied that are likely to induce
changes in active species. Those include temperature, oxidizing vs. reducing gas
mixtures, and water content. In addition, the project will investigate how
exposure to sulfur dioxide (SO2) - a common catalyst poison - influences changes
in active species. Beyond active site identification, the project will examine
the extent to which the dynamic changes in active sites are reversible.
Identification of operating conditions that promote reversible changes are
critical, as reversibility allows catalyst regeneration, thus extending catalyst
lifetimes. Experimental data identifying and quantifying individual types of
active sites, and how those quantities change with environment, will be used to
build predictive kinetic SCR and PNA models that include evolution of individual
active site concentration as a function of gas composition, temperature, and
time. Beyond the technical aspects, the project includes research training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students and opportunities for
collaborative exchange between American and Czech researchers and their graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.