* 2227356
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Influence of Agricultural Tile Drainage on Streamflow and Water Temperature in the Midwestern US using a Stakeholder-driven Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Darren Ficklin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,236.00

The upper Midwest is one of the most agriculturally productive regions in the
world. To achieve this productivity, agricultural tile drainage was widely
installed across the region to rapidly remove excess soil water after major
precipitation events. The presence of tile drainage results in highly
manipulated hydrology due to the rapid transport of water from the agricultural
field to a nearby river or stream. While the effect of tile drainage on
streamflow and water quality has been studied in individual watersheds, this
project will assess how tile drainage alters streamflow at large spatial scales
to make broader conclusions and recommendations to stakeholders. In addition,
the impacts of tile drainage on water temperature regimes are largely unknown.
Changes in water temperature in streams are particularly important, as they
influence biological activity, gas solubility, and water evaporation rates.
Using a large-scale network of streamflow and water-temperature observations in
conjunction with an array of geospatial information (e.g., tile drainage, land
use, climate data), this work will examine the effects of tile drainage on
streamflow and water temperature at the scale of the entire agricultural Upper
Midwest using statistical models. Throughout the project, stakeholders will be
interviewed pre- and post-statistical modeling to ensure that the project
results in actionable outcomes. The work will also provide valuable research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students. Workshops will be conducted
that provide hands-on experience of the methods and approaches to be used in
this project. Results will be disseminated in manuscripts, conference
presentations, news releases, and public data portals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop quantile regression models at the scale of the entire
agricultural portion of the Mississippi River Basin and at local watershed
levels to provide better insight into the mechanisms that drive seasonal
variations of sub-daily and daily streamflows and water temperatures. The use of
quantile regression models will allow for the full distribution of streamflows
and water temperatures to be examined. The stakeholder engagement throughout the
modeling process will shape model results and output displays to user groupsâ€™
interests, extending model salience and utility to other groups. The results
will improve the understanding of how tile drainage has altered local and
regional hydrology and water temperature, thereby providing additional insight
into major Midwestern concerns such as water quality, flooding, and drought
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.