* 2227147
* Conference: Track 1: The 2022 Big Ten Womens Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Lily Wang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2023
* USD 47,420.00

The Big Ten Women’s Workshop (BTWW) aims to build professional skills and
support networks of women engineering faculty, who are underrepresented in
engineering colleges. The workshop will bring together early-career women
faculty from engineering colleges in the Big Ten Academic Alliance (BTAA) and
provide them with opportunities to learn professional skills critical to early
success in their tenure track positions and long-term careers. Important
elements of the workshop will focus on networking, fostering self- and peer-
mentoring relationships, and connecting with senior women faculty who may serve
as role models. The overall percentage of women faculty in engineering remains
low in top-ranked programs (typically around 20%, compared to 51% of the general
population). For this reason, this workshop will broaden participation in
engineering by supporting the sense of belonging for women faculty at top-ranked
academic programs and providing professional interactions that can encourage
them to persist and succeed in the tenure-track path. The participating schools
account for more than 15% of the engineering PhD degrees and more than 12% of
the bachelor’s degrees in engineering awarded annually in the United States.
Eight of the top 20 schools for BS degrees awarded and six of the top 20 schools
for PhD degrees awarded are in the BTAA. Therefore, the faculty members who
attend this workshop will return to their home institutions with skills that
they can use to be successful and to inspire a large number of students, both
men and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women engineering faculty in their first
three years of a tenure-track academic appointment at institutions in the BTAA
will be invited to participate in the BTWW. The workshop will afford these
early-career women faculty unique access to accomplished senior women role
models and a panel of Deans from participating schools. Senior women faculty
will serve as mentors and also will develop their mentoring skills and learn
about pathways into academic leadership. Other activities include a keynote
presentation from a successful female academic leader, skills sessions to
prepare women faculty for early career success, peer-mentoring discussion
groups, facilitated networking sessions to grow networks at their own
institutions and within their technical areas of expertise, and a presentation
from the program director of NSF’s newest directorate: the Directorate for
Technology, Innovation and Partnerships. Two optional workshops on understanding
one’s own communication style and learning improvisation skills to become a
better science communicator will also be offered. The workshop activities will
advance the knowledge and skill sets of women engineering faculty. Participants
are then expected to apply this knowledge regarding professional development,
networking, and mentoring as they mentor their own students or more junior
faculty in the future. The 2022 BTWW builds on the successes and feedback from
previous BTWW offerings, which have occurred every three years since 2010. For
the second time, the offering of the workshop will include senior women
participants from previous junior faculty cohorts. Activities and a panel aimed
at these associate professors to enable expansion of their professional
networks, their research and teaching activities, career planning, and
leadership will be planned. This will help to establish a cycle of networking
and community building across the BTAA engineering colleges that will contribute
to the hiring, retention, and success of women faculty, and the growth in
numbers of women engineers, well into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.