* 2227754
* 2022 Waterman Award
* GEO,RISE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Jessica Tierney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr. Jessica Tierney one of the
three recipients for the 2022 Alan T. Waterman Award round. This award is NSF's
highest honor that annually recognizes an outstanding researcher who is 40 years
or younger or not more than 10 years beyond receipt of the Ph.D. degree, by
December 31 of the year of the nomination. The award funds the recipient's
research in any field of science or engineering. This year, each awardee will
receive a $1 million grant over a five-year period for further advanced study in
his or her field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tierney is an associate professor at
the University of Arizona. Her research focuses on understanding the history of
Earth through paleoclimatology, which looks deeply at past climate change, with
the goal of improving the understanding of what the future holds. She
specializes in generating organic geochemical records of paleoclimate, derived
from fossil molecules known as biomarkers that are preserved in sediments and
rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tierney has received recognition for her work,
receiving support from NSF in the past and being named a Packard Foundation
Fellow, an American Geophysical Union Fellow, a recipient of the Thomas R. Brown
Distinguished Chair in Integrative Science, and a lead author on the
intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment report. In addition
to her research, Dr. Tierney mentors Undergraduate Students and Graduate
Students, and works with Postdoctoral Scholars in a variety of research
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.