* 2227209
* Support for student travel to the 39th International Symposium on Combustion, Vancouver, Canada, July 24 - 29, 2022
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2023
* USD 45,000.00

The 2022 International Symposium on Combustion will be held in July 2022. It is
a gathering of combustion researchers from academia, industry, and government,
both from the United States and around the world. The conference's technical
program consists of a series of plenary lectures, contributed oral
presentations, poster sessions and social gatherings. The best work presented is
published in the Proceedings of the Combustion Institute. This award will
provide funding for students to attend the symposium, where they will have a
unique opportunity to meet members of the research community, discuss their
research, and exchange ideas with both senior researchers as well as their
student peers from around the world. Moreover, two panel discussions on Industry
Perspectives will be held and one of the topical review presentations will be
followed by a panel discussion that includes experts from academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 80% of the world’s energy production and use
is based on the combustion of fossil fuels. Combustion is ubiquitous in
traditional energy conversion systems such as automotive engines, stationary and
aircraft gas turbines, rocket and space propulsion, electrical power generation,
industrial furnaces, and home and institutional space heating. Moreover,
emerging technology areas such as hypersonic propulsion, microscale power
generation and material synthesis depend critically on chemically reacting flow
processes. The world’s dependence on combustion processes has led to many
technological challenges including air quality, energy efficiency, and
fire/explosion safety. Thus, combustion is still an active, vital area of
research. The community of researchers shares knowledge in this important area
through the symposium. Student travel support will engage the next generation of
combustion researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.