* 2227331
* EAGER: Investigating changes to forest soil microorganism communities due to the interactive effects of increasing soil P and pH
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Megan Rua, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Forests cover 30% of the Earth’s surface. They support a large portion of the
earth’s living organisms and play an important role in the global cycling of
carbon and water. While often being directly affected by humans via activities
like logging, they are also often indirectly threatened by human activities such
as those that result in acid rain and high nutrient deposition. The resulting
changes in soil nutrients from these indirect activities can fundamentally alter
the soil microorganism community which in turn can have consequences for forest
composition and processes. For example, soil microorganisms like bacteria and
fungi can drive plant growth, and particular root-associated fungi can favor
some plant species over others. This experimental study will evaluate how soil
microbial composition and abundance change with soil acidification and with
changes in phosphorus in a forested landscape and how root-associated microbes
change as the canopy tree species change. The results of this experimental study
can be used to predict how forests will respond to changes in soil nutrient
availability associated with human influences. In addition to the traditional
training of graduate and undergraduate students, this project benefits the
broader scientific community and society in several ways. It will engage
teachers and school administrators to improve STEM education for students in
sixth grade in the Dayton Regional STEM School by developing programs to
highlight microbial biology and soil fungi and their important roles and
associations. It will also provide training to private woodlot owners and
professional foresters about soil fertility and forest
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work in a variety of systems has shown
that soil acidity is important for shaping soil microorganism communities with
potential consequences for plant composition. Soil and root-associated microbial
responses to acidity are likely facilitated through changes in soil P. Despite
this important linkage between pH and P, experimental manipulations of both pH
and P in forest ecosystems are relatively rare and instead studies tend to take
advantage of existing gradients in nutrient availability. This lack of factorial
manipulation of pH and P limits the ability to tease apart mechanisms driving
the responses of microorganisms to alterations in pH versus other nutrients . To
fully understand how changing P alters the soil microorganism community,studies
that manipulate soil P directly versus indirectly by changing soil pH are
needed. The proposed research utilizes a unique, 12-year forest fertilization
experiment that has increased soil pH and P availability independently and
together, through the addition of lime and/or phosphate fertilizer. The main
objective of this proposal is to determine if altered soil P availability drives
changes in taxonomic and functional composition of microorganism communities.
The proposed work seeks to disentangle biotic and abiotic drivers of these
microbial communities and to identify whether particular phyla or key dominant
strains of the microorganism community are driving changes. In doing so,
outcomes from the research proposed will contribute to understanding microbial
contributions to changing nutrient cycles and provide a critical step towards a
predictive understanding of how soil P availability can alter forest community
composition with consequences for future carbon
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.