* 2227669
* III: Small: Rethinking the Data Organization and Lifecycle in LSM Storage Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yihan Sun, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

To support the efficient storing of large amounts of data, many modern database
systems use the Log Structured Merge tree (LSM) technology. This technology
allows grouping many data updates together, before applying them to the
database. This project has identified several limitations of LSM storage, which
cause reduced rates of reads and writes to the database system. Specifically,
current LSM systems do not consider the hotness of a data record when deciding
how to store it, and may also suffer from periodic stalls, where the system may
become unresponsive while large maintenance operations, called merges, are
performed. Further, LSM systems are inefficient at exploiting larger computer
memories. The developed techniques create novel data organization and flow
patterns in the LSM storage, which leverage modern hardware capabilities to
boost the read and write capabilities of the storage system. Improving the
performance of database systems will allow storing larger data at lower costs,
thus making storage systems more accessible to scientists and general users.
This project will also strengthen and extend the ongoing undergraduate research
and high school outreach activities of the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project has several research aims. First, algorithms will be
developed to store frequently accessed records in more accessible locations for
faster retrieval. This will facilitate a bi-directional LSM tree architecture,
where records flow both top-down and bottom-up. This will allow naturally
maintaining hot records together, for faster querying and more effective
caching. Second, new algorithms will be created to improve the speed of data
merges. Periodic merges are used to maintain the stored data organized and
consistent. This aim will study how to universally partition LSM runs to
facilitate splitting a large merge into multiple disjoint sub-merges, thus
reducing stall periods. The third aim will create algorithms to better utilize
large memory sizes and multithreading parallelism, and develop a mixed memory-
disk LSM tree. The key idea is that, instead of directly enlarging the MemTable,
where recent writes are buffered, some components can be pinned in memory, with
a more efficient organization, and enable parallel execution on queries. The
project includes theoretical analysis, experimental study and software
development. The developed algorithms are tested on real-world data and
integrated in real database systems. This integration may increase the impact of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.