* 2227224
* I-Corps:  Automatic Aortic Aneurysm Screening using Deep-Learning Models
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Hieu Nguyen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform for radiologists and vascular surgeons to
help reduce the time required for screening aortic aneurysms. The proposed
technology is designed to improve the speed and efficiency in computed
tomography (CT) scan readings, three-dimensional (3D) image reconstruction, and
aortic aneurysm screening. Currently, annotating and measuring an aortic
aneurysm is done manually and is time consuming. The proposed technology’s
automatic screening feature may increase the productivity of doctors who
routinely read the scans and improve patient experiences. In addition to aortic
aneurysms, the automatic screening feature may be used in other applications in
the medical screening field including brain tumors, pulmonary embolisms, and
lung cancer. The results and resources developed from this project also may be
used for educational purposes, where new curricula will be developed based on
this project to cover the fields of neural network applications, three-
dimensional (3D) image reconstruction, and image processing
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a software platform that automates the readings of computed
tomography (CT) scans using algorithms to train deep-learning models and allow
for efficient and accurate diameter measurement of aortic aneurysms. In
particular, the proposed technology uses adaptive image processing methods based
on brightness and contrast to fine tune deep-learning models and employ
ensemble-based state-of-the-art objective detection models. The proposed
technology may render 3D visualizations of the aorta, which may help doctors to
perform more comprehensive diagnosis of the aneurysm. Moreover, based on the
measurements and patient health medical record data, the proposed method is
designed to calculate estimated risk of adverse aortic events (dissection,
rupture, and death), and report risk-rankings to help prioritize patient
treatment and surgical procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.