* 2227695
* Active Matter and Complex Media
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Petia Vlahovska, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

Active matter refers to collectives of self-propelled units, e.g., birds, fish,
humans, bacteria, drones. The units tend to self-organize in various structures,
without any external guidance. For example, birds flock and bacteria swarm. The
agility and versatility of active matter (as seen in the starling murmurations)
is inspiring scientists and engineers to develop materials with similar
properties. This summer school will introduce graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers to the latest advances in this rapidly evolving field. This
is a project to support expenses related to the registration and travel of young
scientists and students from the US to attend the summer school on " Active
Matter and Complex Media" to be held in Cargese (Corsica Island, France) in
September 2022. About 15 US participants (graduate students and post-docs) are
expected to be supported through this grant, who would not otherwise be able to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active fluids are those where the presence of
active particles that can self-assemble, or can move and pack in different ways,
give different macroscopic properties to the fluid. The focus of the summer
school will be on areas that are very research active, including microorganism
swimming, collective behavior of motile colloids and active particles in complex
and crowded environment (such as porous media). The aims of the proposed
workshop are to address challenges in the modeling of active (synthetic,
biomimetic, and living) matter, to discuss approaches to overcome these
challenges, and to educate and inform young scientists (mainly graduate
students), who will be attending not only lectures on techniques and
fundamentals, but also seminars on current research topics given by
internationally known experts in the field, from the US and from around the
world. The conference has a strong interdisciplinary character involving
researchers from different disciplines (physics, engineering, applied
mathematics, biology) as well as different generations (expert senior scientists
and students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.