* 2227454
* I-Corps:  Strain-Sensing Smart Skin - a New Technology for Strain Measurement
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Robert Weisman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of strain measurement technology that uses carbon nanotubes. Strain
measurements are used in a wide variety of heavy industries, including
aerospace, bridge maintenance, pipeline and chemical plant safety inspections,
wind turbine monitoring, and others. Strain technologies are needed for testing
critical structures and for routine maintenance inspections of infrastructure
exposed to large stresses/strains. The proposed technology is a strain-sensing
smart skin, a non-contact, laser-based sensor that uses carbon nanotubes. The
sensor's performance may allow improved non-destructive evaluation and testing,
leading to reduced failure rates and greater safety of critical infrastructure.
Because many of the applications involve safety certifications, strain
measurements have great societal value in helping to prevent catastrophic
structural failures that may claim human life and incur significant
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a strain measurement technology called strain-sensing smart skin. The technology
uses a sensing layer consisting of single-wall carbon nanotubes embedded in a
polymeric host that is applied to the surface of metallic, plastic, composite,
or cement-based substrates. After curing, subsequent strains in the substrate
are transmitted through the film to the nanotubes, perturbing their electronic
structures and shifting their characteristic near-infrared emission in
systematic and predictable ways. Laser excitation at any points of interest
induces emission the from nanotubes at those locations, and the emitted light is
spectrally analyzed to reveal the local strain value. The strain values may be
compiled to form two-dimensional strain maps. This method may have a significant
advantage over digital image correlation (DIC), the only strain mapping method
in common industrial use. DIC requires the specimen to stay under constant
observation while the proposed technology does not have this requirement. This
means that the proposed technology may be used to measure strains that have
accumulated in service (e.g., ground maintenance inspections of
aircraft).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.