* 2228192
* Implementation Grant: Community-Soil-Air-Water (CSAW): A Model Community-Based Learning Ecosystem to Transform Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Katherine Hankins, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,443,990.00

The Community-Soil-Air-Water (CSAW) learning ecosystem will integrate justice,
equity, diversity, and inclusion into the practices of collaborating with
communities in geosciences research. To expand capacity and accountability in
socio-environmental research collaborations between geoscientists and community
partners, CSAW will bring together three academic partners (Georgia State
University, a Predominantly Black Institution, Spelman College, a Historically
Black College, and Emory University) with two community organizations: the West
Atlanta Watershed Alliance and ECO-Action. This project will address the
question: How can Geoscientists learn from, contribute to, and find solutions
with communities facing fundamental problems related to Earth systems? CSAW will
examine how a learning ecosystem model centered in community-engaged, place-
based research can increase: (1) recruitment, retention, and training of diverse
geoscientists; and (2) capacity for and accountability within collaboration
between geoscientists and communities addressing socio-environmental problems.
Cohorts of faculty and community organizers along with 12 post-baccalaureate
(postbac) scholars and 15 Master’s students will be trained in building outreach
and research projects with community partners using a framework of shared values
of equity, transparency, and accountability. These projects will address
critical needs in place-based Earth systems research including Soil lead and
other heavy metal contamination and radon exposure; Air pollution, climate
change, and heat mapping; and Water pollution, urban flooding, and green
stormwater infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals and
objectives of the project are to build a BRIDGE: 1) Build and formalize the CSAW
learning ecosystem with all cohort members to solve socio-environmental
challenges; 2) Recruit diverse cohorts of postbacs and Master’s students and
train them in professional development, community engagement, and networking,
with a focus on centering justice, equity, and inclusion; 3) Implement training,
programming, and pedagogy protocols to recruit, mentor, and support diverse
students, community collaborators, and faculty in the geosciences; 4) Develop an
asset-based model of collaboration with community-driven research to include
formal training, accountability, and assessment for engagement practices and
outcomes; and 5) Grow a network, materials, and prototype to expand the CSAW
learning Ecosystem model to other communities, universities, and institutions.
CSAW partnerships will advance a broad range of scholarship on socio-
environmental problems and their solutions, and on best practices for
geoscientists in community engagement, accountability, and co-production. CSAW
will provide a well-evaluated and successful model to adopt in transformative
geosciences work across disciplines. Through broadening participation of
underrepresented groups and building and enhancing partnerships with community
advocacy groups, the CSAW learning ecosystem will provide a prototype to promote
geoscience transformations at other institutions and across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.