* 2228831
* I-Corps: Smart Data Gateway for Intelligent Transportation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Arthur Helmicki, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a field-testing regimen and a long-term, on-site health monitor
for highway structures. This technology seeks to develop a smart and secured
data gateway to integrate the data from emerging, heterogeneous cyberphysical
systems and provide a seamless dashboard for transportation officials to make
quick and informed actions. As a service, this technology could provide real-
time traffic information such as vehicle counts, vehicle/pedestrian/wildlife
classifications, and a combination of strategic alliances with private
transportation agencies that are contracted to create safe traffic intersections
and roundabouts. The proposed technology could also scale existing software to
provide analytics such as bike and pedestrian detection, near misses, real-time
asset monitoring, and the ability to provide computer-based
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the potential
development of a robust, yet adaptive smart data gateway to monitor the health
of highway infrastructture. The gateway must be capable of supporting the
diverse data formats used in heterogeneous cyberphysical systems. The ability to
connect nearby cyberphysical systems to historical data in each location is
challenging; The smart data gateway should connect and continuously stream data
between the heterogeneous cyberphysical systems. In addition, the gateway should
process the incoming data in real-time, detect the correct data format, check
for any malicious data points, process the data using artificial intelligence
(AI) models to prioritize the data, derive patterns, display the relevant data
in the dashboard, and relay proper responses to the corresponding systems. As a
service, this technology could provide real-time traffic information to create
safer traffic intersections and roundabouts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.