* 2228616
* Collaborative Research: SAI-R: Integrative Cyberinfrastructure for Enhancing and Accelerating Online Abuse Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Feng Luo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 375,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online abuse is a pressing and growing
societal challenge. Online hate and harassment, cyberbullying, and extremism
threaten the safety and psychological well-being of targeted groups.
Understanding the problem and developing ways to address it is the active focus
of many fields of research in the social and behavioral sciences and in computer
science. Machine learning and the use of artificial intelligence (AI) offers
great potential to support research in this area. Still, researchers face
fundamental challenges in leveraging emerging machine learning techniques for
innovative studies and scientific discoveries in online abuse. This SAI research
project strengthens and transforms the current disperse machine learning
software infrastructure. It develops a scalable, customizable, extendable, and
user-friendly Integrative Cyberinfrastructure for Online Abuse Research (ICOAR).
The new infrastructure advances the research capability for scholars in
different fields of science to leverage advanced machine learning methods for
online abuse research. The ICOAR software infrastructure can be utilized by a
large and growing number of researchers on online abuse detection and is a
stimulus to research and innovation in AI for social
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables easy access to state-of-the-art
machine learning techniques and datasets for rapid online abuse analysis. It
supports and advances future investigations of new concepts and phenomena,
assessments of prevalence, measures of causal effects, predictions, and
evaluation of online abuse detection algorithms. ICOAR offers a modular and
user-centered approach, ensuring future enhancements and long-term
sustainability. The open software infrastructure consists of three major layers:
a data layer, a capability layer, and an application layer. The data layer
includes tools for automatic data collection and preparation of online social
media data from different sources, and access to public benchmark datasets. The
capability layer is composed of modularized machine learning-based capabilities
and algorithms for the study of online abuse. The application layer allows
researchers to easily develop different applications based on their research
priorities. The ICOAR resources are open-source and provide an easy-to-use
learning platform for curriculum development and workforce
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.