* 2228384
* I-Corps: Rapid Heating and Cooling Technology for Liquids
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Marissa Rylander, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that rapidly and uniformly heats or cools liquids to
the desired temperature. Conventional methods for heating or cooling liquids
(e.g., breast milk/formula, wine, coffee, pharmaceuticals, intravenous fluids,
blood, or chemicals) are not satisfactory for certain applications due to the
extended timeframes required to reach the desired temperature. A primary
application for this technology is warming of baby formula and breast milk,
which is relevant to households, child development centers, nurseries, and
neonatal care facilities in hospitals. The proposed device may be used to both
heat and cool liquids rapidly and uniformly, which broadens the opportunities
for a wide range of commercial applications. Such a device may have applications
in the restaurant industry, pharmacies, drug companies, chemical industries, and
military applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a heat exchanger technology that rapidly heats and cools liquids
uniformly to the desired temperature. Compared to traditional methods that rely
on heat conduction through the vessel containing the fluid, the proposed
technology directly heats or cools the target liquid. The proposed technology
leverages the on demand hot or cold temperatures and steady flow rate of a
conventional household water faucet to expedite the heat transfer process when
coupled with an efficient and rapid circulation of the target/primary liquid
through the proposed heat exchanger system. Existing technologies for warming
beverages, including breast milk and formula, focus on boiling water in a
stagnant bath and subsequent heat conduction through the bottle comprised of
insulating plastic or glass. The proposed technology may be used to heat from
refrigerator temperatures of 36 degrees Fahrenheit to the desired temperature of
100 degrees Fahrenheit in less than 30 seconds compared to traditional bottle
warmers that require approximately 10 min, decreasing heating time by a factor
of 20. Similarly, the proposed technology may be used to chill a standard liquid
volume of 750 ml from a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit to 55 degrees
Fahrenheit in one minute compared to traditional methods that require
significantly longer time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.