* 2228607
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Creating an AI-based Community-wide Efficient and Equitable Response System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Gregory Porumbescu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

With a growing number of requests and national labor shortages in city
governments and contracted services, the need for efficient, easily accessible,
and equitable response systems is more urgent than ever. To address this need,
this university-community collaboration aims to revolutionize the next
generation of emergency services by applying state-of-the-art AI techniques to
response systems that will reduce emergency response times while increasing
their accessibility and equity. To do so, this project takes the following
steps: 1) automate responses to non-emergency requests and thus ensuring 9-1-1
dispatchers are available to provide quick assistance to those who may be
adversely affected by emergencies; 2) precisely ascertain emergency response
times, which can maximize the efficiency of the placement of stations and
response units and potentially result in an improved (insurance services) ISO
rating and lower insurance rates for the citizens and businesses, 3) extract on-
scene information to support first-responders operations to save lives and time
during emergencies, and 4) create a community-centric approach to ensure
equitable and trustworthy emergency and non-emergency response
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This planning grant aims to identify sources of
inefficiency, inequity, and inaccessibility present in existing emergency and
non-emergency response systems and remedy them by developing novel AI-based
interventions. In this planning effort, the project team consisting of
university researchers, public safety professionals, and community partners is
collaborating with members of underserved communities to identify crucial
bottlenecks in the response system that reduce efficiency, equity, and
accessibility of these systems. The vision is to develop prototypes of
interventions to address these bottlenecks using principled techniques from AI
and data-driven learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to
the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between
essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.