* 2228274
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Designing a Decarbonization- Ready Common Home Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Johanna Mathieu, PECAN STREET INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project will enable an interdisciplinary team of energy, health, and equity
researchers and community-based organizations (CBOs) develop a research-based
toolkit for CBO’s charged with helping low-income families of color access
assistance, financing, and incentive programs designed to promote housing and
energy security. The focal point of the proposed Phase I effort is to undertake
a collaborative design process to develop a Decarbonization-Ready Common Home
Assessment that then can be piloted during Phase II in Detroit, Michigan. This
effort will also plan for the development of outreach and training materials to
support implementation of the Assessment, and research protocols to evaluate
impact on low-income households and service providers. This project builds on
existing collaborations in Detroit between researchers, CBO’s, and neighborhood
groups aimed at better connecting eligible homes with available public
resources. Despite collaboration efforts between organizations, social services
case managers consistently report frustration that clients who are eligible for
services from multiple programs are often discouraged by the need to undertake
repetitive and duplicative home assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a direct response to repeated requests for a common home assessment protocol
that can be used across multiple programs to maximize efficiency and illuminate
additional opportunities that may not be immediately apparent depending on the
original point of intake. It also takes into account expressions of concern that
existing assessments do not map the pathway for concurrent or stepwise
investments to decarbonize and improve air quality of homes. To develop this
first of its kind Decarbonization-Ready Common Home Assessment, the research
team will bring together building knowledge, technical capacity, connective
tissue, and buy-in among Detroit’s numerous community-based organizations,
environmental groups, energy researchers, municipal and utility staff,
technicians tasked with home assessments and energy upgrades, and a variety of
other stakeholders. The project will also include development of a toolkit of
outreach and training materials, and explore opportunities to streamline data
collection and visualization through application of advanced engineering and
data science techniques to support its implementation. Research protocols will
be established to evaluate impact on low-income households and service
providers. Piloting and assessment of the Tool will be implemented during Phase
2. Efficacy of a Common Home Assessment will be documented to serve as a
research-based best practice toolkit that will be extensible to other regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge
which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department of Energy's Vehicle Technology
Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
Directorate and Federal Emergency Management Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.