* 2228373
* Determination of Morphology Effects on Bubble Nucleation and Growth in Micro/Nano Structured Surface Layers for High Performance Boiling Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Van Carey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2025
* USD 376,195.00

Thermal management is important for electronics, two phase pumped loop cooling
systems for aerospace applications, vaporization processes in building energy
systems, and Rankine cycle power plants. Development of micro/nano structured
enhanced boiling heat transfer surfaces has typically been motivated by a desire
to create vaporization process technologies that can handle high heat fluxes at
low to moderate driving temperature difference to boost the energy efficiency
and performance. Recent research on enhanced boiling surfaces has provided only
a limited understanding of how the morphology of a micro/nano structured surface
affects conditions of embryo bubble growth under superheated conditions, and has
provided limited modeling capability that can be used to predict the dependence
of heterogeneous nucleation on morphology and guide development of enhanced
boiling surfaces. The research in this project develops two innovative ways to
predict how morphology affects nucleation performance in micro/nano porous
enhanced boiling surfaces. A machine-learning approach will be used to predict
nucleation performance from learned trends in surface-feature and nucleation-
performance data. The second will be a multiphase thermophysics model developed
specifically to accurately predict onset of nanobubble nucleation and growth in
nanoporous structures. These complementary models will both better illuminate
the physics of the boiling process and can be used to guide development of next
generation high-efficiency boiling surfaces for a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goals of this research are to
develop and evaluate two novel ways to predict the effects of surface morphology
on the onset of nucleation and bubble growth in micro/nano porous layers of the
type used for enhanced boiling surfaces. In one of two primary research threads,
surface micrograph image analysis data will be combined with nucleation
performance data for the corresponding surface, and the composite data will be
used to train a neural network model that can predict the number density of
active nucleation sites given the surface superheat temperature and the surface
number density of features with the right combinations of low complexity (low
surface image entropy) and above average feature size in the micro/nano
structured layer. A second thread of this research will develop and evaluate a
specialized 3D Lattice-Boltzmann multiphase simulation framework that will more
accurately model micro/nano embryo bubble stability and growth in close
proximity to micro/nano surface structures. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research is that combining and comparing these two innovative
strategies will provide a better understanding of the physics of nucleation in
these circumstances, and will provide two complementary methods to guide the
choice of micro/nano surface features for the design of optimized next-
generation micro/nano-structured enhanced boiling surfaces for important
applications. Both of these approaches can also be extended to ways of
quantifying surface feature characteristics and predicting morphology effects in
other phase change processes such as dropwise condensation, sublimation
deposition, and thin liquid film melting and vaporization in laser processing of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.