* 2228785
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Everyday Respect: Measuring &amp; Improving Police Officer Communication During Motor Vehicle Stops
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Morteza Dehghani, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,866.00

Traffic stops conducted by police officers are both mundane and potentially
deadly. This project will use audio and video footage from body-worn cameras to
study the communication between Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) officers
and drivers during these stops. We will examine how officers’ communication
early on in a stop shapes how the interaction unfolds, including whether or not
it escalates. We will also examine whether race, gender, class or other
disparities exist in how community members are treated during stops, as well as
how factors like race, disability status, community context, and officer
training interact to shape how officers communicate. Stage 2 of this project
also includes collaboration with the Los Angeles Police Academy to develop and
implement new training curricula drawing on our findings and collaboration with
the LAPD Office of Constitutional Policing and Policy to explore possible
revisions to department policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This community-led study
draws on footage from body-worn and dashboard cameras, as well as complementary
stop data, personnel data, and location-based data on community context. We move
beyond existing work in this area by basing our measures of communication on
views solicited from both the LAPD and a wide range of community members and
community organizations regarding the various aspects of “good” communication
that should be measured (Stage 1). We will employ a diverse population of human
annotators to code all the dimensions of officer communication we identify as
salient to community stakeholders (Stage 2). We will use machine learning tools,
trained on these human annotations, to then measure communication at scale and
then proceed to statistical analysis of both the causes and consequences of
officer communication, including the factors that may lead some groups in the
community to be treated differently than others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services &amp; community
needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security,
and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.