* 2228176
* ATD:   Collaborative Research:   Spectral Interpretations of Essential Subgraphs for Threat Discoveries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Sang Chin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 6,639.00

In the past decade, graph theory has undertaken a remarkable shift --- a
profound transformation. Graph theory is no longer limited to a few vertices and
edges (as in the famous riddle of "The Seven Bridges of Konigsberg"). Today,
graph theory is often about understanding our ever-more connected world, which
may contain millions and billions of nodes. Such a change is in large part due
to the humongous amount of information present in today's society. For example,
successful Web search algorithms are based on WWW graphs, which contain all web
pages as vertices and hyperlinks as edges. In other cases, such as social
networks, the sheer number of users contribute to the huge size of the graphs
representing a particular social medium. In response to challenges set forth in
the ATD announcement, this work seeks to develop a framework using advanced
tools from random and spectral graph theory to carry out quantitative analyses
of the structure and dynamics of large graphs or networks. Here, the focus is on
finding patterns that may be hidden in them that could potentially be indicative
of emerging threats of various kinds (internets, critical infrastructure
networks, financial networks, social networks, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research plans to use tools from random graph theory, differential geometry, and
information theory to carry out analytic computations of observable network
structures and capture the most relevant and refined quantities of real-world
networks. The approach is based on the Szemeredi regularity lemma, which
provides regular partitions of a given graph. If these can be found efficiently,
then rapid (and often parallel- and distributed- among partitions) methods to
compute a myriad of graph properties of interest, including graph merging and
subgraph detection, will be achieved. Unfortunately, the regularity Lemma is
only an existence proof; however, it is here, using ideas from spectral graph
theory, where computationally efficient and scalable methods to approximate
these partitions will be developed. Moreover, to further achieve efficiency, a
new model will be developed (based on a stochastic block model) representing
information on graphs. The motivation behind this approach is two-fold. First,
the most meaningful types of graph operations (graph merging, etc.) tend to
preserve such partitions. Second, these blocks (or communities) can further
reduce the complexity of finding a particular subgraph (often indicative of
emerging threats) in a given graph.