* 2228412
* ISLS 2022 Mentoring Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Joseph Polman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 8,697.00

This project supports a group of 15 US-based doctoral students, early and mid-
career professionals to virtually attend the Doctoral Consortium, Early Career
Workshop, and Mid-Career Workshop at the Annual Meeting of the International
Society of the Learning Sciences to be held virtually in June 2022. This
workshop will enhance the capacity of the learning sciences as a field to
address important challenges associated with the transformation of education and
broadening of participation in the digital age. Additionally, the workshop will
target diverse participants within the field and mentor scholars who are
underrepresented. The overall goal is to support new scholars in the
interdisciplinary learning science research community and contribute to
impactful research on learning that will benefit society as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the virtual setting due to the continuing
Covid-19 pandemic, the project will employ new technologies to create virtual-
based opportunities for community building and networking for the participants.
The workshop organization builds on a successful model documented as effective
in similar past workshops, providing opportunities for the participants to
interact with international researchers and practitioners. The activities
provide participants with a deeper understanding of the field combined with
hands-on mentorship. This will support early career scholars to succeed in the
field and go on to make valuable intellectual contributions. Ultimately, the
workshop will enhance the capacity of the learning sciences as an
interdisciplinary field to address important challenges associated with the
transformation of education and broadening of participation in the digital
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.