* 2228603
* SAI-R: Strengthening American Electricity Infrastructure for an Electric Vehicle Future: An Energy Justice Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Saba Siddiki, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 749,999.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread adoption of electric vehicles (EVs)
is seen as one key strategy to curb carbon emissions, reduce air pollution, and
improve public health. However, EVs also generate high demand and exert
additional pressure on current and future electricity infrastructure. Past
research on EVs has not sufficiently attended to how EV deployment and the
needed infrastructure upgrades may contribute to energy injustice and widen
existing equity gaps. This SAI research project develops an energy justice
approach to assessing and reducing the negative effects of EV deployment on non-
users. It focuses on the costs of infrastructure upgrades and electricity
consumption. Equity interventions are developed and policy guidance is suggested
in ways that produce benefits for all segments of society during the
electrification transition. A multidisciplinary project team uses innovative
data analytics and advanced computational modeling methods to measure various
forms of energy justice. Collaboration with stakeholders helps to facilitate
policy design and implementation. By strengthening American electric
infrastructure, the nation is better positioned to move toward a sustainable and
just EV future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates social and techno-
engineering approaches to holistically assess and mitigate potential injustice
introduced by the EV transition. On the social dimension, the project develops
an energy justice framework mapped to an EV future. It also formulates metrics
to guide qualitative and quantitative assessments of potential injustices
stemming from the transition. The framework specifically aims to protect non-EV
users, particularly those in low- and moderate-income communities that may
otherwise bear disproportionate costs for electric infrastructure upgrades and
electricity consumption surges. On the techno-engineering dimension, new
socioeconomic and spatiotemporal methods are created to analyze multimodal
datasets and to provide accurate predictions of EV electricity demand and
electricity generation growth. New computational optimization and analytics
tools are developed to apply agent-based models to study the future electric
grid, EV, and stakeholder interactions at fine resolutions. A policy guide is
developed to provide socially and technically feasible solutions to reduce
injustice in the EV transition, thereby facilitating a just EV future inclusive
of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.