* 2228419
* CIVIC-PG Track B Walk to Healthy Foods: Modeling Community-Based Assets to Increase Healthy Food Access in Underserved Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Iana Castro, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,998.00

Low-income and racially- and ethnically- diverse communities across the United
States experience limited access to healthy foods, and a higher concentration of
liquor, corner, and convenience stores than supermarkets, with implications for
the health and well-being of residents. Walk to Healthy Foods' vision is to
bridge the gap between food accessibility and community needs in underserved
communities nationwide by providing communities with an approach for identifying
and leveraging existing assets in their communities to address food access
challenges. Walk to Healthy Foods takes an asset-based approach by identifying
businesses that are already serving community residents, such as existing
liquor, corner, and convenience stores, and leveraging their presence in the
community to provide healthier food options. During Stage 1, through engagement
and collaboration with community stakeholders, Walk to Healthy Foods will
develop a site selection model for identifying existing assets in the community
that can become access points for healthy foods. During Stage 2, Walk to Healthy
Foods will test and calibrate the site selection model through an intervention
in an underserved community in San Diego County. Specifically, the site
selection model will be used to identify potential healthy food access points,
and produce distribution services will be launched at these sites, resulting in
increased access to fresh produce in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach proposed, which includes partnering with an organization that is
providing a direct service to the community (i.e., produce distribution services
to selected sites), allows a true test of the site selection model and for
research to address a community-identified need through a pilot that will have a
direct impact on one community while testing and calibrating a model that can be
implemented in others. A site selection model that can be used to identify
existing assets in underserved communities that can be leveraged to address
systemic challenges, such as limited food access, has the potential to redefine
what is needed in communities for residents to have access to essential
resources. Walk to Healthy Foods will contribute to the fields of geography,
public health, city planning, and business, among others, and to the ongoing
development of innovative approaches to solving pressing social
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.