* 2228709
* Planning: CIVIC-PG Track B: Placekeeping: a Co-designed Model for Intergenerational Co-housing and Coalition Building in a University-Adjacent Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Christopher Wright, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,998.00

The US housing crisis has severely impacted underserved communities of color.
Rising rents and home prices put homeownership further out of reach. In 2021,
74% of white Americans owned a home, compared with 43% of Black Americans. Due
to systemic racism, these disparities have persisted over decades. Existing
housing stock needs reinvestment to meet the demands of an aging population.
These challenges have been exacerbated due to residual impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic and surging prices of food, gas, and other necessities. This project
addresses these issues through the co-development of Second Story Collective
(2SC), a novel multi-generational co-housing model that centers the arts to
cohere diverse communities. This homesharing strategy aims to preserve
homeownership for long-term residents, create affordable opportunities for new
homebuyers, and reduce student housing costs. By utilizing a co-design process
informed by community input as well as multi-modal data, the 2SC co-housing
model will address the need for affordable housing and aging-in-place options
while increasing access to services, reducing isolation, and building social
cohesion. Findings from this project will contribute to knowledge in the fields
of comprehensive urban community development, creative placemaking/placekeeping,
and participatory research and design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this project is to develop, implement, and evaluate the 2SC model for
intergenerational co-housing as an anti-displacement and aging-in-place
strategy. The transdisciplinary team will work with an established cross-sector
partner network to address urgent housing needs in the West Philadelphia Promise
Zone neighborhood of Mantua, a rapidly gentrifying community that is also one of
the nation’s most impoverished. The project will utilize a Community-led
Participatory Action Research design driven by the Community Capitals Framework,
examining community development efforts from a systems perspective that centers
community assets rather than deficits. Stage 1 will co-design and develop the
2SC co-housing model for Village Square on Haverford, a new multi-use
development in Mantua. Using heterogenous data, we will create an asset map of
the relevant resources and develop a plan for establishing and coalescing the
pilot community. In Stage 2, the project team will implement the 2SC pilot
community and collect data including surveys, interviews, and focus groups to
evaluate the success of the pilot. The 2SC model has the potential to be
implemented in similar communities throughout the US, and results from this
pilot will serve as a model for equitable development through community-driven
anti-displacement and co-housing solutions, particularly for historically
marginalized Black communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response
to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between
essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.