* 2228747
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Legacy Building Toolset
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Christopher Weaver, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,991.00

The Legacy Building Toolset (LBT) is a digital platform, centered on interactive
data visualizations, that allows community members to collectively explore
identity, the meaning of place, and create and engage with community assets.
Currently such tools and methods are underexplored, which is concerning because
public policy is often based on how policymakers perceive the meaning of place
from the perspective of residents. As a result, residents often find it
challenging to collect and organize community information to present to policy
makers or face exclusion when their interpretations of the built form remain
unrecognized. The LBT aims to realize community-accessible tools for creating
community-driven interpretations of meaning in the built form at a large scale,
in real time, and with an overlay of culture and identity. The tool will be
developed in Northeast Oklahoma City, a disadvantaged and predominantly Black
community, and the knowledge gained will be disseminated for use by other
communities across the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development and
deployment of the Legacy Building Toolset (LBT) through the envisioned Stage 2
pilot project will combine successful engagement methods of photovoice and
storytelling with scalability via crowdsourced data editing and viewing directly
inside maps, timelines, and other data visualizations. The LBT will include a
collection of intuitively interactive, visualization-centric, in-browser data
editing and viewing applications supported by a web services database backend.
The applications will support entry of information about people, places, times,
and other details through interactive gesturing directly in the visualizations
themselves. This includes opportunities to annotate locations, regions, and
times with photos, video, or audio. The applications will also support
organization of information into stories that integrate text, visualizations,
and multimedia annotations. Existing photovoice and storytelling methods often
require an in-person expert who organizes and leads the process. Through
visualization-centric user interfaces, the LBT will provide less centralized
methods of collecting, organizing, and curating community information. The
community will be able to develop and use stories more independently of experts.
Many urban design and planning projects may still benefit from or even require
expert involvement, but the community will be able to identify needs through the
LBT and call upon experts internal or external to the community as needed. The
broader impacts will be to make participation in community collaboration
projects involving sharing of data more accessible, usable, and scalable,
especially in historically disadvantaged communities, and broaden the user base
for both data sharing and projects built on it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services &amp; community
needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security,
and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.