* 2228864
* Conference: 2022 Smart and Connected Communities Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Frankie King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 07/31/2024
* USD 583,874.00

The purpose of this project is to plan and organize the 2022 National Science
Foundation (NSF) Smart &amp; Connected Communities Principal Investigator (PI)
Meeting. This meeting will convene all PIs of active awards the NSF S&amp;CC
Program for the fifth time since the program began. The PI Meeting is to take
place during the Fall of 2022 in Crystal City, Virginia. The PI meeting is an
annual opportunity for NSF-sponsored S&amp;CC researchers, local government and
community organization representatives, and Federal agency representatives to
gather and review S&amp;CC progress and developments, identify new and emerging
research areas, and to discuss research and application gaps and barriers. The
program agenda is community-driven and includes presentations (oral and poster)
from PIs, reports of past year program activities, and showcasing of new
S&amp;CC advancements and innovations. This will be a hybrid PI meeting. It will
include both in-person and virtual elements. The virtual component of the PI
meeting will also enable a larger community of researchers across academia,
government, and industry to participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual PI
Meeting serves as the only opportunity where the NSF-funded S&amp;CC PIs meet to
share their research, discuss new research opportunities and challenges, and
explore new ideas and partnerships for future work. Furthermore, the PI meeting
is also an opportunity for the academic research community to interact with
government agencies with vested interest in S&amp;CC research and development.
The PI Meeting is a forum for sharing ideas across the S&amp;CC community. It
has played a major role in growing the community across a broad range of sectors
and technologies, and performing outreach to others who have interest in
learning about the program and participating as future proposers, transition
partners, or sponsors. The 2022 PI meeting will feature presentations from
researchers, poster sessions, special topic workshops, and demonstrations and
keynotes from leaders in the research community and local
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.