* 2228726
* SSC-CIVIC-PG TRACK B: Streamlining and Supporting Access to Public Assistance Programs in Louisiana
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Jon Valant, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,997.00

Nearly 20% of children under age five in the US live in poverty. To support
these children, the US government funds multiple social safety-net programs to
provide nutrition, healthcare, early childhood education, and additional income
for families. Research on many of these programs demonstrates long-term
academic, health, and economic benefits to participating children. However,
these programs, which are administered at the state and local levels, are
divided among multiple agencies, resulting in separate, and typically
cumbersome, application processes. Information on programs and eligibility is
neither centrally located nor easily findable, and application portals are often
clumsy, confusing, duplicative, and outdated. This can hinder participation in
beneficial programs. This project targets efforts to simplify and streamline the
application process for families so that children in poverty receive the
benefits of the health and education programs for which they are
eligible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is planning a centralized
application portal for low-income New Orleans families with children, so they
can apply for multiple programs that provide services. The project is developing
plans to improve and streamline the benefits application process and ultimately
to increase enrollment rates in participating programs among eligible families.
the project will develop a user-friendly online portal that shows people which
benefits they might be eligible for and enables the simultaneous submission of
applications and supporting documentation to multiple programs in one
application package. The project is working in collaboration with local
partners. The portal will be evaluated experimentally to examine the effects on
outcomes of interest and understand the causal mechanisms that produce
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.