* 2228485
* Collaborative Research: SAI-R: Decision-making Under Evolving and Conditional Risk Associated with Coastal Flood Barriers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Ashley Ross, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 440,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People make decisions on where to live based
on many considerations. In addition to budget constraints, this may include such
features as availability of public goods, the environment, and local climate.
One very important consideration is the risk associated with flooding. Locations
vary by flood risk. Such risk evolves because of changing climate and because of
government investments in flood control infrastructure. This SAI research
project examines the decision making of people residing in coastal communities
regarding their residential location choices when threatened by changing flood
risk conditions. Investments in flood control infrastructure can turn previously
risky areas into safer locations. The safety provided by coastal flood barriers
may, in turn, increase the demand for local housing. A societal consequence is
that real estate prices are driven up, and low- and middle-class residents are
driven out. This outcome may further exacerbate disparities in home ownership
across income strata and lead to the emergence of a new source of social
inequity. This project develops a framework integrating risk modeling with
economic decisions and social behavioral models. The integrative approach brings
clarity to various coastal protection options in the face of climate
uncertainty. It also helps to understand how decisions regarding different risk
reduction strategies can best address the needs of racially, ethnically, and
socioeconomically diverse populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of flood
control infrastructure is often driven by hydraulic and structural engineering
models to assess and validate baseline conditions as well as simulate future
risk at the parcel level. This project extends that approach by integrating two
additional perspectives drawn from the social and behavioral sciences. One is an
econometric sorting model that uses risk profiles to model preferences for
location choices based on sales data of owner-occupied residential properties.
The other is based on social behavior models that identify residents’ risk
perceptions and uncover how risk preferences are affected by beliefs,
information and other factors not captured by the economic sorting model. These
approaches are integrated to quantify the change in welfare of the total
population and the distributional equity for a set of risk profile scenarios
involving different storm surge barrier types and current and future storm
climatology and sea levels. The risk profiles and welfare metrics are further
refined to address the needs of end-users and key stakeholders involved in
making decisions about the design of a coastal barrier system. This engagement
seeks to help policy makers evaluate a range of possible interventions, from
investment in public housing to more accessible participatory planning, that may
address inequities emerging from conditional and evolving risk associated with
flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.