* 2228957
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Accelerating diffusion of energy efficiency programs in under-represented communities through social networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Juliette Rooney-Varga, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* John Taylor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,611.00

Improving energy efficiency is high leverage climate action with many co-
benefits. It is considered the cleanest, most abundant, and most affordable way
to deliver energy services and resilience to climate extremes and disruptions in
energy supply. But even in states with policies aiming to incentivize
residential energy efficiency projects, communities that may have the most to
gain from such incentives face barriers to participation. In the proposed
research we ask whether intentional focus on word-of-mouth, or social, diffusion
can accelerate adoption of energy efficiency programs (EEPs) in under-served
environmental justice urban communities. In this model, EEPs work with civic
organizations to reach influential early adopters, build tools and incentives
for adopters to share information about the programs, and use their existing
networks for social diffusion. Unlike direct outreach programs, social diffusion
can drive exponential growth in adoption or enable a product or idea to ‘go
viral.’ Integrating social diffusion strategies into existing community-based
outreach programs can fuel subsequent waves of adoption. This project lays the
groundwork to develop, implement, and research social diffusion strategies
guided by analysis of communities’ social structures, discourse, and social
capital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team combines leaders of community-
based outreach programs, civic organizations, municipal government, experienced
social scientists, and sustainability experts with established networks in our
pilot communities in Lowell, Massachusetts. UMass Lowell’s urban campus is
embedded in environmental justice communities that are underserved by EEPs.
Stages 1 and 2 will address research questions: 1. How do community social
networks and socio-demographic characteristics impact social diffusion of energy
efficiency programs? 2. What skills, tools, and incentives can increase the
impact of early adopters on subsequent social diffusion of energy efficiency
programs? 3. What tools allow adopters to effectively engage with the
community’s digital public square to foster openness and awareness about energy
efficiency programs? 4. What approaches can be used to incentivize adopters to
share effective messages with potential adopters and thereby accelerate social
diffusion? 5. What metrics should be developed to assess progress in increasing
participation in energy efficiency programs? Our project will build a toolkit
for intentionally strengthening and using social networks to foster social
diffusion of energy efficiency programs. It has the potential to transform the
way that community officials and leaders increase EEP participation, generating
scalable, strategic approaches to accelerate adoption of residential EEPs,
cutting energy demand, costs, and emissions for under-served populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.