* 2228128
* I-Corps:  Context-specific scientific simulation models to mitigate wildfire risks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Kenichi Soga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of dynamic and community-oriented wildfire preparedness solutions
for the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) areas, which constitute a third of US
households. Current wildfire evacuation plans rely heavily on static zoning and
often lack a regional or system-level perspective. These plans fall short when
it comes to understanding and addressing practical challenges, such as the
unpredictability of the wildfire progression, the general lack of
awareness/collaboration by the residents, and the difficulty in communication
and resource mobilization in emergency situations. By incorporating the dynamic
elements as well as community efforts in the planning process, the proposed
solution (software and service) aims at supporting government agencies at
various jurisdiction levels (e.g., fire department, planning department, and
offices of emergency services) in potentially safeguarding the WUI residents’
safety and properties, as well as possibly creating positive community images.
Private sector companies such as insurance providers or large resorts also may
benefit from the proposed solution to develop better services/products for their
customers and increase company returns. Once validated in the wildfire sector,
the proposed solution may be used to mitigate the losses of other natural
disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of two core innovations: a suite of
scientific simulation models that capture the holistic process of wildfire
evacuations, as well as an advanced visualization platform that stimulates
awareness-raising and bottom-up collaborations through hands-on experiences. On
the modeling side, the integrated simulation framework captures the dynamics in
wildfire evacuation through the inclusion of the wildfire progression, the
organizational communication flow, and traffic evacuation sub-modules. The
models are developed to be efficient and highly scalable, which helps to
identify the evacuation bottlenecks beyond the boundary limits of a small
jurisdiction or a single infrastructure type. On the visualization side, the
results from the simulation module are converted to 3D animations, including the
fire flames, traffic congestion, and communication disruptions. The simulation-
visualization procedure enables endless scenarios to be generated and presented
to the users, effectively facilitating the enhancements of the residents’
situational awareness and ensuring smoother two-way communications between the
local community members and the wildfire management experts. The models and
visualizations have been prototyped at various case study locations, showing the
potential of possible improved preparedness through scientific and social
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.