* 2228975
* EAGER: Illuminating the consequences of membrane association on quantum-based magnetosensing
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Lauren Jarocha, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 297,047.00

The proposed project is aiming to understand the roles of magnetoreception in
the biological systems. Magnetoreception is a biological sense employed by
migratory birds to navigate on a global scale. It has been proposed that the
primary detector is a specialized ocular photoreceptor that plays host to
magnetically sensitive photochemical reactions having radical pairs as fleeting
intermediates. A radical pair is a short-lived reaction intermediate comprising
two radicals (radical is an atom, molecule, or ion that has unpaired valence
electrons or an open electron shell) formed in tandem whose unpaired electron
spins may be either antiparallel (a singlet state) or parallel (a triplet
state). Quantum interaction of unpaired spins can generate Magnetic Field
Effects – a difference in product yield or reaction rate as a function of the
field strength. The open question is whether this mechanism is the foundation of
avian magnetoreception. The objective of the proposed work is to develop
methodology to measure magnetic field effects on chemical reactions occurring in
the photoreceptor molecules. The PI is partnered with the Osher Lifelong
Learning Institute (OLLI), a learning community for senior learners, to offer
classes on quantum mechanics and quantum biology. OLLI offers 150 courses and 40
additional events per year that are available to nearly 2600 members. The Co-PI
will present on magnetism and chemical sensing at the Western Region Education
Service Alliance’s STEM Entrepreneurship program, a biannual event that engages
elementary, middle, and high school students from 18 school systems across eight
counties in western North Carolina. These activities lead to dissemination of
research results to the public across a wide range of ages and backgrounds, with
the goal of increasing scientific literacy and engagement in the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to provide
evidence that avian magnetoreception is a quantum phenomenon. To act as a
directional sensor, Cryptochrome proteins (chemistry of Cryptochrome, a blue-
light photoreceptor protein found in the avian retina, are speculated to be
responsible for magnetic sensing) must be oriented. For radical pairs formed in
Cryptochrome to act as a magnetoreceptor, they must demonstrate sensitivity to
external fields, including those as weak as the Earth’s natural field of 50-100
μT, and that sensitivity must have a direction dependence. Furthermore, in vitro
studies suggest that increasing viscosity leads to an increase in magnetic
sensitivity. Lipid membrane association is a promising way to achieve both
requirements. The main objective of the proposed work is to develop an
evanescent-wave cavity enhanced spectrometer to measure magnetic field effects
on chemical reactions occurring between membrane-bound molecules. The central
hypothesis is that membrane association transforms a radical pair magnetosensor
into a molecular compass that can sense Earth strength fields. If successful,
the project will allow the field to demonstrate anisotropic magnetic field
effects on biomolecules – including Cryptochrome. From an ecological
perspective, understanding the mechanism of avian navigation is important to
protect migratory birds. Beyond that, if the quantum origin of this phenomenon
proves correct, the principles of its operation can inform the design of
navigational devices as alternatives to satellite-based global positioning
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.