* 2228206
* ORE-CZ: Methane emission from wetlands surrounding Lake Pontchartrain
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Samrat Dutta, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,779.00

Wetlands emit methane, a potent greenhouse gas. The characteristics of this
emission depend on the individual characteristics of the wetland. In this
research, the focus is on the wetlands of Lake Pontchartrain, which is one of
the largest wetlands along the Gulf Coast of North America. These wetlands are
under considerable stress due to erosion, construction of levees and canals,
saltwater intrusion from the Gulf of Mexico, and urbanization. Against this
backdrop, the specific research plan is to assess methane emissions from the
soil at different locations along Lake Pontchartrain using infrared spectroscopy
and compare the data to those reported in the literature for other wetlands. The
research will also study the relation of the soil characteristics and the local
environment with the observed emission pattern of the gas. The outcome of this
work can show how the large wetlands around Lake Pontchartrain contribute to
global methane emissions and the factors that drive the release of the gas from
the investigated wetlands. Furthermore, the findings will provide information
that can enable better management of wetlands and support Louisiana’s effort
toward net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, which includes a plan to use
restored wetlands as a sink for long-term carbon storage. This project provides
research opportunities in STEM for undergraduate students enrolled at a
Historically Black College and University, and it is supported in part by the
HBCU-Undergraduate Program at the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetlands contribute about 30% of global methane
emissions and are thus a significant contributor to the accumulation of this
greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. Despite many research reports, discrepancies
between theoretical and measured methane estimation and patterns from individual
wetlands are observed. Inconsistencies arise because methane emission from a
particular wetland is dependent on water level, soil characteristics, vegetation
type, and topography. This research focuses on assessing methane gas from
wetlands around Lake Pontchartrain, one of the largest along the Gulf Coast of
North America, which has seen a steady loss of wetland area and a gradual
conversion of freshwater to saltwater vegetation types. A unique stressor to the
wetlands is the urban sprawl of New Orleans and its suburbs, whose effluents
impacts the wetlands. The plan is to use portable, user-friendly infrared-based
devices to collect soil methane emissions under different conditions from
various wetland locations surrounding Lake Pontchartrain and integrate the
findings into the larger framework of carbon cycling from wetlands. To this end,
the research will modify existing methane collection protocols, test soil
characteristics, survey heavy metal contamination and assess the biological
activity of the wetland soil. The objective is to understand the relation
between stressors and the emission pattern of the gas from the wetlands. The
result is expected to lead to better management of wetlands and support
Louisiana’s plan to optimize the carbon sequestration potential through wetland
restoration efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.