* 2228410
* I-Corps: Tissue-Engineered Intervertebral Disc with Biodegradable Cage
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a tissue-engineered intervertebral disc that may treat
intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration. IVD degeneration is one of the leading
causes of disability among Americans. Currently, chronic back pain due to
intervertebral disc degeneration costs US $100 billion per year. In addition, up
to 60% of discs in 70-year-old patients have severely degenerated, and 20% of
discs in 20-year-old patients have mild signs of degeneration. With the rapid
increase in the global median age, a greater number of people could suffer
debilitating pain related to IVD degeneration. Currently, there are two surgical
intervention techniques available for IVD degeneration, discectomy and spinal
fusion. However, these two techniques may not treat the underlying cause of the
disease, and research indicates that these approaches lead to the degeneration
of adjacent IVDs. The proposed technology may benefit both patients and
orthopedic/neurosurgeons. Patients may be alleviated from the debilitating pain
and the economic burden. Surgeons may benefit from simplified surgical
procedures, ultimately reducing operative time and costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
tissue-engineered (TE) intervertebral disc (IVD) with a 3-D printed
biodegradable cage to potentially treat intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration.
The IVD is an candidate for the TE solution, as the disc tissue has innate
limitations to its regenerative capabilities. The proposed technology is a TE
IVD construct to regenerate the function of the native tissue. Recent animal
study results have shown its efficacy to potentially treat damaged IVDs.
However, replicating the mechanical properties of the native tissue remains a
challenge. In the early stages of implantation, TE IVD constructs do not have
sufficient mechanical properties to withstand in vivo loads. Such a lack of
mechanical robustness causes dislocation and collapse of the tissue. However, TE
IVD constructs that survived the early implantation stage were successfully
integrated in vivo. To provide extra mechanical support, the proposed technology
includes a 3-D printed biodegradable cage that may protect the soft TE IVD
constructs until integration with the host tissue is achieved and the constructs
can withstand in vivo loads. In addition, to best match the anatomical geometry
of individual patients, a finite element model has been developed to potentially
predict the structural response in vivo and optimize the topology of the
cage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.