* 2228996
* SHINE: Exploring the Initiations of Solar Flares using Deep Learning Methods
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jason Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,926.00

Many new discoveries of phenomena of solar activity have been made in recent
years thanks to state-of-the-art instrumentation for both ground-based and
space-borne observations. However, due to ever increasing spatial and temporal
resolutions, researchers are facing tremendous challenges to handle massive
amounts of data in near real-time, and to extract important information from the
data that can lead to further scientific discoveries and forecasting of solar
activities. These tasks become more demanding when larger telescopes are
revealing finer structure with rapid dynamics and evolution, such as the NSF-
funded 1.6 meter Goode Solar Telescope (GST) at Big Bear Solar Observatory
(BBSO). This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and Interplanetary
Environment (SHINE) goal of understanding the initiation of solar flares through
use of deep learning methods and solar observations from the GST. The project is
a joint effort between physics and computer science groups, integrating research
and education through interdisciplinary training. A graduate researcher and high
school students will be trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project,
the team will develop and apply a suite of deep learning models and tools to
advance the understanding of the initiation of solar flares, and provide near
real-time flare forecasting. There are five interrelated tasks. (1) They will
develop a convolutional neural network with attention mechanisms for inverting
GST Stokes profiles to vector magnetograms with high efficiency and reduced
noise. (2) Using a Bayesian convolutional network with uncertainty
quantification, they will trace the fibril and loop structures of chromospheric
observations to provide an assessment of magnetic fields in the chromosphere,
which is crucial in 3D magnetic field extrapolations. (3) They will train
generative adversarial networks (GANs) using simultaneous NASA Solar Dynamics
Observatory (SDO) and GST magnetograms to create higher-resolution, larger
field-of-view data, which are critical to derive flow fields in flare-producing
solar active regions. (4) They will train a new GAN model, using SDO vector
magnetograms and HÎ± images to derive transverse fields from the NASA Solar
Heliospheric Observatory line-of-sight magnetograms. Therefore, the availability
of vector magnetograms is extended to two solar cycles. (5) They will develop a
new encoder-decoder bidirectional long short-term memory network with attention
mechanisms to carry out near real-time flare prediction and evaluate the most
critical magnetic parameters relevant to flare initiations. With these data and
tools, they will address the following two key science questions: (i) With
consistent high-resolution observations, what roles do the evolution of magnetic
fields and flow fields play in storing energy and triggering solar flares? (ii)
What is the quantitative assessment of flare prediction with the deep learning-
processed data and deep learning-based prediction
tools?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.