* 2228667
* SAI-R: Uncovering Barriers to Low-Carbon Travel to Strengthen Transportation Infrastructure in Rural Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the environmental impact of travel in
small and rural communities will be necessary to meet U.S. climate goals.
Transportation is the largest source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the
U.S., and transportation GHGs are particularly significant in small and rural
communities where 30% of U.S. auto-travel occurs and the average person travels
40% farther than their urban counterparts. However, most research that focuses
on reducing transportation GHGs has been conducted in urban areas despite
important differences in the physical and social contexts of rural communities.
A clear understanding of those differences is needed to design GHG reduction
strategies that work in rural contexts. The lack of rural travel behavior
research stems in part from a lack of robust information about where, why and
how people who live in rural places travel. This SAI research project
strengthens understanding of travel behavior in small and rural communities by
first building a powerful new rural travel dataset and then using it to uncover
the factors that influence how people travel in rural communities. This project
also evaluates the effects of infrastructure investments and policies on the
travel decisions and transportation GHGs of people in small and rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel in small and rural communities is a
significant driver of overall GHG emissions from the transportation sector. This
project fills a critical gap in knowledge about rural travel behavior by
creating a novel panel dataset that fuses spatially detailed data from three
sources: vehicle observations, transportation infrastructure data, and
individual-level survey data. The data are evaluated using a convergent human
behavioral framework drawn from the fields of transportation planning and
engineering, economics, and behavioral sciences. Importantly, the dataset tracks
changes in travel behavior over time, supporting an analysis of peoples’
responses to interventions such as changes in energy prices, electric vehicle
(EV) purchase incentives, the availability of broadband internet, changes in
land use, and the location of EV charging infrastructure. This research will
help small and rural communities achieve deep reductions in GHG emissions by
providing insights into how to leverage transportation infrastructure
investments, technology, and policies to reduce GHGs while supporting economic
vitality, mobility, and equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE)
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.