* 2228582
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Equalizing Access to Non-opioid Strategies with Community-embedded Online Pain Management Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Marian Wilson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Persisting gaps in pain care is the problem to be addressed in this project. We
intend to build an expert community team to create online resources that will be
freely available to aid people with pain. The opioid crisis has heightened
public awareness about the risks of relying on opioids alone for pain relief.
Despite that online pain management programs have been found to improve pain,
reduce opioid use and misuse, and increase use of non-opioid pain management
options, they are not always available for people who need the help. More
attention is needed to create programs that can be accessed for all. This projet
will include input from healthcare providers and the public to create resources
for people with pain. The aim with this work is to advance the science on use of
technology to assist with a public health problem. The end goal is to create an
up-to-date, accessible program that will improve pain care outcomes. The project
will also investigate new ways to keep the online pain program updated and
current, noting that the cost of technology maintenance is an obstacle. This
project expects our project could improve pain care for people and, potentially,
result in fewer problems from poorly managed pain, such as suicide, opioid
misuse, or overdose. Creation of a successful open-access model could result in
an innovation that can be easily replicable and widely shared in other
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Stage 1 planning grant is to
build a network of community collaborators to work together towards a shared
goal of improving pain management outcomes. This project will first solidify an
advisory board to direct all aspects of the project. We will then seek input
from people with pain, healthcare providers, and community members on desired
features and content of an online suite of pain management resources (E-health).
The project will use surveys and focus group methods to collect diverse
feedback. Technology tools are often created, but resources to maintain and
embed them in clinical settings are often insufficient. Therefore, this project
will also investigate options for ongoing sustainability of the online resources
during our data gathering stage. The project team will ask the advisory board to
review summaries of the gathered data after analysis. Together, the research
team and advisory board will draft a prototype and cost estimate for an E-health
suite that can be fully developed, and pilot tested in a Stage 2
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.