* 2228444
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Reimagining Urban Resilience and Education Hubs Using a Community-Engaged, Equity-Centered Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Zhihua Qu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The University of Central Florida and its partners, including the City of
Orlando, have identified a recurring need for “equitable resilience” in response
to climate-related disasters, such as hurricanes, that lead to significant loss
of power and connectivity. Historically marginalized groups and lower-income
populations have higher energy burdens, less access to generators, and reduced
internet access, and are especially susceptible to external shocks that threaten
community resilience. For these reasons, this project will co-create a design
for an equity-centered, portable resilience hub and education center tailored
for Central Florida and the Orlando community. This project calls this a
Resilience, Education, and Advocacy Center for Hazard preparedness, or REACH
hubs, which will provide pre- and post-disaster necessities and connectivity and
serve as hands-on STEM education centers during non-emergency times. In
collaboration with state and local governments, multiple community partners, and
local youth, this project will use a community-engaged approach to put
underserved communities in front of what we do to co-design mutually beneficial
REACH hubs. With strategic placement of the REACH hubs in socioeconomically
vulnerable parts of Orlando, the proposed hubs will improve disaster response
and recovery in a more equitable way. The hubs will contribute to local
sustainability goals by operating on clean, solar energy, and the design process
will consider how to scale or modify for other hurricane prone, peninsular, or
island locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives for the planning
grant are to: (1) consider and incorporate diverse community needs in REACH hub
design and deployment, (2) develop technical specifications for the solar-
powered hub, (3) design sensor data packaging and integration, (4) build a
strong interdisciplinary team and research agenda, and (5) scale and modify for
other hurricane-prone communities. We will use partner agency and community
workshops for collecting community feedback to design all elements of the hubs.
This project will also develop a modular design for our resilience hub that will
use commercialized technologies of long-duration batteries, cost effective and
highly durable PV modules, 5G communication, wireless charging, and user
interfaces. Based on existing and planned smart devices in the City of Orlando’s
Future-Ready program, this project will use cutting-edge cloud/edge techniques
to integrate sensor data related to our REACH hubs, analyze using artificial
intelligence techniques, and package for STEM education. In addition, this will
create an inventory of existing and planned resilience assets in Central Florida
to help inform the prioritization scheme for REACH hub
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.