* 2228468
* CIVIC-PG Track A: From Crisis to Opportunity: Addressing Rapidly Escalating Wildfire Risks on Colorado's Front Range through a Science-based Natural Climate Solutions Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Protecting communities from catastrophic fire while concurrently working on
solutions that can mitigate global warming and benefit biological diversity is
the topic of this project organized by the University of Colorado Boulder’s
Center for Sustainable Landscapes and Communities. The team that includes civic
leaders, stakeholders, and academics will assess the potential impact of local
pilot projects that can minimize the threat of catastrophic fire in both built
and natural communities. Such actions have concurrent impacts and possible
benefits to ecological characteristics such as biological diversity and soil
fertility, and could reduce greenhouse gases. The crux of this effort is to
develop actionable science activities that can be implemented immediately at
little cost by both public and private entities. These actions focus on the
local and regional value of ‘green solutions,’ nature-based actions that can
increase community resilience and benefit the physical and mental wellbeing of
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses catastrophic fire
prevention and climate solutions. Among the deliverables of this project are the
prioritization of the highest impact natural climate solutions to be developed
to support wildfire mitigation. These include a synthesis of public and private
land management best practices for wildfire resilience based on observed
behaviors of fire under different land management/land use scenarios within
local or geographically analogous settings. The project is developing a
framework for conducting a full cost/benefit analysis of priority natural
climate solutions, including both the carbon/climate stabilization benefits and
the related climate resilience benefits (reduced temperatures, increased storm
water infiltration, reduced energy consumption). An assessment of the impacts
from land management practices to soil health, and insect and bird diversity and
abundance will be conducted by combining and analyzing data sets from partner
research projects, ecology surveys on natural land, and urban community science
surveys. In all cases, recognizing stakeholder limitations to implementation
will be included in evaluations. Of considerable interest, assessment of actions
in terms of effects on other actions will be
highlighted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.