* 2228990
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT-SAT: RFI Detection Across Six Orders of Magnitude in Intensity: A Unifying Framework with Weakly Supervised Machine Learning
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Miguel Morales, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2025
* USD 271,974.00

The coexistence of satellite constellations with ground-based astronomy is a
growing challenge with the increase in the number of radio transmitters. One
cosmological signal of extreme importance to astronomers is the 21 cm “spin
flip” transition, indicating the presence of neutral hydrogen in the cosmos.
This signal is emitted at 1420 MHz but received at a range of lower frequencies
from very distant galaxies due to cosmological redshift. Detecting this weak
signal can be difficult in the presence of interference from human-generated
radio-frequency transmissions for wireless communications. This research project
will use machine learning algorithms to better detect and mitigate such
interference, which will enable detection of neutral hydrogen in the very early
universe. Undergraduate students will participate in all aspects of this
program, providing them with hands-on experience in key issues of spectrum
management, space situational awareness, and machine learning algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radio frequency interference (RFI) from satellite
constellations poses a critical threat to observational radio astronomy
experiments seeking to detect the 21 cm signal of neutral hydrogen across cosmic
time. These highly sensitive experiments must integrate over a thousand hours to
detect the redshifted 21 cm signal; even very faint RFI becomes a significant
contaminant at these extreme sensitivities. Currently, no single RFI detection
technique can effectively identify both very bright and very faint RFI (which
can differ by as much as six orders of magnitude in signal strength). This
research team will develop a weakly supervised machine learning framework that
uses existing RFI detection techniques to create a self-consistent flagging
strategy suitable for all events, from bright transmitters down to faint
reflections of terrestrial signals off CubeSats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.