* 2228414
* Collaborative Research: Geophysical Study of Ongoing Subduction Initiation Along the Matthew-Hunter Trench
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2023,10/31/2027
* Fernando Martinez, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 10/31/2027
* USD 136,894.00

Subduction, where one plate plunges downward beneath another plate and produces
a volcanic arc on the overriding plate, is a fundamental component of plate
tectonics. However, there is little understanding of how subduction begins,
largely because there have been no observations of this process happening at the
present time. Recent studies show that subduction is just beginning along the
Matthew and Hunter Trench, between Vanuatu, New Caledonia, and Fiji in the South
Pacific. This project will conduct a pair of scientific cruises to the Matthew-
Hunter Subduction Zone to deploy and recover ocean bottom seismographs, as well
as gather marine geophysical datasets. The seismic data will be used to image
the downgoing plate and magma source regions beneath volcanoes. The cruises will
also map the seafloor and make gravity and magnetic measurements that will
provide evidence concerning tectonic structures, volcanism, crustal deformation,
and ages of subduction initiation processes. This project will be carried out in
collaboration with scientists from France and New Caledonia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction initiation may be the most enduring question in
terrestrial geodynamics. Most knowledge of subduction initiation comes from the
study of past initiation events where some of the volcanic products have been
preserved. The lack of present-day examples of subduction initiation that
include the classic sequence of forearc magmatism limits the understanding of
how these processes occur. However, recent studies show that subduction
initiation with accompanying magmatic activity is occurring along the Matthew
and Hunter Trench between the New Hebrides Trench and the Fiji Platform. The
Matthew-Hunter Subduction Zone thus offers a unique opportunity to study a young
subduction zone in the process of formation but sufficiently advanced to create
magmatic products. This project will deploy an array of 25 passive ocean bottom
seismographs (20 US and 5 French) and carry out a marine geophysical survey to
define the slab geometry, seismicity, structure, and mantle flow patterns
associated with this developing subduction zone. The seismographs will be
deployed along lines to be shot by a collaborative French cruise to take
advantage of shallow structure constraints, and the array is designed to image
the structure of the forearc, the volcanic Hunter Ridge, and the extensional
Monzier Rift. Seismic data will be analyzed using Rayleigh wave tomography from
ambient noise and earthquakes, body wave tomography, and shear wave splitting.
In addition, an extensive multibeam bathymetric, acoustic backscatter imagery,
gravity and magnetic survey will be carried out to identify tectonic structures,
regions of recent seafloor volcanism, and magnetic isochrons. Geophysical track
spacing will be sufficiently dense to fully map the forearc area and carry out
three-dimensional geophysical inversions over the same regions as the main
seismograph deployment. This combination of near surface and coincident deeper
crustal and mantle imaging will provide powerful constraints for understanding
subduction initiation. This project will be carried out in collaboration with
investigators from IFREMER and New Caledonia, who have proposed a French cruise
currently awaiting scheduling to collect active source seismic data as well as
heat flow and fluid samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.