* 2228662
* SAI-P: Optimizing Deployment of Green Stormwater Infrastructure for Maximum Benefit
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Paul Imhoff, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 123,556.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stormwater runoff is a major source of water
pollution and flooding in cities. To help manage these problems, many
communities are turning to practices like rain gardens, bioswales, or soil
amendments that reduce and treat stormwater runoff by mimicking natural
hydrologic processes. These “green infrastructure” practices are cost-effective
and can provide multiple social, economic, and health benefits when implemented
in strategic locations within a watershed. However, the public land owned by
government agencies charged with managing stormwater may not be sufficient to
meet watershed targets. Developing effective strategies for engaging residents
and incentivizing adoption of green infrastructure on private land is a top
priority. This SAI planning project focuses on how municipalities and government
agencies can optimally allocate their resources to equitably distribute and
maximize the benefits of stormwater management to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI planning project brings together
stakeholders in a major region of the country to define the challenges
surrounding green infrastructure implementation. A major goal is to prioritize
the social, behavioral, economic, policy, and/or hydrologic research needed to
develop more effective and equitable green infrastructure strategies. This
project focuses primarily on bringing together a diverse range of stakeholders,
including local governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) who work with
homeowners to install green infrastructure, and basic science researchers. These
groups participate in half-day meetings during the project period. Between
meetings, additional information is gathered on one or more local areas of
interest to guide more focused discussions of potential research directions. To
include feedback from stakeholder groups and perspectives beyond the local area,
a special session is hosted at a larger regional meeting. The planning activity
culminates in a comprehensive research plan that addresses the most pressing
challenges in implementing effective and equitable green
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.