* 2228226
* Facilitating Accessibility in STEM at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Thomas Higgins, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,920.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing science and math
faculty with practical skills to teach students with disabilities at two-year
colleges. A greater proportion of the student population at two-year colleges
have documented disabilities compared with four-year institutions. To improve
inclusivity and diversity in STEM, it is important that students with
disabilities achieve success at rates comparable to the whole population. While
reasonable accommodations are provided for each student, more nuanced techniques
will enhance the student experience, provide more opportunities for success, and
give guidance to faculty. This training conference will bring expertise to
science and math faculty at two-year colleges, engaging them in specific,
practical, and immediately implementable skills to better engage with
neurodivergent students, and students with visual, auditory, or mobility
disabilities. Conference participants will learn techniques, initiate a
community of practice to support each other, and become faculty liaisons within
their own institutions and regional groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to convene a conference that prepares two-year college
faculty to support students with disabilities. Participants in the conference
will include two-year college faculty in math, physics, and chemistry. The
conference will offer workshops to help faculty enhance student graphical
literacy among students with visual disabilities, and to ensure laboratory
safety for students with mobility disabilities. Participants will gain first-
hand knowledge of accessibility challenges through a student-led science museum
tour and a panel discussion. Disciplinary and cross disciplinary discussions
will support the creation of communication channels to brainstorm specific
strategies for inclusive teaching while providing opportunities for participants
to develop and facilitate similar workshops in their home institutions. The
conference will be organized by the leaders of three two-year college
professional organizations and convened in Minneapolis, Minnesota with expected
attendance of 24 participants. Dissemination will involve multiple modalities,
including presentations at conferences, professional disciplinary societies and
a handbook of helpful practices will be widely distributed. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM
education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes
innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-
year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.