* 2228556
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 ACM Recommender Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Yi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 14,416.00

This is funding to partially support a Doctoral Research Symposium (workshop) of
about 18 promising graduate students along with a panel of 8 distinguished
researchers from academia and industry. This one day event will take place on
Seattle in conjunction with the ACM 2022 ACM Recommender System Conference
(RecSys). RecSys is the premier international forum for the presentation of new
research results, systems, and techniques in the broad field of recommender
systems. Recommendation systems leverage past user behaviors and user
similarities to suggest things that are tailored tailored to a user’s
preferences, and are used in a variety of contexts including social media,
ecommerce, health, and entertainment. As RecSys brings together the main
international research groups working on recommender systems, along with many of
the world’s leading companies, it has become the most important annual
conference for the presentation and discussion of recommender system research.
Providing travel funding to rising PhD students in the field will both enrich
the conference with novel research and provide useful feedback for the students
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the symposium are 1) provide a
supportive setting for feedback on students’ current research and guidance on
future research directions; 2) offer each student feedback and fresh
perspectives on their work from faculty and students outside their own
institution; 3) promote the development of a supportive community of researchers
and a spirit of collaborative research; and 4) contribute to the conference
goals through interaction with other researchers and conference events. During
the symposium, each student will give a 15 minute presentation, followed by
20-25 minutes for feedback and discussion. Two of the symposium faculty will be
assigned to provide primary feedback for each presenter; following this primary
feedback there will be a period of open discussion with all participants. The
feedback will be constructive with an eye towards shaping the field and upcoming
participants in the research area, helping students understand and articulate
how their work is positioned relative to related research, appropriately focus
and scope their ideas for thesis research projects, and improve the choice and
application of their methods and analyses. During the main conference, students
will also present their dissertation work and plans in the form of a poster
presentation; the work will be published in the RecSys main conference
proceedings. The conference management committee will evaluate the doctoral
research symposium, and the results will be made available to the organizers of
future symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.