* 2228591
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Catalyzing Walkable, Sustainable, and Equitable Urban Development using Innovative Transportation Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Celen Pasalar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,989.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) project aims to establish innovative
approaches for converting auto-oriented suburban commercial corridors into
walkable, accessible, sustainable, and affordable mixed-use “activity centers”
by leveraging cutting edge transportation design innovations and strong
university and community partnerships. This project relies on state-of-the-art
“Placemaking Alternative Intersection” strategies that have great potential to
catalyze walkable development along decaying multilane suburban highways. Other
benefits will include multi-modal accessibility, reduced delay, improved safety,
reduced carbon footprint, improved equity, reduced per-capita cost of
infrastructure, and strong economic vitality. Civic partners involve the North
Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT), the City of Greenville, and the
Town of Smithfield. The non-profit, Strong Towns, will also collaborate and
ensure project results and associated tools and methods for national
implementation will be widely discovered. The project provides a process for
empowering community officials and NCDOT with tools and strategies for advancing
sustainable, accessible, multimodal development through participatory
approaches. Tools and process include 3D visualizations and development of
community-specific design guidelines for implementing mixed-use development and
innovative intersection models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this planning effort,
the project team of university researchers and community organizations will work
together to address research questions necessary to prepare design guidelines
for the study areas. This includes gathering baseline information on land uses,
density, transportation mobility, travel time, current experiences and
perceptions, and other factors. Results of this Stage I effort will include the
initial research agenda and assessment identifying community-specific strengths,
needs, challenges related to transportation, walkability, equitable access to
amenities, and economic development opportunities for a Stage 2 project. The
project team and partners will devise a 12-month strategy involving community
surveys, focus groups, and workshops to increase acceptance of new ideas, 3D
renderings to demonstrate design strategies, and further performance analysis.
Webinars and new webapps are also planned for Stage 2 to broaden the impact and
vet these strategies thoroughly before a larger audience of stakeholders so that
urban revitalization strategies centered around transportation can be easily
applied in community plans and NCDOT planning processes. The goal is to
demonstrate how to overcome obstacles to sustainable, walkable, and equitable
urban design by using innovative placemaking strategies in suburban communities
currently struggling with revitalization. By vetting the project vision with key
stakeholders, the project will also determine the cost to implement strategies
and how much can be constructed from development-financed value-capture
strategies. This will help communities more likely to adopt placemaking and
alternative intersection strategies and amenities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.