* 2228180
* Implementation Grant: Community-driven Inclusive Excellence and Leadership Opportunities in the Geosciences (CIELO-G)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,759,895.00

The Community-driven Inclusive Excellence and Leadership Opportunities in the
Geosciences (CIELO-G) project will form cohorts of graduate students,
postdoctoral scholars, and educators at all levels to transform the culture of
the geoscience community by: 1) Supporting a diverse and multi-disciplinary team
to address fundamental climate change and Earth system science problems, 2)
Training and synergistic learning with local educators to create a modern
geoscience learning ecosystem in a bi-national community, 3) Increasing both the
number and success rate of students from diverse socio-economic backgrounds that
become geoscience professionals, 4) Increasing awareness of the importance of
geosciences and inspiring underserved communities and students, and 5) Improving
graduate students’ and postdoctoral scholars’ training through evidence-based
professional development covering both technical and soft skills. To achieve
these goals, the project leaders adopt a collective impact approach that
provides a foundation for innovative, robust research that incorporates
community engagement. The collective impact (CI) model develops a network of
community members, organizations, and institutions by advancing a common agenda,
providing centralized support, promoting continuous communication, creating
mutually reinforcing activities, and executing a shared measurement.
Programmatically, the project leaders will create cohorts of six graduate
students, six high school and community college educators, two postdoctoral
fellows along with junior faculty, and six faculty research mentors, with
integrated efforts for community research and engagement with five local non-
government organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together with the local
community, the project leaders will design and execute geoscience research
projects that combine four essential elements: 1) a basic science question
addressing fundamental climate change and Earth system science issues impacting
the Paso del Norte Region (west Texas, southern New Mexico, and northern
Mexico), 2) use-inspired research which results may lead to implementation of
practical solutions for the community, 3) socially relevant outcomes driving
substantial changes of awareness towards the importance of geosciences in the
community, and 4) strong community engagement leading to a long-lasting and
sustainable geoscience learning ecosystem in the region. The project leaders
identify four initial research projects, recognizing that new projects may
develop as CI is implemented: 1) Urgent challenges around water and agriculture
sustainability in arid lands, 2) Exploring interactions between geologic
structure and water pathways, including impacts on erosion, floods, landslides,
and aquifer recharge, 3) Investigating intraplate earthquake hazards in West
Texas and southern New Mexico, and 4) Understanding and mitigating increasing
urban heat and dust. The projects will be designed to address key science
challenges while reaching deep into the communities that they will impact in an
organic way, allowing them to evolve in response to continuous community
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.