* 2228457
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Reducing disparities in drinking water access by rebuilding consumer confidence in municipal tap water
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2023
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 04/30/2023
* USD 49,996.00

Previous studies have shown that the rise in commercial water consumption
reflects an erosion in Americans’ trust in government to provide safe drinking
water. This research addresses this crisis in consumer confidence by examining
the increasing use of bottled water by low-income minority populations in Des
Moines IA even though commercial water is more expensive; less regulated; and
more environmentally damaging than tap water. The project tests the hypothesis
that the propensity of low-income minority populations to favor commercial water
products, over municipal sources, is rooted in distrust of government to provide
safe tap water. Also involved is examining the impact of commercial water sector
marketing materials and the messages they send with regard to public perceptions
of the safety of municipal tap water. Understanding the dynamic of increased
commercial water use by low-income minority populations has implications for
public health, places a greater financial burden on low-income consumers, and
increases disparities in access to drinking water which is an essential resource
and human right. This research uses an innovative and interdisciplinary
partnership that involves academic researchers, public service providers, and
input from residents in low-income and various minority communities in the Des
Moines area. Goals are to understand low-income and minority community
perceptions and concerns about the safety and quality of public tap water;
trustworthiness of public services, in this case the Des Moines Water Works.
Research questions include: (1) What is the source of distrust in tap water
within historically marginalized communities; (2) How does the source of
distrust vary from one demographic to the next (e.g., African American,
Hispanic, immigrant, low-income); (3) How can consumer confidence be rebuilt
among historically marginalized groups; and (4) What interventions can be
implemented to build trust and who should deliver them: public works offices,
independent parties, or grassroots community leaders. Broader impacts of the
work include improved access to low cost, high quality drinking water for low-
income communities, increased trust in public municipal services, and effective
mechanisms for building trust in public services. Broader impacts of the project
include lowering the cost of safe, high quality, drinking water for low-income
and minority communities and rebuilding trust in civic essential resource
providers. If successful, lessons learned and interventions used in this project
can be scaled and translated to other communities with similar public service
trust issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to
identify and implement interventions that rebuild trust in municipal drinking
water providers. It involves designing and implementing interventions that
increase consumer confidence and consumption of public services, ultimately
reducing disparities in service consumption between racial, ethnic and low-
income groups and affluent, non-Hispanic white populations. The central
hypothesis of the work is that interventions targeting racial, ethnic, and low-
income groups will improve these groups’ perceptions of publicly provided
services. Using qualitative and quantitative data, we will conduct initial
demographic analyses to understand current drinking water behavior among the
civic partner’s consumer base and interview community stakeholders to understand
their perceptions and concerns about tap water and commercial water consumption
habits. These tasks will inform the development of interventions meant to
increase consumer confidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response
to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between
essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.