* 2228343
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Smart Watersheds for Conservation and Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Noah Webster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Flooding is the leading cause of natural disaster fatalities and property damage
in the US. Simultaneously, communities along rivers are facing unprecedented
ecological challenges, such as harmful algal blooms, polluted waters, and
degraded fish habitats. This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) project will
enable the smart watershed – a landscape covered by connected sensors, whose
data are analyzed to coordinate the flow of water between communities. The smart
watershed will help address challenges of water pollution, flooding, and extreme
weather. This community-led project brings together watershed planners, policy
planners, ecologists, ethnographers, engineers, and dam operators along the
Huron River in Michigan. The research will span multiple disciplines,
ecosystems, communities, and residents across 800 square miles. Once validated
at this scale, the smart watershed will become a viable blueprint to address
flooding, ecological conservation, and climate resilience for communities across
the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding hypothesis of this project is that
smart watersheds will reduce flooding and restore the natural flows of rivers by
helping dam operators coordinate water releases between communities. The
hypothesis will be tested by answering the following research questions: (1)
which social mechanisms underpin the major barriers to the adoption of real-time
coordination between distributed dam operators in a watershed, (2) how should
real-time data be disseminated to maximize the usability of decision- support
systems, and (3) how should dynamical control algorithms be structured,
parametrized, and constrained to support a positive feedback loop that maximally
incentivizes participation by a group of operators? This research will lead to
advances in fundamental knowledge, spanning ecology, water science, social
science, data science, and controls. The project will result web-based decision
support systems, which will ingest sensor data to help operators coordinate the
flow of water in real-time. In the long term, the project will culminate in a
successful demonstration of real-time coordination, as measured by ecologic
indicators, reduction in flooding and operator trust. Ecological indicators will
be measured directly via sensors and laboratory samples, while operator
perceptions, trust, and broader outcomes will be measured through ethnographic
methods, interviews, and surveys. Finally, the collective team, in partnership
with policy planners from the coalition of local governments, will promote the
findings of the project as part of best practices that can be followed by others
across country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.