* 2228888
* Conference on Quantum Symmetries: Tensor Categories, Topological Quantum Field Theories, and Vertex Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Nicolai Reshetikhin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 09/30/2023
* USD 39,697.00

Symmetry is all around us and, as such, forms a crucial tool to understand the
natural world. Mathematicians have studied symmetries for hundreds of years and
these classical results have guided almost every area of applied science. In the
microscopic world, however, it is the counterintuitive rules of quantum science
that must be obeyed. Scientists studying these phenomena therefore turn to a
newly created field of mathematics known as quantum symmetry. While new, this
field has already led to many breakthroughs and has played a crucial role in
work that has been awarded several recent Fields medals and Nobel prizes. This
project will bring together leading international experts and early career
researchers from mathematics and physics to share techniques and advances in
quantum symmetry. It will take place at the Centre de Recherches Math√©matiques
(CRM), Montreal, Canada, from October 10 to November 4, 2022, and will feature
three weeks of lectures courses and a one-week international conference. For
more information, see the conference website:
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2022/Quantum22/index_e.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
topics of this event are important both in mathematics and physics. In
mathematics, the latest developments in the representation theory of quantum
groups at roots of unity bring new results to this well-developed subject.
Related developments in topological quantum field theory (TQFT) and vertex
algebras (VA) clarify the structure of "non-semisimple" TQFT and VA. Many recent
conferences in these areas of research have focused on parts of these
connections, but this conference will be unique in the sense that it will
feature talks on each of the following topics: conformal field theories, vertex
operator algebras, Hopf algebras and fusion categories, tensor categories in
positive characteristic, constructions of modular categories, cohomological
aspects of tensor categories, and more. These activities will connect
communities working on different sides of the rich research area that is quantum
symmetry. Other important aims include the training of the next generation of
mathematical scientists and creating opportunities to meet with other
researchers working on related problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.