* 2228568
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Full Building Scans for Targeted Micro-retrofits using Drones, Radars, and Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Semiha Ergan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Taylor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,991.00

Poor air and moisture sealing in building envelopes contribute to worse
buildings emissions and occupant health outcomes. Finding moisture using thermal
scans can be a laborious and environmentally constrained process. Our
contribution in ground penetrating radar involves using machine learning to find
anomalous areas of interest in radar scans. We will be able to find trapped and
hidden moisture that is not detectable with current non destructive testing
techniques. By partnering with the City of New York and NGOs like District 2030,
this project will (a) research the applicability of radar scans on different
types of building facades, (b) create real, actionable outcomes that will
improve the quality of life for residents of disadvantaged communities in NYC by
creating better buildings through improving building envelopes with targeted
micro-retrofits, (c) create a product that is beneficial to the new
construction, the existing construction, the building insurance, the property
management, and the building engineering industries. This project will enhance
US competitiveness, produce new products, bolster economic growth, and benefit
society at large. The findings from this project have the potential to scale and
produce similar positive outcomes across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poorly
maintained building envelopes exacerbate building greenhouse gas emissions and
cause quality of life problems. We propose a non-invasive integrated solution to
locate and document moisture intrusion, thermal bridges, and air leaks to
diagnose building envelope issues. The system identifies and quantifies common
envelope defects and applies long-wave radar and deep learning to detect hidden
deep moisture penetration and other major envelope defects. This project aims to
perform inspections on public and private buildings in New York City,
specifically in low-income communities. We will work with community
organizations and local government departments already carrying out this work
and enhance their efforts through AI and robotics technologies being actively
developed in the PI/Co-PI’s labs. This project will improve the quality of life
for residents in low-income communities by creating more comfortable and usable
buildings. With this system, it is possible to perform low-cost, targeted micro-
retrofits to address envelope issues. We will either address building envelope
issues directly through low-cost targeted micro-retrofits or we will propose a
list of retrofits to our partners when that is not possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.