* 2228783
* SAI-P: Overcoming Barriers to User-Centered Infrastructure Planning with System Modeling and Natural Language Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ameeta Agrawal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 147,800.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. transportation infrastructure is
aging rapidly. Strengthening this infrastructure is a high priority for the
nation. This SAI planning project focuses on how computer technology can improve
transportation planning so that costly investments in infrastructure are
successful and serve all members of a community. A major challenge in this area
is that many transportation projects (bridges, highways, light rail lines)
experience community push back, cost overruns, schedule delays, and lengthy
approval processes. When such projects are completed, the results can sometimes
be disappointing because the outcomes are not as good as expected. Projects can
also negatively impact people who are poor, disabled, or marginalized in other
ways. Transportation planners can avoid such problems by involving experts and
community members early, learning from them, and anticipating outcomes. In doing
so, however, planning teams can get overwhelmed by too much information about
diverse concerns and opinions. This project addresses the problem by using
technology to help planners process data more thoroughly. As a result,
transportation projects will better serve user needs and produce more positive
impacts for communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project harnesses recent
advances in computing technology to help transportation planners process large
volumes of complex data. Two technologies are combined in this project: Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and Fuzzy Cognitive Mapping (FCM). NLP technologies
assist in the processing and interpretation of texts (expert reports, community
comments, posts on social media). FCM helps people understand causes and effects
in complex situations. FCM is used in this project to help people understand the
likely outcomes of a transportation plan. These technologies are combined to
create a new transportation planning approach. A participatory framework brings
experts, community members, and planners together to test and provide feedback
on the new approach. This SAI planning activity develops and evaluates the
technical foundations of the participatory planning method and designs plans for
testing this approach in real-world planning situations to ensure it works in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.