* 2228283
* REU Site: Increasing Diversity in the Linguistic Sciences through Research on Language and Social Mobility
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Anne Charity Hudley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 122,710.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. This REU site is designed to
increase diversity in the linguistic sciences by investigating the linguistic
choices that underrepresented minority students make as they navigate higher
education. The research sheds light on the role of language in social mobility,
an important but understudied aspect of educational and economic advancement. It
therefore supports the prosperity of underrepresented minorities and many
findings are likely to generalize to and thus benefit other American
populations. The project fosters diversity in the linguistic sciences by
involving undergraduates from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and other Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs), which do not offer
linguistics as a major. The findings of the research benefit colleges and
universities by providing information about the nature of the language and
culture of African-American college students, which has direct implications for
teaching and mentoring. In addition, the project makes scholarly contributions
to linguistics, sociology, and education. REU participants conduct interviews
with African-American students and gather samples of academic writing and social
media activity to create a public archive documenting the full range of
underrepresented minority students' linguistic practices. In Year 2, REU
activities are divided between the University of California, Santa Barbara and
the University of California, Davis, to take advantage of the fact that the
University of California, Davis will host the Linguistic Society of America's
biennial Institute in Summer 2019. The project thus begins to create a
collaborative community of faculty interested in linguistics across HBCUs and
other MSIs in order to build infrastructure across
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the REU site is to
examine the role of language in social mobility while increasing the diversity
of undergraduates engaged in the linguistic sciences. The project is the first
to extensively document and analyze the linguistic choices and experiences of
African-American English-speaking undergraduates as they navigate higher
education. The project creates a free public archive of African-American English
by having REU participants document the language of African-Americans on college
and university campuses in Southern California. REU participants conduct
sociolinguistic interviews with African-American undergraduates and gather
samples of their academic writing and social media activity to document the full
range of interviewees' linguistic practices. The research answers questions
about how African-American English is used and perceived by speakers in academic
contexts, which in turn sheds light on the impact of language on the educational
attainment and social mobility of African-American students. The primary
training objective of the REU is to provide undergraduates from HBCUs and other
MSIs with training and experience in the methods of linguistic research as well
as in-depth mentoring and professional development in order to support their
pursuit of a Ph.D. in linguistics or a related field. Research methods include
sociolinguistic interviews, corpus building, statistical analysis of grammatical
patterns, instrumental phonetic analysis, and discourse analysis. The REU
contributes to linguistics, sociology, and education by shedding light on the
role of language in higher education and African-Americans' social mobility. The
broader impacts of the project are to provide undergraduates from
underrepresented groups with research experience and preparation for graduate
school in linguistics and related fields, to benefit colleges and universities
by sharing research results and their implications for teaching undergraduate
African-American English speakers, and to create a professional network of
faculty interested in linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.