* 2228635
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B Design for Community Resilience: Participatory Civic Technology to Close the Last-Mile Disaster Relief Gap in Puerto Rico
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Robert Soden, FOUNDATION FOR PUERTO RICO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project seeks to pilot a participatory civic technology initiative,
re+connect, to close the last-mile disaster relief gap and create long-term
resilience for under-served communities in Puerto Rico. Home to 3.2 million
people, Puerto Rico is confronted with more frequent and more destructive
disasters such as hurricanes and floods. The need to better prepare the Island
for future disasters is immense and urgent. Building on collaborative research
and design efforts from the past three years, this project aims to mobilize,
inform, and coordinate collective action through a mobile application and
engagement program across residents, community groups, and governmental and non-
governmental entities in disaster management to direct the right responses, to
the right places, at the right time. Currently, there is limited guidance on how
to design such systems that effectively leverage the strengths, resources, and
best practices of communities and citizens in response to disasters. This
project brings together a team with expertise and experiences across
humanitarian innovation, participatory design, civic engagement, social and
behavioral science, disaster informatics, software technology, and social
entrepreneurship to both advance knowledge and understanding in key fields
related to disaster management and generate measurable, inclusive, and equitable
social impacts. Successful implementation of the initiative will enhance
peoples' access to essential resources and services by strengthening social
connectedness, improving local disaster information and knowledge inclusion, and
facilitating collaboration and coordination across stakeholders to achieve
disaster management goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build,
test, and pilot an initiative that integrates an accessible, reliable, and user-
friendly software application and community engagement program to crowdsource
key information to bridge the gap between essential resources and services
provision and community needs. With the goal of yielding a sustainable,
scalable, and transferable initiative across the Island, this project aims to
reach at least 100,000 residents from the most vulnerable communities and
generate knowledge and lessons learned to serve as a model for efforts in other
disaster-prone regions. The Stage 1 award will support a series of planning
activities to: 1) Solidify roles, governance, and management structure across
the proposing team; 2) Strengthen collaboration with implementing partners
(civic partners who will be potential users of the initiative) and expand
stakeholder buy-in; and 3) Refine the vision and plan for executing the pilot
project in Stage 2. The team will refine implementation plans for product
development; research; community engagement; business, implementation, and
growth; humanitarian ethics, data, and technology governance; and monitoring,
evaluation, accountability, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIVIC is a joint
program with NSF, Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology
Directorate, FEMA, and Department of Energy Vehicle Technology
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.