* 2228610
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Economic Resiliency through Mechanism Design and Secure Computing: MainStreetPulse: An Early Warning Platform for Monitoring and Supporting Main Street Businesses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Ziba Cranmer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The project seeks to better understand the health of individual small businesses
and Main Street business districts in Boston using cryptography, incentives, and
publicly available data. Using these techniques, the city can improve planning
recommendations for Main Street Districts and proactively identify distressed
businesses for targeted interventions and support. The project ultimately aims
to create replicable tools that can be used by all cities to protect and grow
the small business sector which serves as the backbone of the American economy,
accounting for 44% of all economic activity and 47% of all U.S. employees,
according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. It will also provide tools to
prevent and mitigate the impact of business closures on Main Street districts.
This challenge became even more acute during the first months of the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic when an estimated 100,000 businesses were forced to close, a volume
much higher than the approximately 600,000 business that exit each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this, the research team will develop a
predictive model and a user-friendly application using mechanism design and
secure computation. The envisioned cloud-native tool can be used by city
planners and by individual businesses to make critical decisions such as
location citing, rent and payroll budgets, and sales forecasts that leverage
projected population shifts. The research questions for Stage 1 are primarily
centered around the feasibility of designing a mechanism to predict the distress
or closure of small businesses, based on the application of existing data
sources along with sensitive data contributed by business owners as a result of
the application of mechanism design and secure computation techniques. This
model will be tested at the neighborhood scale in the Stage 2 pilot.
Participants will be incentivized to contribute business data, because secure
multi-party computation will allow the team to develop the model without ever
having access to the original data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in
response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap
between essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a
collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.