* 2228447
* CIVIC-PG: Track B: Improving integration of Ukrainian refugees in the US through equitable housing services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Nell Gabiam, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

With the World Bank estimating that there will be over 140 million global
climate refugees by 2050, it is imperative that scholars and practitioners
develop flexible and scalable refugee integration models. The US government has
responded to contemporary external displacement resulting from Russian
aggression in Ukraine by announcing a policy of accepting 100 thousand refugees.
This trans-disciplinary project across political science, anthropology and
engineering will analyze the determinants of Ukrainian refugee integration in
the Midwest region, a critical facet of which is the refugee housing services.
Refugee housing provides the foundation for stability and a return to normalcy,
but is often substandard and underfinanced. Despite initially supportive public
sentiment towards displaced Ukrainians, numerous contextual factors (e.g.,
minimal federal funding, varied concentrations of Ukrainian-heritage
communities, transitory news cycles, national identity, cultural and political
divisions) suggest significant geographic and temporal variation in refugee
housing. These characteristics outline the need to identify flexible decision-
making tools that could facilitate the provision and management of housing in
ways that best benefit refugees while also adapting to constraints. The dynamic
character of this crisis is in keeping with the logic of CIVIC because it
bridges the gap between essential resources/services and community needs and
requires a short timescale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal of assessing
the role of housing on Ukrainian refugee integration will be aided through co-
production of knowledge with refugees and genuine civic partnerships with
refugee organizations. Key questions to be analyzed include: (1) What is the
current state of practice of housing services in the Midwest (Stage 1) and US
(Stage 2) for Ukrainian refugees? (2) Which housing services improve or impede
refugee integration and identity in the Midwest (Stage 1) and US (Stage 2)? (3)
What is a flexible decision-making framework and tool to accommodate high-flux
refugee populations (Stage 2)? This study will utilize the collaborative,
capacity-building, and empowering approach of community-based participatory
research (CBPR). We will interview 40 refugees and 10 refugee organizations in
the Midwest (Stage 1), followed by a regionally diverse national study in which
we will interview 50 refugees and 20 refugee organizations from each of four
regions (Stage 2). This study provides a framework to understand how encounters
with housing organizations and local communities define refugees’ position in US
civil society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.