* 2228718
* Planning: SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Securing the Future of the Great Salt Lake Basin Through Effective Water and Land Use Partnerships
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Sarah Null, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Southwestern United States and much of the Intermountain West face a major water
crisis due to persistent and unprecedented drought conditions. The Great Salt
Lake Basin lies at the heart of the Intermountain West and is confronted with
pressures that put its ecological integrity, human health, and even regional
security at risk. Many of these factors are exacerbated by rapid population
growth, unsustainable urban development, social expectations toward water use
and availability, and improper mechanisms to reduce water use. State agencies,
research institutions, and lawmakers have rallied around several provisions to
address the problem yet a gap still remains between ambitions and actions by
individuals and institutions. This research bridges the knowledge and resource
gaps through development of a formal network of community and civic
organizations and actors to facilitate positive and timely movement toward
improving land development and water conservation. This network pilots a
community-level, research-driven project that connects local government,
environmental stewards, and water users directly to technology, analytics, and
scenario modeling tools. Broader impacts include improving land and water
management and planning in the Great Salt Lake Basin, reducing urban/suburban
sprawl, public education and engagement in the process of evaluating issues
involved with water use and accessibility, and improved ecosystem services of
the Great Salt Lake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project assembles a cross-cutting,
multi-institutional team to craft a shared vision for water resource management
that spans industry, non-government organizations, defense organizations,
commercial enterprises, and government agencies. The project leverages
relationships between Utah State University’s Institute for Land, Water, and Air
and the Center for Anticipatory Intelligence, Utah Regional Water Districts, and
environmental non-profits working in the watershed. Research will address
various issues of important including: major barriers that limit a systematic
and comprehensive approach toward long-term, security-centric, future land
development and use of water resources and how prolonged drought, urban growth,
land use change, and recent water policies intersect to impact long-term
outcomes of the Great Salt Lake Basin. To tackle these issues, the research team
and their partners will host various workshops and charettes to identify
organizational connectedness and gauge awareness of how existing and past
policies and social norms and environmental conditions influence the watershed.
The project adopts a novel new social interaction methodology called the System-
Centric Threats and Resilience Assessment Tool. This tool assesses possible
unprecedented threats and unintended consequences resulting from the convergence
of regional, national and global events. Project goals are a clearer knowledge
of actual water use and what influences this behavior; improved policy and tools
for reducing outdoor water use; improved outdoor water efficiency; greater water
security and community resilience in the region; and generalizable methods for
measuring tradeoffs and adjusting water systems management throughout Utah. If
successful, the results of the approach can be translated to other communities
and urban settings in drought or other water impacted
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.