* 2228971
* FMRG: Bio: Enabling Cell-Free Engineering and Biomanufacturing of Bacteriophages as a Universal Platform for Tailorable Bioactive Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Vincent Noireaux, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,430,641.00

Purified protein synthesis machinery can create proteins outside the cell. Cell-
free synthesis (CFS) can produce proteins that would otherwise disrupt or kill
the cell that produced it. Vaccines have been produced using CFS. Synthesizing
more complex structures, like bacteriophages, remains to be investigated and
accomplished. Phages are a resource of a variety of bioactive materials. Their
natural function is to infect specific bacteria. They could be reprogrammed to
kill bacteria resistant to antibiotics. They could kill food-borne pathogens and
treat bacterial infections, to name two important applications. The objective of
this project is to develop the CFS technology required to produce phages
flexibly and with high fidelity. Educational efforts involving the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory DNA Learning Center will focus on developing and delivering
curricular material. Topics critical to integrating CFS of phages into the
biomanufacturing ecosystem will be emphasized. Developed for high school and
college students, these materials will bolster the development of an agile
bioeconomy workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CFS of phages has not been
exploited commercially. Basic research advances are needed that will enable the
cell-free biomanufacturing of phages. The project will deliver knowledge on
phage synthesis across species and on phage genomes. This fundamental knowledge
will guide the engineering of phages with broader host ranges, by developing a
one-pot next generation sequencing (NGS)-based approach for determining gene
essentiality in phage and identification of permissive loci. The objective of
the project is to lay the foundation for the cell-free engineering and
biomanufacturing of phages, the largest family of antimicrobials. Efforts will
address four limitations to the current production of phages: (i) the need for
bioreactors of dangerous pathogens such as Salmonella or Listeria to produce;
(ii) the likelihood of generating phage-resistant pathogenic strains; (iii) the
need for many purification steps, which drives up the cost of phage production;
and (iv) bottlenecks surrounding large DNA transformation into cells to produce
the phage. The tools and knowledge developed can be readily used to tackle
societal problems such as the emergence of antibiotic-resistant microbes. The
phages included in the project are related to the pathogens Salmonella and
Listeria monocytogenes (Lmo), two of the most significant pathogens in the U.S.
To explore alternative solutions, several E. coli CFS systems will be optimized
as effective, safe platforms for phage synthesis, complementary to a Gram-
positive CFS system prepared from pathogen substitutes for
Lmo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division
(ENG/CBET), the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (ENG/EEC), the
Office of the Assistant Director (ENG/OAD), and the Division of Undergraduate
Education (EHR/DUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.