* 2228967
* SHINE: Physics-based and Statistical Studies Connecting Surface-field Distributions to the Magnetic Flux Rope Structure in the Corona and Heliosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Hong Xie, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 10/31/2025
* USD 508,504.00

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) from the Sun are the driver of extreme space
weather near Earth. This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and
Interplanetary Environment (SHINE) goal of understanding the origin and
evolution of CMEs through an investigation of magnetic flux ropes. The project
is led by scientists from under-represented groups in STEM, who will mentor
undergraduate students from underrepresented ethnic minority groups or first-
generation college students. The project advances the participation of women in
science. Outreach will also be conducted in preparation for the October 2023 and
April 2024 solar eclipses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project
is to obtain a quantitative understanding of the structure and evolution of
magnetic flux ropes from the solar photosphere to the inner heliosphere. The
scientific objective of the work is to determine how the reconnected magnetic
flux in the solar source region drives the CME flux rope structure in the corona
and heliosphere. The proposed objective will be achieved by answering the
questions: 1) Do flux ropes exist prior to eruptions, or are they formed during
eruptions, or some combination of the two? 2) How magnetic reconnection affect
the magnetic properties and kinematics of CME flux ropes? A combination of
photospheric and coronal observations combined with flux rope fitting form the
basis for geometrical and magnetic characterization of the “flux rope from
eruption data” (FRED). The team will determine the direction of the axial
magnetic field and magnetic flux rope (MFR) helicity by a combination of
magnetogram data and EUV eruptive features (e.g., coronal arcade skews, Fe XII
stalks, sigmoids, and magnetic tongues) in solar source regions. Since the flux
rope legs are anchored in the photosphere within the EUV core dimming regions in
the eruption site, the magnetic flux within the core dimming region corresponds
to the flux rope’s axial flux. The reconnected flux within the post eruption
arcade corresponds to the poloidal flux of the flux rope. Thus, a MFR is fully
defined in the corona and its evolution is tracked under the assumption of self-
similar expansion, enabling the prediction of the Bz (out of the ecliptic field)
component that encounters Earth. The coronal flux rope structure will be
compared against the flux rope in the heliosphere fitted to in-situ observations
at various heliocentric distances (Parker Solar Probe, Solar Orbiter, and
spacecraft near 1 AU), including self-similar expansion, helicity and the
orientation of the coronal and interplanetary flux ropes. The team will use the
elliptical flux rope and graduated cylindrical shell techniques for forward
modeling of the CME flux ropes. Both the Lepping cylindrical force-free magnetic
cloud fitting and Marubashi cylinder and torus fitting are used to derive the
MFR structure in CMEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.