* 2228909
* I-Corps:  Transmission Electron Microscope Specimen Holder for Imaging Quantum Matter and Other Extreme Low-Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Robert Hovden, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of methods to characterize quantum devices and other materials at
ultra-low temperatures. Many advanced materials for critical next-generation
technologies are interesting to study but can only be tested at very low
temperatures. These include quantum materials and devices used for quantum
computing, magnets, superconductors, batteries, and more. The proposed
technology may allow for structural characterization of these devices at or near
their operating temperatures. More broadly, some material specimens such as
polymers, battery electrolytes, and biological matter are highly sensitive to
conditions found inside an electron microscope and are easily damaged or
destroyed during imaging. Cooling these specimens may preserve their structure
by slowing or arresting pathways to degradation and allow for sustained
structural characterization using real-space imaging. The proposed technology
may enable useful atomic resolution imaging for a variety of applications in a
wide range of industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of an atomically stable specimen holder for use within
transmission electron microscopes (TEM) that enables extreme low-temperature
cryogenic imaging of materials at atomic resolution. Existing technological
attempts have been unable to provide low-temperature imaging of materials due to
excessive vibrations and instability introduced by traditional cooling methods.
Advancement also has been challenged by limited physical space that makes the
introduction of cryogens and other stimuli difficult. The proposed technology
focuses on designs to potentially overcome space constraints imposed by electron
microscopes and reduce vibration to enable stable imaging. This project will
evaluate the commercial impact of atomic resolution low-temperature electron
microscopy on the quantum device, semiconductor, and soft biological, and
chemical material industries to enable next-generation computational and
electronic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.