* 2228427
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Unique Composition, Environmental Stability, and Export of Dissolved Pyrogenic Organic Matter in Wildfire-Impacted Watersheds
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,05/31/2023
* Amanda Hohner, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 225,368.00

Forested watersheds have historically provided pristine sources of water to
address approximately 50% of the Nationâ€™s need for drinking water. However, the
increased frequency and severity of wildfires in forested watersheds are
adversely impacting downstream water quality due to the exports of sediments,
nutrients, and dissolved organic matter. Heat from wildfires initiates and
catalyzes a series of chemical reactions in soil organic matter that result in
the formation of pyrogenic organic matter (PyOM). In a wildfire impacted
watershed, PyOM has the potential to impact surface water quality, aquatic
biogeochemical processes, and the operation of downstream water treatment
plants. The overarching goal of this project is to evaluate the chemical
composition, environmental fate and reactivity, and timing of PyOM release from
a wildfire impacted watershed. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) propose to carry out an integrated laboratory and field research program
to 1) characterize the chemical composition of PyOM using optical spectroscopy
and ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry, 2) evaluate the environmental fate
of PyOM during photodegradation and biodegradation, and 3) monitor the timing of
PyOM export from a wildfire-impacted watershed with in-situ optical sensors. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge and data to advance the assessment and
evaluation of the environmental fate and transport of PyOM in forested
watersheds and its potential impact on downstream water quality. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and education activities
including the mentoring of one graduate student at Texas A&amp;M University and
one graduate student at Washington State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires can drastically change the quantity
and quality of dissolved organic matter (DOM) that is exported from burned
watersheds to downstream surface water systems due to the formation of pyrogenic
organic matter (PyOM). The presence of PyOM in wildfire-impacted watersheds has
the potential to impact aquatic biogeochemical processes and the removal of
organic matter during drinking water treatment. The goal of this project is to
evaluate the chemical composition, environmental stability, and timing of
dissolved PyOM export from wildfire-impacted watersheds. The specific objectives
of the research are to: (1) Evaluate the differences in chemical compositions
between background DOM and PyOM; (2) Assess the fate of PyOM during
biodegradation, photodegradation, and photobiodegradation; and (3) Evaluate the
timing of PyOM release from a wildfire-impacted watershed using in situ optical
sensors. PyOM generated from water leaching experiments of laboratory-heated
soils will be characterized by elemental composition, optical measurements, and
ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry. A multi-year field campaign will
evaluate the temporal dynamics of PyOM release from a wildfire-impacted
watershed using in situ optical sensors. The successful completion of this
research has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of
new insight and data from both lab and field studies to advance the fundamental
understanding of the fate and transport of PyOM in forested watersheds as
climate change exacerbates the frequency and severity of wildfires. To implement
the educational and training goals of this project, the PIs will leverage
existing programs at their respective institutions to integrate the findings
from this research into a K-12 teacher training program (Spark! PK-12 Outreach)
at Texas A&amp;M University and a field training program (Science at the Site)
at Washington State University designed to attract and engage students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.