* 2228216
* Implementation Grant: A Cultural, Learning, and Institutional Model to Accelerate Transformations for Environmental Justice (CLIMATE Justice)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Kim Fortun, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

Effective and equitable solutions to climate change will require a diverse and
culturally competent geoscience workforce with a solid foundation in Earth
system science, strong technical skills, and transdisciplinary expertise. To
address this need, researchers at the University of California, Irvine (UCI)
will work across disciplines to develop a Cultural, Learning, and Institutional
Model to Accelerate Transformations for Environmental Justice (CLIMATE Justice).
The primary goal of the CLIMATE Justice initiative is to transform the culture
of the geosciences through building a learning ecosystem that brings on-the-
ground challenges of environmental justice and sustainability into the heart of
geoscience research and education. The project will approach climate change
research in a holistic way that brings together multiple communities and
addresses climate impacts and solutions, as well as social and environmental
justice, systemic racism, and knowledge imperialism that discounts different
ways of knowing. Program activities will center on training diverse cohorts of
postbaccalaureate and PhD student fellows in core climate and geoscience skills,
as well as community-engaged research and environmental justice. The cross-
disciplinary experience with knowledge co-production gained through this project
will uniquely position the participants to serve as agents of change in their
careers, whether in academia or other fields. The project will have broad
impacts for education, workforce development, broadening participation, and
building capacity for addressing climate change. It will improve the culture,
effectiveness, and economic benefits of geoscience research by creating a model
for institutional change that emphasizes community engagement to tackle pressing
environmental problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CLIMATE Justice initiative
will mobilize a cultural shift in the geosciences through a place-based approach
that situates UCIâ€™s global-scale climate research in a local community context.
The specific project objectives are to: 1) Train and empower postbaccalaureate
and PhD students from historically marginalized communities to pursue graduate
education and careers related to climate change, 2) Increase participation of
scientists from traditional STEM disciplines in environmental justice and
community-engaged research, 3) Build strong cross-disciplinary collaborations
between geoscientists and experts from other fields, such as social science, 4)
Develop equitable partnerships with community-based organizations, and 5)
Transform the culture of geoscience by building a learning ecosystem that spans
traditional institutional, disciplinary, and hierarchical boundaries. CLIMATE
Justice Fellows will co-develop research projects with community-based
organizations focused on addressing climate change and environmental justice in
Southern California. Through culturally aware mentorship and authentic
community-engaged research experiences, underrepresented minorities and members
of other marginalized communities will build scientific identities and a sense
of belonging, increasing the diversity of people entering geoscience careers
within and outside academia. Through its research and capacity-building goals,
this project will have broad impacts for communities dealing with the impacts of
climate and environmental change. Furthermore, it will provide a model for
transforming the intellectual focus, research culture, and inclusiveness of
academic geoscience departments across the United States and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.