* 2228292
* CIVIC-PG Track B:  Strengthening community paramedicine services through action research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Miranda Worthen, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,974.00

Community paramedicine programs are designed to provide expedited and customized
care to underserved and often vulnerable populations seeking repeat assistance
through emergency 9-1-1 services. While evaluations show that these programs are
effective at reducing use of emergency services and saving cities money,
knowledge of how successful these programs are at improving the quality of life
for the clients they serve and whether they serve the community equitably is
limited. This participatory action research project explores the perspectives of
San Francisco Fire Department Community Paramedicine Division’s vulnerable
clients and the paramedicine staff. The goals in Stage 1 are to identify
indicators of success as defined by clients and staff and develop a method to
meaningfully measure progress toward successful outcomes. The project aims to
consolidate data from several distinct community paramedicine programs to better
understand the client population. Insights from this project will be used to
develop, pilot, and evaluate interventions to improve effectiveness and
equitable delivery of community paramedicine services in San Francisco and other
communities across the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision for this
project is to strengthen community paramedicine’s work to improve the quality of
life and resilience of residents of San Francisco who rely heavily on emergency
services. Existing metrics to evaluate community paramedicine programs focus
only on cost-savings and efficiencies and not on the experiences of vulnerable
clients and community paramedics. The research team will be measuring success at
the individual- and community-level, tracking how equitably these programs are
being delivered, and developing strategies to reduce burnout and moral injury
among community paramedics. The Stage 1 activities are guided by three core
questions: 1) how do community paramedicine staff, clients, and municipal
stakeholders define success for community paramedicine programs?; 2) what are
useful metrics to measure equitable delivery of community paramedicine programs
and what data should be routinely collected to assess these metrics?; and 3)
what interventions could improve the coordination, design, equitable delivery,
and/or efficiency of community paramedicine services? The Stage 2 pilot will
test best practices that could be scaled and adopted by other community
paramedicine programs that share the goal of serving vulnerable
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.