* 2228188
* Proposal Writing Workshop for Psychology Education Research and Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Michael Reed, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,994.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing targeted workshop
training to increase understanding of the process of crafting proposals to the
NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program, as well as other
programs in the Education and Human Resources (EHR) directorate of NSF. The
workshop will target psychology departments from institutions of higher
education (IHE) in the Southeastern and Mid-Atlantic portions of the United
States, with a focus on institutions that have historically served students from
populations currently underrepresented in STEM fields of study. Additionally,
the psychology departments and IHE to be targeted for workshop attendance will
be those who are either new to NSF funding or have had limited NSF funding in
the past, as the goal of this project is to increase the number and quality of
IUSE submissions coming from psychology departments who have yet to be active in
seeking such support. The workshop will provide information, mentoring, and
activities designed to aid potential principal investigators on their path to
IUSE proposal submission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of NSF targeted goals is to
access the “Missing Millions” of individuals who have potential for STEM
education and workforce engagement, but have not, as of yet, been actively
engaged in that educational or career path. This project plans on addressing
those needs by creating a peer mentoring environment of psychology faculty from
the Southeastern and Mid-Atlantic portions of the United States that will
develop through workshop preparation, delivery, and follow-up. The targeted IHE
will be those that serve a high percentage of students from populations who are
underrepresented in their participation in STEM. These institutions are likely
to be new or relatively new to NSF funding. The workshop will be designed to
build a cohort of potential PIs with shared experiences who are already
conducting research that is aligned with the goals of IUSE, but have, to date,
not made use of such funding to advance their research. Through the delivery of
information, along with scaffolding the proposal writing experience for
attendees, it is expected that cross institutional collaborations as well as
individual or departmental submissions to the IUSE program will increase. The
process will be evaluated and the findings of how to increase submissions will
be disseminated both to NSF as well as to and through other psychology
associations (e.g., the American Psychological Association.) The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.