* 2228992
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sunlight stimulates a spectrum of microbial CO2 production from permafrost carbon
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Rose Cory, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,549.00

We need to better understand and reduce greenhouse-gas emissions to meet the
Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to a 1.5 ºC increase. The
thawing of organic carbon stored in Arctic permafrost soils ultimately creates
carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas). Further, this process is predicted to amplify
with additional global warming, however, to an unknown extent. Therefore, we
need to quantify the extent to which carbon dioxide released from thawing
permafrost will amplify global warming; this is one of the most urgent questions
that Arctic scientists must answer. To address this, this project will make
measurements to quantify how much carbon dioxide is produced when organic carbon
from thawing permafrost soils flows into sunlit arctic surface waters. The
project will also leverage an existing University of Michigan program called
Earth Camp to engage high school students about environmental sciences through
hands-on experiences and outdoor activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As water moves
through thawed soil it dissolves organic carbon. This dissolved organic carbon
(DOC) then flows into streams, ponds, and lakes. Once in surface waters, both
microbes and sunlight oxidize DOC to CO2. DOC exposed to sunlight is easier for
microbes to oxidize to CO2 compared to the same DOC kept in the dark. However,
the sunlight reaching surface waters spans a spectrum of wavelengths, from the
high-energy ultraviolet (UV) to the lower-energy visible light. A critical
unknown is which wavelengths of sunlight from the UV to the visible are most
efficient at helping microbes to oxidize DOC to CO2. If visible light helps
microbes oxidize more DOC to CO2 than currently assumed, the CO2 produced from
this process could be double the current estimate because there is more visible
light reaching surface waters than UV light. In addition, different wavelengths
of sunlight may help microbes oxidize a fraction of DOC that, in the absence of
sunlight, microbes would not be able to oxidize to CO2. This fraction of DOC
that is difficult to oxidize may be some of the oldest carbon that has been
frozen for thousands of years in permafrost soils. This project will test how
efficiently sunlight helps microbes oxidize ancient permafrost DOC by measuring
the amount and radiocarbon age of the CO2 produced from microbial oxidation of
permafrost DOC exposed to UV and visible sunlight. Results from this project
will enable predictions of the CO2 produced from ancient permafrost organic
carbon thawed and exported to sunlit surface waters, which is critical knowledge
needed to quantify arctic amplification of global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.