* 2228791
* Time-Certified Decision Making in Connected Autonomous Systems: Fixed-Time Equilibrium Seeking Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jorge Poveda, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2026
* USD 603,100.00

Advances in connected transportation systems (CTS) will significantly reduce
traffic accidents, CO2 emissions, and congestion, with impact estimated at $200B
in the US alone. Humans cause a large share of challenges in CTS: they close
loops, add uncertainty and dynamics, and preclude the use of model-based
algorithms for control and optimization. Model-free controllers and algorithms
with guarantees of stability, safety, and performance are critically needed in
CTS and other industries. The main goal of this project is to advance the design
and analysis of model-free optimization algorithms in settings where decision-
making problems need to be solved, using real-time information, within a given
time prescribed by the decision-making user. Such controllers have a tremendous
potential to improve the performance of different applications in CTS but
require advances beyond the traditional nonlinear control theory and its smooth
feedback tools. The project incorporates collaborations with industry to inform
the development of the algorithms with practical limitations imposed by
computational processing, limited actuation and sensing, and intermittent
communication networks, and cultivates a talent pipeline into important areas of
national technology needs. The tools and algorithms developed will be integrated
into graduate and undergraduate courses and disseminated through short courses
and workshops offered at major conferences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will synthesize and analyze new classes of model-free fixed-time equilibrium-
seeking controllers for decision-making tasks characterized by constrained
variational inequalities. In contrast to traditional extremum seeking
algorithms, which only achieve exponential convergence to the minimizer of the
steady-state input-to-output map of a plant, the algorithms will achieve fixed-
time and prescribed-time convergence via new feedback designs that combine
super-linear feedback to accelerate convergence from a distance and sub-linear
feedback to accelerate convergence near the extremum. The algorithms will be
able to solve standard optimization problems, as well as multi-objective
decision making problems with a well-defined Nash or Pareto set. The methodology
will advance singular perturbation theory and averaging theory, so they are
generalized from guaranteeing only asymptotic stability to guaranteeing fixed-
time stability. The algorithms will be tested in different CTS applications,
including traffic congestion control, model-free leader-follower tracking with
time-varying personalized comfort-related payoff functions, and the coordination
of connected mobile robotic networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.