* 2228559
* SAI-R: Reducing Natural Hazards Risks by Incorporating Community Impacts and Equity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Julio Ramirez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 742,353.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concrete buildings designed prior to the
implementation of modern building codes in the mid-1970s may be highly
vulnerable to collapse. Many thousands of these structures in seismically active
areas like California are still in service. This includes residential buildings,
schools, and critical facilities like hospitals. Although these vulnerabilities
are known, local ordinances mandating retrofits have been largely unsuccessful
in achieving risk reductions. Building codes governing seismic retrofits focus
almost exclusively on structural vulnerability and preventing loss of life
during an earthquake. They tend to ignore the value that people place on the
functionality of buildings and the ability to reoccupy them as quickly as
possible after an extreme event. This SAI research project identifies different
stakeholders’ willingness to pay for seismic retrofits on various types of
buildings. It also investigates the priorities and incentives that are necessary
to successfully motivate action. The long-term aim of this research is to
identify effective policy-making strategies to motivate communities to mitigate
seismic risks before a future earthquake disaster
strikes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses several approaches to better
capture the feedback between human interaction with the built environment and
infrastructure vulnerability. One approach uses a mix of qualitative and
quantitative methods to elicit measures of building functionality and usage that
can be used to predict how community members prioritize different retrofit
options based on their cost, the buildings affected, and resulting performance
in the event of a major earthquake. Another approach uses physical experiments
and simulation of earthquakes on archetypal building features to better
characterize the vulnerability of this type of concrete building and the
effectiveness of different retrofit options. The data generated by these social
and physical experiments are combined to produce a decision support system that
policy makers can use to design retrofit and funding strategies that are closely
aligned with the revealed preferences of the community. Incorporating
stakeholder preferences into risk mitigation efforts will improve and strengthen
resilience to future earthquake disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences
and the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.