* 2228703
* CIVIC-PG Track A - Developing Community-Informed Strategies for Increased Longevity of Urban Trees to Mitigate Climate Change
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Gabriel Filippelli, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to provide government, community, and financial support for
long-term maintenance of a healthy tree canopy to mitigate air pollution and
exacerbation of urban heat from climate change, especially in communities at
greatest risk from increased heat as a result of disinvestment and racial
discrimination. By developing tree maintenance plans that align with community
values and sharing lessons learned across the Midwest region through a newly
formed Midwest tree hub, this project will develop tools for tapping into non-
traditional funds for tree maintenance that alleviate the effects of extreme
heat while also improving air quality, reducing energy burdens, and addressing
other community priorities. This project significantly adds to the work on
expanding tree canopy to maximize benefits to human and environmental health.
While many communities hold pieces of the puzzle, such as where trees should be
planted and how to fund the planting of new trees, the ability to maintain a
healthy tree canopy over time is often thwarted by a lack of resources,
knowledge, and coordination. This project will focus on those barriers by
leveraging support, sharing knowledge, and increasing coordination to equitably
sustain healthy tree canopies to mitigate the effects of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning effort brings together clusters of
local government, NGOs, and academic institutions in four Midwestern communities
to build climate resilience by developing long-term, community-based solutions
to maintain and expand tree canopy, focusing on communities that have
experienced the most disinvestment and suffered the greatest disparities in
health, income, and climate resilience. This work will bring together local
government and community organizations in Indianapolis; Kansas City, Missouri;
Dane County, Wisconsin; and St. Louis, to share successful tools, datasets, and
strategies as well as dive deeper into common challenges and barriers that will
not only benefit their communities but have impacts throughout the Midwest. The
focus communities have been collecting data and exploring resources to better
plan for expanded tree canopy in their respective locales. This multi-city and
multi-institution collaboration will expand partner and stakeholder knowledge
in: quantifying benefits of planting and maintenance strategies as planting
zones shift due to climate change, best practices for the deployment of sensors
and technology to aid in more efficient and effective tree maintenance,
community engagement strategies for developing and implementing long-term
maintenance plans prioritizing underserved and historically disinvested areas,
and the possibility of using carbon credits as long-term funding for local tree
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.