* 2228205
* Implementation grant: Community Resilience integrated into an Earth System  Science Learning Ecosystem (CRESSLE)
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2028
* USD 2,396,628.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project CRESSLE, Community
Resilience integrated into an Earth System Science Learning Ecosystem, will
partner University of Texas (UT) geoscience researchers and community members to
create a learning environment that is welcoming to marginalized and minoritized
(MMG) researchers, community members, and students while supporting close
collaboration on research using Earth System Science in service of communities.
This ecosystem integrates theory and successful practice with four integrated
strategies: 1) Discovery Research, to assess assets and needs in both MMG
communities and UT geoscientists, 2) a Community of Practice, joining UT and MMG
communities in cohorts to address issues around three research themes (Water
Resources, Climate Resilience, and Communities &amp; Landscapes), 3) advancement
of the successful Scientist in Residence program to train and inspire early
career researchers, and 4) development of Informal Geoscience Learning
experiences co-designed by the cohorts. These four strategies will build a
rigorous and inclusive Participatory Research (PR) program facilitated by the
Community of Practice that will co-design and co-produce research to address
community resilience and sustainability challenges, centered on Environmental
Justice. Project leaders apply a PR approach to long-standing institutional,
cultural, and scientific challenges to the resilience and sustainability of
communities facing impacts on the natural resources of water, climate, and
landscapes. Based on the successes of PR in other disciplines, CRESSLE will test
the idea that PR integrating the four strategies and applying geoscience to
address environmental resilience can produce four key outcomes: 1) increase
engagement of MMG persons in geoscience careers; 2) increase research
productivity and career pathways for early career geoscientists; 3) produce
enduring university-community partnerships, and 4) help understand environmental
justice problems and potential solutions on the neighborhood
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long history of racially-biased institutional and
cultural actions on national scales has led to underrepresentation of MMG groups
in the discipline of geoscience/Earth System Science. Over the same period, a
history of racially-biased community and city planning in Austin, TX led to the
segregation of MMG groups into neighborhoods that have been subject to
disproportionate environmental impacts. Project leaders argue that CRESSLE will
transform the culture of the geoscience community and advance MMG communities’
ability to address resilience issues using geoscience by increasing the
diversity of the geoscience workforce, building university-MMG community
connections, and advancing methods for PR and informal geoscience learning
experiences that engage and transform the STEM discipline of geoscience. Project
leaders will develop a best practices model that will be disseminated locally
and nationally and support career development of early-career MMG researchers
through PR opportunities, professional development training, and mentoring. The
goals of the career development and dissemination plan are to: 1) expand the
implementation of the innovative approach to enhance engagement of MMG
communities in geoscience PR, 2) gain institutional and community endorsement
and private/corporate support for sustaining efforts beyond NSF support; and 3)
‘normalize’ CRESSLE activities as a step towards transforming the culture of the
geoscience community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.