* 2228495
* Collaborative Research: Biochemical, Genetic, Metabolic and Isotopic Constraints on an Ancient Thiobiosphere
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Betul Kacar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 190,253.00

Chemical bonds between phosphorus and oxygen are important in building DNA and
RNA, and also in supplying modern cells with energy. It is not known, however,
whether the first life forms had the same chemistry, and early life in
particular may have run on sulfur instead of phosphorus. This project will work
backwards from the traces of this sulfur-based chemistry in modern life to
reconstruct the role of sulfur-oxygen bonds in early ecosystems. Predictions
made from this approach will be compared to the carbon and sulfur isotope record
in &gt;2.5 billion year old rocks. We will use the astrobiology social media
platform (SAGANet) for the conversations with public about this project and
other studies of evolution of life on Earth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phosphate
esters, such as nucleotide triphosphates, diphosphates, and pyrophosphate, are
the central component of energy metabolism in all living cells. It is not known,
however, whether they were of similar paramount importance at the origin of life
or in the first cells, or whether another kind of chemistry was playing the same
role there. Considerations from geochemistry, molecular evolution, and systems
biology imply that thioesters - high-energy bonds based on sulfur instead of
phosphorus - may have supplied energy in the first metabolisms on Earth. This
project will develop a broad and detailed understanding of the natural history
of thioester utilization, working backwards to reconstruct ancient biochemistry
from contemporary metabolism, and simultaneously examining pre-biological
chemistries that can couple thioester formation and degradation. These two lines
of study will allow the research team to infer the carbon and sulfur isotopic
signatures of important metabolic pathways in a putative early thiobiosphere,
and test whether these signatures are preserved in the &gt;2.5 billion year old
geological record. The results of this project should be of broad interest, and
the project will engage with the scientific community and the public through
journal publications as well as an established astrobiology social media
platform (SAGANet). Select high school serving communities traditionally
underrepresented in science will be reached through semester-long programs led
by SAGANet graduate student mentors and facilitated by the investigators of this
project.