* 2228728
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Piloting the application of the data-to-decisions rapid response team to support climate adaptation planning within the Florida State Park system
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Gwenllian Iacona, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Community land management agencies – such as the Florida State Parks agency -
are faced with numerous climate change-related challenges. For instance,
wildfire season is arriving earlier each year and consuming increasing staff
time and resources, and management, in general, is challenged by the northward
movement of invasive species. Florida State Parks decision makers are interested
in finding new ways to address these challenges by using research-based decision
support approaches. However inadequate staffing and limited capacity to deploy
new management and planning have limited their capabilities. This CIVIC project
will enable Florida State Parks to develop the staff knowledge and capacity to
use data-driven decision support approaches to solve problems related to climate
adaptation on public conservation lands. We plan to pilot a “data-to-decisions
rapid response team” approach that pairs local expertise with university
research scientists to identify and trial solutions to local conservation land
management challenges. These teams will use cutting-edge research on
environmental decision support to solve environmental problems while also
gathering information on the effectiveness of this approach. It will serve as a
potential implementation model for the use of this team-based approach to
address similar issues encountered by entities tasked with making decisions
related to the management of public lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decision-theory-
based approaches for structuring problems and identifying solutions show
tremendous promise for promoting efficient and effective management pathways to
desired environmental outcomes. However, to date, these approaches have been out
of reach for community-based land management organizations. Despite clear
interest in embracing theory-based decision support processes, the steep
learning curve and uncertain benefits have particularly hindered uptake among
many organizations. We have been developing approaches to support individual
organizations in improving their capacity to test the benefit of theory-based
decision support approaches. This support involves researchers and organization
members working together to use approaches such as structured decision-making
and return-on-investment theory to pursue a problem that needs solving. However,
to substantially increase the use of theory-based decision support within local
organizations, we need to rapidly scale the approaches used and the capacity of
local organizations to engage. The “data to decisions” rapid response team pilot
project aims to do that by providing financial, staffing, and technical support
to the community land management agency as we co-produce solutions to 3-5 pilot
projects, while also measuring the effectiveness of the approach so that it can
be refined and scaled to support other conservation organizations later.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.