* 2228013
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral consortium at the ASSETS 2022 conference
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Aqueasha Martin-Hammond, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 29,695.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 15
promising graduate students (up to 10 from the United States, who will be funded
by this award), along with about 5 distinguished research faculty. The event
will take place on October 22-23, immediately preceding and in conjunction with
the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility
(ASSETS 2022), to be held October 24-26, 2022, in Athens, Greece. The ASSETS
conferences are the premier forum for presenting innovative research on the
design and use of both mainstream and specialized assistive technologies in
support of the needs associated with speech, motor, hearing, and vision
impairments, cognitive limitations, emotional and learning disabilities, aging
and education in computing accessibility, as well as the professionals who work
with these populations. Researchers and developers from around the world, in
both academia and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2022 to exchange ideas and
present their latest work. More information about the conference may be found
online at http://assets22.sigaccess.org/. A key component of building any
community is through its youth. The Doctoral Consortium will help expand the
participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field, by
providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their
innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior researchers and
peers. It will foster a sense of community among these young researchers by
allowing them to create a social network at a critical stage in their
professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse
group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and
scientific discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field. To fulfill the Doctoral Consortium’s goal of providing an
interdisciplinary atmosphere that will span the areas of diversity critical to
ASSETS 2022, students will be selected to span a range of research interests and
approaches. The organizers will take special steps to promote participation from
institutions with relatively large numbers of students from underrepresented
groups, and will not invite more than one or two students from the same
educational institution; if two students from the same educational institution
are selected, at least one will be from an underrepresented minority in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSETS 2022 Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused meeting of an international group of selected Ph.D. candidates
under the guidance of the PI and a panel of distinguished research faculty. The
event will be composed of two parts: an informal dinner for introductions and
conversation (October 22), followed by a more formal all-day workshop which will
include a mixture of student presentations, feedback, and small group
discussions culminating in a second dinner (October 23). Student participants
will receive constructive feedback from the faculty panel regarding their
presentations that is designed to help them understand and articulate how their
work is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. Thus, the Doctoral Consortium will help shape ongoing
and future research projects aimed at assistive technologies and universal
access; it will promote scholarship and networking among new researchers in
these interdisciplinary fields, and will also expose the young researchers to a
larger community. Participants will showcase their work in a poster session
during the conference, and to further integrate them into the research community
a session has been set aside in the technical program where all of them can
present their research to the full conference. In addition, the faculty panel
will give a presentation on job opportunities for researchers both in academia
and in industry, to better inform the students when considering career options.
An evaluation of the consortium will be carried out and the results made
available to the organizers of future such events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.