* 2228959
* POSE: Phase I:  OSE for Consumer and Academic Scale Renewable Energy Adoption
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Reid, IMPACT ALLIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,144.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. The past
decade has been characterized by a momentous shift in the energy landscape with
over $2.6 trillion invested in the exponential growth of renewable energy (RE).
More than 80% of all new electrical generation added in 2020 was from RE
sources. However, a great bulk of this addition was for utility (&gt;5MW) and
distributed scale generation (&gt;500kW) and not at the consumer level
integration. The main mission of this research project is to scope an open-
source ecosystem (OSE) which will increase consumer adoption and support
academic teaching and research in the RE space. The project’s novelties are
providing consumers, researchers, and educators with intuitive, easy to operate
open-source software and hardware to control, connect, and modify RE systems,
along with access to large open data sets to analyze variables that affect
various solutions. The project’s impacts are 1) addressing the legal, security,
sustainability, reliability, and training areas needed for a successful OSE
around the software, hardware, and data platforms, and 2) enabling pathways for
development by growing the user base and creating a community of practice that
will demonstrate uses of the products and support ease of mass adoption across
multiple sectors in the academic and consumer RE space. Enhancing these
platforms and communities makes the individual consumer and institutional level
researcher and educator compete with industry giants in the RE space and serves
as a force multiplier in the United States’ quest for energy independence and
reduction in greenhouse gasses. Beyond RE, these platforms have applicability to
and can be modified by developers in other relevant fields needing similar
solutions such as water ecology and water remediation, small batch
manufacturing, and a host of agrisciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the consumer
and academia levels, significant barriers to RE implementation remain that
need&lt;br/&gt;to be addressed. This project’s team of researchers is focused on
three items that have been identified by industry, academia, government, and
consumers as critical gaps to broader development and usage of renewables: 1)
open-source free Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) interfaces to
control and monitor renewable energy assets (software), 2) open-source hardware
applications for diagnostic, smart relay, and microinverter purposes to
affordably connect, operate, and modify renewables (hardware), and 3) access to
large data sets to research and understand all variables associated with
renewable integration (data sets). The project’s scoping activities include
training, ecosystem discovery, governance structure, community building, and
planning for scale and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.