* 2228517
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Improving Service and Resource Distribution Programs through Public Deliberation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* John Gastil, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,457.00

Government-provided services and resources in communities all too often prove
insufficient, inefficient, and inequitable, yet public agencies have difficulty
giving a voice to underserved community members in their decision-making
processes. Led by academic researchers in collaboration with civic leaders in
Lexington, Kentucky, this project will assess a new model for cost-effective
public involvement in service and resource decisions using the theme of greater
educational equity in Lexington as its focus. Civic leaders in Lexington have
identified educational equity as a topic of importance in their city in self-
studies. This complex issue extends into questions about housing,
transportation, job opportunities, and more. By focusing on a cluster of related
resource and service challenges, this study will consider whether deliberative
community engagement changes how community members think about themselves, civic
associations, and their local government. The project has the potential to offer
evidence that more equitable and inclusive public engagement can improve the
quality of service and resource decisions made by local governments. The project
objective is to establish a new process for discovering a local community’s
greatest challenges and working together to devise customized solutions. Beyond
the specific issue of greater educational equity in Lexington, the project team
hopes to demonstrate that these methods could be used across the country to help
underserved populations have more voice in local decision-making while also
increasing government legitimacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliberative democratic
theory has focused on rarefied processes that involve tremendous costs and float
far above the on-the-ground realities of local governance. This project will
fill gaps in the public deliberation literature concerning cost-effective
methods for achieving high levels of inclusion, deliberative quality, and long-
term outcomes. The researchers will test hypotheses regarding: 1) successful
recruitment of diverse participants in deliberation; 2) the interaction of
communication mode and facilitation method to ensure robust deliberation; and 3)
the multifaceted impact of government responsiveness on civic self-confidence,
trust in government and civic associations, and future participation in public
consultations and engagements. Stage 1 funding will lay the groundwork for a
randomized control trial to test these hypotheses in Stage 2. A large sample of
deliberative groups will be recruited to meet in one of six modes in a 2 x 3
design that contrasts a passive versus targeted facilitation style in three
communication modes—in-person meetings, online video chats, and asynchronous
online engagement. Data will consist of direct observation, transcripts, and
surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.