* 2228028
* CNS Core: Small: Toward Opportunistic, Fast, and Robust In-Cache AI Acceleration at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Shaahin Angizi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,181.00

Internet of Things (IoT) is anticipated to comprise approximately 75+ billion
interconnected devices by 2025. Many Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled IoT
devices consist of sensory imaging systems that enable data collection from
people and the environment. However, insufficient computing ability of small IoT
devices such as smartphones, wearable devices, etc., and memory/compute-
intensive AI tasks prevent AI techniques from being widely deployed in such
devices. This proposal enables a smooth transition from the state-of-the-art
cloud-centric IoT approach to a data-centric approach, enabling mobile edge
devices to perform computation close to the sensor by repurposing the cache
memory to a data-parallel processing unit. This will remarkably reduce the power
consumption and latency of data transmission to the cloud. Moreover, this
project seeks to design and deploy new hardware-oriented AI algorithms into edge
devices for efficient image processing, reducing the computation complexity and
memory access, while maintaining accuracy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the
technologies developed in this project, more powerful and stable IoT devices can
be introduced ensuring accelerated operation with applications of societal
importance spanning healthcare monitoring, automotive applications, industrial
and agriculture sensing, intelligent infrastructure, etc. A comprehensive
circuit-to-system assessment framework will be adopted to systematically
evaluate the performance of the system on several IoT workload suites. This
project will make a strong effort on developing undergraduate and graduate
course modules, propagating transportable and open-source models, and broadening
STEM participation through publications/presentations at conferences and
workshops and involving undergraduate minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.