* 2228587
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Codeveloping local flood thresholds and high tide flooding predictions with community science and innovative technology
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Gayle Bowness, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,978.00

Sea level rise is increasing the frequency of high tide flooding along the 3,500
miles of tidally influenced shoreline in Maine, and coastal communities face an
urgent need to adapt. Near and long-term high tide flooding projections that
combine reliable tide predictions and local observations that tie water levels
to specific flood impacts (“flood thresholds”) serve as a technical foundation
for community adaptation to increasing flood risk. However, sparse tide gauge
coverage, unreliable tide predictions, and a lack of observation-based flood
thresholds all pose significant barriers to flood adaptation planning in Maine.
The Gulf of Maine Research Institute, in collaboration with US Harbors, will
lead a team of civic, community, and industry partners in building social and
technological infrastructure for establishing flood thresholds and improving
tide predictions in three coastal Maine communities: Portland, St. George, and
Boothbay. The low-cost processes piloted in this project will inform replicable
practices in analogously complex coastlines with limited NOAA tide gauge data.
Within Maine, localized, co-developed flood hazard and vulnerability information
produced by this project will provide data and engagement foundational to
climate adaptation planning questions faced by a broad array of stakeholders.
The state’s economy relies on access to coastal infrastructure—and as the most
rural state in the U.S.—Maine coastal communities face unique adaptation
challenges due to their remoteness, isolation from central planning agencies,
limited resources, and poverty. Consequently, this project fills a critical need
for enabling more effective flood adaptation in coastal communities in Maine—and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in this research project involves
installing community-owned, low-cost tide gauges using emerging water level
measurement technologies. Civic and community partners will identify priority
areas for installing the gauges. Collaborating university scientists will
conduct use-case scenarios to evaluate the efficacy of the water level data
products (e.g., tide predictions and emergency alerts) in meeting community
needs. Researchers will also build community science and education programs in
each community for collecting geo- and time-referenced photographic flood impact
data that can be tied to water level measurements and LiDAR for the development
of local flood thresholds. Finally, water level data will be used to
periodically calculate harmonic constituents, generate improved local tide
predictions, and estimate tidal datums. In the project’s follow-on Stage 2
submission of which this Stage 1 work prepares the project ready for quick
initiation and implementation, the team will leverage the scalable methodology
and civic and community partnerships built in Stage 1 to expand to 20
communities and adapt existing statistical methodologies for developing high
tide flooding projections for integration into community planning activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.