* 2228697
* Collaborative Research: SAI-P: Institutional Design Innovation for Power System Reliability as the Grid Decarbonizes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Lenhart, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 78,872.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electricity system within the U.S. is
undergoing rapid changes. It is incorporating higher levels of wind and solar
energy sources, responding to more variable demand, and preparing for large
climate and weather uncertainties. Yet, decisions about resource procurement,
investment, and contingency planning are often made with limited information
about tradeoffs between resource costs and reliability risks or the unequal
impacts of power grid reliability across communities and social settings. This
SAI planning project examines how the transition to a reliable future electric
grid can be made more efficient, sustainable, and equitable. It considers how
the engineering metrics and models for resource adequacy are embedded in
decision-making practices and relationships between organizations. The project
focuses on the co-design of resource adequacy approaches, with partnerships
involving industry actors, regulators and electric grid stakeholders in a region
of the country where the relationships between power reliability, affordability,
and sustainability are at the forefront of legislative and regulatory agendas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI planning project establishes an integrated
framework, a set of transformative concepts and analytical tools, and an
interdisciplinary collaborative team to further a fundamental rethinking of
approaches for power grid reliability. The project develops a new framework for
power-grid resource adequacy assessment by focusing on two long-term research
questions. One is a consideration of how institutional design choices and rules
structuring governance arrangements enable or constrain learning and innovation.
The other focuses on how quantitative and predictive modeling of resource
adequacy and power shutoff contingencies can better incorporate differences
across spatial and social settings in assumptions and attitudes about risks,
costs, fairness, environmental impacts, and climate change mitigation. The
planning activity combines stakeholder-engaged conceptualization and data
collection, semi-structured interviews, pilot testing of analytical tools and
approaches to uncertainty in coupled human-technical systems, and team building
activities. These efforts provide a foundation for research on resource adequacy
using new concepts for understanding institutional design choices in electricity
system governance, novel analytical tools for characterizing the risks and
uncertainties posed by rapid technological and climate change, and new metrics
and modeling tools for assessing the affordability, reliability, sustainability,
and equity of decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.