* 2228240
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: NV-RGRA: Non-Volatile Nano-Second Right-Grained Reconfigurable Architecture for Data-Intensive Machine Learning and Graph Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Houman Homayoun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 290,739.00

In the era of digital data, computing devices amass vast amounts of data
continuously over time. This leads to a paradigm shift in the computing by
adopting machine learning (ML) and graph analytic processing to analyze such
massive amounts of data. Traditional computing paradigms are inefficient in
terms of energy consumption, latency, and computational efficiency. Existing in-
memory computing paradigms address this challenge to a certain extent, but are
not adaptable for heterogeneous applications. The proposed project introduces a
novel computing architecture, right-grained reconfigurable architecture (RGRA)
that combines the flexibility of coarse-grained reconfigurable array (CGRA) and
programmability of FPGAs, deploying a circuit-switched interconnects and router
network with torus topology to address this challenge. At the top-level, RGRA is
a many-core architecture with each core configurable at finer granularity. The
proposed research is also expected to lead to the development of new branch of
reconfigurable architectures that support efficient execution of data-intensive
applications such as graph analytics and benefit from architectural aspects such
as reconfigurability and heterogeneity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impact, design of hardware accelerators is one of the driving directions
in the field of computer architecture. As such, the successful design of RGRA
that is performance efficient irrespective of the application memory-traits can
have a significant societal and economic impact. For instance, it can augment
CPUs, FPGAs, and GPUs in the existing and emerging systems. The results of the
project will include design of high-speed reconfigurable NVMs and interconnects,
which can also be adopted in many-core systems towards developing high-
throughput processors. With ML being taught in the higher-secondary schools, the
project has a good scope for outreach to the community and attract students,
especially in terms of (i) recruitment of underrepresented classes including
minorities and women; (ii) outreach in the form of K-12 and undergraduate
student involvement in research via summer internships and senior-design
projects; and (iii) offering a graduate course on ML accelerator
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.