* 2228256
* EAGER: Using museum specimens to disentangle the impacts of climate change on body-size across species in freshwater fish communities.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Karen Alofs, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,031.00

Climate change is predicted to shrink body sizes and in doing so alter
interactions between species and their environment with implications for
survival, reproduction, and ecosystem services (including nutrient transport and
food provisioning). Evidence suggests that not all species are equally impacted
by climate change. But our understanding of changes in fish size and the
underlying process of growth are primarily from fisheries records and do not
represent the range of fish diversity. This project aims to examine patterns of
growth across decades of environmental change and across a group of freshwater
fish species with different traits and ecological roles in order to clarify the
drivers of vulnerability to climate change. Outreach and education components of
the project include developing K-12 activities and building an online Story Map
to share research findings. The project also incorporates mentored undergraduate
research aimed at training and retaining diverse students in museum science,
data analysis and modeling, and ecological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will use a combination of museum specimens, data from historical
fisheries and surveys to improve our understanding of the impacts of climate on
fish growth. Focusing on species which are common in northern temperate lakes,
the researchers will examine patterns of growth across the last century and
across gradients in temperature and growing season length, while accounting for
other factors which can influence fish growth including water clarity,
productivity, density-dependent species interactions, and fishing pressure. Fish
growth is recorded in hard structures, including scales, which have rings
delimiting growth periods between years. Therefore, museum specimens hold
evidence of changes in growth rates across time and space. In this project, age
at capture size (length-at-age, a measure of growth) will be estimated using
non-destructive scale samples of thousands of museum specimens. Estimates will
be validated by comparisons across different aging structures and from fresh
specimens. By examining species which vary in evolutionary history, maximum
size, thermal guilds, life history, and feeding characteristics, researchers
will identify which traits are associated with climate-related changes in
growth. Finally, statistical models will be used to test for changes in growth
across life stages and disentangle climate effects from those of other
environmental conditions, density-dependent ecological interactions, or sampling
biases. By identifying the characteristics that put species at risk and the
conditions driving changes in fish populations and communities, this research
will inform the conservation and management of freshwater
fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.