* 2228194
* Planning Grant: Advancing Justice-centered Community Science
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Rajul Pandya, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,196.00

This activity will develop a curriculum, learning materials, and participant
model that will introduce 100’s of geoscientists each year to the theory and
practice of justice-centered community science. Justice-centered community
science is when scientists collaborate with community leaders, especially from
communities that have been historically marginalized, neglected, exploited, and
underserved by science, and design and carry out projects that use science to
advance local priorities. The curriculum will incorporate guidance from minority
serving institutions and leaders who have strong records of doing justice-
centered community science to expand existing content from AGU’s Thriving Earth
Exchange that introduce geoscientists to the principles and practices of
justice-centered community science and help them identify and improve
fundamental skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The curriculum and learning materials
will contribute to an emerging body of knowledge about community science.
Community science, including justice-centered community science, expands science
– it contributes new research questions, new methodological approaches, and new
data sources. The most transformative community science projects explore the
very epistemology of science, which enlarge the conception of what counts as
science, and build respectful bridges between science and other ways of knowing
or traditions of knowledge. The Community science is designed to be societally
relevant and contribute science to concrete solutions; successful projects
translate science into action by informing community plans, guiding
infrastructure and development, influencing policy, or helping individuals act
or make decisions. Community science also contributes to science literacy and
public engagement with science. In justice-centered community science,
scientists learn new strategies and practices for diversity, equity, inclusion,
and justice from their community partners. The focus of this work is developing
the concept of justice-centered community science, advancing the theory and
practice of community science, and contributing new research questions and
approaches to the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.