* 2228275
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Understanding Native American Tribal Residents Needs through Better Data and Query Systems
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Olutayo Fabusuyi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,962.00

The Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians (LTBB) administration currently
works with a patchwork of data silos that limits their ability to identify and
address the needs of their residents. This project defines a central “database
of record” containing a comprehensive set of indicators about LTBB residents and
their community, such as their demographics, health, education, the economy, the
natural environment, employment, housing, public safety and transportation. The
database incorporates tribal knowledge in addition to standard community
indicators, and includes key terms from the tribal language. This project is an
important component of supporting tribal nations’ effort to develop data
strategies and data sovereignty. The project incorporates technical advances in
the design of this database, including: integrating existing data sets with
large variations; interpolating missing values; addressing data equity, using
this database to inform future data collection strategies, and making the
database easy to use by tribal government employees in multiple departments and
with varying levels of technical skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection
is expensive, and hence must be used sparingly. This project uses a smart mix of
integration and interpolation to minimize the need for fresh data collection. It
builds upon the team's past work on data equity to ensure that the results
obtained are equitable. In past research, there have been many recent technical
advances that facilitate collecting, integrating, and analyzing data.
Nevertheless, such advances often address one component of the data-driven
decision making process, and integrating multiple such advances into a data
project can be challenging because of the many real-life “wrinkles” that get
assumed away in most academic research. This project identifies and addresses
key considerations that are often missing in an academic research environment,
and thus advances research generalizability through real-life deployment in a
scenario with high social value. In Stage 2 of this project, the team will build
a database of record, along with query facilities that are easy to use. The
resulting database of record will drive the strategic direction of the tribal
government, including through better targeted effort in seeking and allocating
resources, and through better identifying citizens with unmet
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential resources and
services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the
Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.