* 2228535
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A:  Ocean Model Infrastructure For A Resilient Coastal City
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Alan Blumberg, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 46,362.00

Climate change poses significant challenges for coastal cities and ports. In
coming decades, coastal cities will contend with sea-level rise, increasing
storm intensity, warming waters, changes in precipitation, threats to water
quality, and shifts in coastal marine ecosystem. For industrialized cities, like
Portland, Maine, which is selected as a pilot location, this is in addition to
managing the complex socio-economic structure of a modern port. This research
provides a novel approach involving methods for deploying coastal science, high-
resolution modeling, and direct community engagement to benefit coastal cities
like Portland in order to improve community resilience. It involves work on a
novel, comprehensive, coastal hydrodynamic model that integrates data on air and
water temperature, salinity, wind, currents, features of the coastline and
seafloor, and other relevant parameters. To benefit coastal cities, however,
models must link to and reflect community needs because access to data is not
enough. Informed decisions and community resilience depend on information at
spatial and temporal scales that matter to decision-makers in ways that are
easily digestible, accurate, transparent, accessible, and useful. Portland,
Maine is a small coastal city, with a vibrant working waterfront and complex
port operation. Because of its relatively small scale, compared to other ports
like Baltimore or Los Angeles, Portland, Maine is an ideal testing ground for
developing scalable methods for integrating ocean science into local governance.
Goals of the work will be to build and validate an urban ocean model of Portland
Harbor coupled from the start to urban infrastructure and community needs.
Broader impacts of the work include providing critical information in a useful
manner to decision makers, land-use planners, and the community with a
comprehensive package from which current and future conditions in the port and
coastal ocean area can be considered. Such a utility will help coastal cities
assess risks and prepare for storms and other hazards. The model also can also
be used to inform port operations and emergency management, to support oil spill
response, and to facilitate coastal water quality management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has identified three initial coastal
management challenges where insight from hydrodynamic models can address a
number of important civic concerns: flood risk and storm surge remediation and
adaptation; water quality monitoring and management; and port operations,
especially dredging and sediment management. In this Phase 1 project, university
researchers will work with municipal leaders, waterfront businesses, and at-risk
communities to define information needs and develop modeling strategies to
address community challenges. In the Phase 2 follow-on pilot, the project will
develop and validate an operational hydrodynamic model of Portland Harbor (based
on lower-resolution models that already exist) and conduct additional model runs
(“scenarios”) needed to answer questions identified by our civic partners.
Working closely with end-users, the project will create novel, new,
sophisticated data products, like dashboards and visualizations, that are user-
friendly and easy to use to deliver insights from the urban ocean model to
support local decisions. The approach applied for this project has the potential
for scaling and translation to other coastal cities with port
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.