* 2228706
* SAI-R: Culturally Appropriate Language and Messaging for Influencing End User Behavior During Impending Infrastructure Failures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Keri Stephens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure supporting the public water
supply is often the most vulnerable during times of disaster. Losing access to
water can be life-threatening. Water utilities must explain to the public why
conservation, boiling water, and protecting pipes are essential to avoid
catastrophic infrastructure failure. Yet utilities typically lack the resources
and expertise needed to effectively communicate the importance of collaborative
efforts to their end-users during such critical times. One challenge is the
growing number of communication channels, including social media, text
messaging, and wireless emergency alerts. Another challenge is anticipating
cultural differences and the need to communicate effectively with diverse
populations, including Spanish-speaking and older adult populations. This SAI
research project strengthens America’s water infrastructure by exploring
cultural interventions with Spanish-speaking and older adult populations and
using these studies to design and test messages that can impact human
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs and tests communication
strategies that utilities can use with the public during disasters. A user-
centered design approach is developed in partnership with water utilities that
serve predominantly Spanish-speaking populations. The goal is to understand
system vulnerability concerns during disasters and to identify current
communication practices. Community-centered research is used to uncover
important cultural considerations that help tailor water utility messages for
their audiences. The research draws from theory-informed message strategies that
utilities can use to encourage cooperative end-user water-related behavior.
Messages are tested through multiple communication channels, and the data are
used to determine the impact of the messaging interventions on technical system
performance and user attitudes and behaviors. By focusing on effective
communication with diverse populations, water utilities will be in a stronger
position to protect this vital infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE)
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.