* 2228492
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Creating the West Virginia Flood Resilience Framework for comprehensive disaster response and long-term community recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Jamie Shinn, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,812.00

Community resilience is the ability of communities to withstand and mitigate the
stress of a disaster and is a key component of long-term recovery from natural
disasters such as floods. Community resilience requires effective pre-disaster
planning and coordination of the complex network of actors involved in disaster
response. Every county in West Virginia (WV) has a high risk of flooding and
these risks are compounded by increasing frequency and intensity of
precipitation, aging infrastructure, and high levels of socioeconomic
vulnerability. This project is a collaboration between academic researchers and
civic actors and will identify lessons learned during response and recovery
efforts to a major flood in 2016 in WV. This flood devastated several small
towns, killed 23 people, and caused over $1 billion in damage across the state.
In 2022, some communities still have not made a full recovery and lessons from
the 2016 event have yet to be clearly identified or incorporated into local or
statewide planning. Project findings from this Civic Innovation Challenge
(CIVIC) project will be reported back to communities and policymakers to be used
in future planning efforts, as well as to procure funding to increase
resilience. The team will build on insights from the planning grant to develop a
Stage 2 project to create the West Virginia Flood Resilience Framework (WVFRF),
which will be a comprehensive online toolkit to empower communities with the
knowledge they need for coordination and capacity building to prepare for future
floods, which will have broad application to flood-prone communities across the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to determine the gaps in
organizational capacity, cross-organization coordination, and flood risk
knowledge that need to be filled for more comprehensive flood response and long-
term flood recovery in WV. The team will integrate findings from a county-wide
survey, Participatory GIS (PGIS), and focus groups in two case study sites with
different levels of socioeconomic vulnerability that impacted success of long-
term recovery to provide a comprehensive understanding of gaps in flood response
and recovery. As a result of a novel integration of quantitative, qualitative,
and PGIS methods, the project will have insights for scholarship on building
resilience to natural disaster in &lt;br/&gt;socioeconomically vulnerable
communities while also presenting a unique transdisciplinary model for
community-engaged research that centers co-production of knowledge and creates a
comprehensive approach to disaster response and
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.