* 2228553
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Youth-Centered Civic Technology and Citizen Science for Improving Community Heat Resilience Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Naren Ramakrishnan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

One challenge for cities, especially under conditions of global climate change,
is developing effective ways to keep residents safe from extreme heat. Within
cities, historically marginalized neighborhoods often have measurably higher
temperatures and fewer economic and social resources to mitigate the impacts of
heat. The participation of these groups in planning how cities address heat is
critical. To improve urban resilience to increasing temperatures and heat waves,
this project develops a civic-engaged planning process that integrates
strategically deployed sensor technologies with a community-informed data hub to
forecast areas most in need of heat reduction intervention. The project will
train city youth to collect, monitor, and communicate data on urban temperatures
and experiences of heat through a citizen science program integrated with public
decision-making processes. This project involves academic, government, public
schools, nonprofit, and resident partners from the City of Roanoke,
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates novel linkages between
processes of resident and organizational learning, social trust, coordination,
and governance capacity necessary for long-term adaptation. The project builds
on a previous place-based STEM and urban planning citizen science program
implemented in Roanoke, VA. The current citizen science efforts will be expanded
to include the deployment of wearable temperature sensors and stationary
temperature monitoring equipment, as well as training youth in Photovoice
methods using photography to document the effects of heat on their communities
while simultaneously learning the language of urban planning. Key research
questions include: (1) How do informal educators characterize leverage points to
engage families around citizen science and heat resilience? (2) How can civic
technologies help forge collaborations necessary to proactively address extreme
heat in cities? and (3) How can digital infrastructure for diverse types of data
be designed to facilitate how residents and government officials make sense of
the problem of extreme heat and priorities for heat resilience? Outcomes include
the deployment of a civic technology platform that will be co-designed with
government officials, residents, and academic partners to incorporate the
quantitative and qualitative data generated through youth and family engagement,
as well as the development of replicable materials and methods to increase
diverse citizen participation in increased urban resilience to the impacts of
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.