* 2228370
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Community Informed AI-Based System for Driver Training to Advance Neurodiverse Independence and Employment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Mary Baker-Ericzen, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

In 2022, approximately 70,000 young adults with autism will leave high school
and face a litany of disheartening statistics regarding independent living,
community participation, and employment. Adults with autism rate employment as
their top concern. A major impediment for autistic individuals to access work
opportunities specifically is lack of independence with transportation; fewer
than a third of driving-age individuals with autism are licensed to drive while
many more are capable with the right training. This project offers a community-
driven planning process to explore how a prototype of an advanced artificial-
intelligence-based driving-training (AIDT) system, specifically designed for
neurodiverse individuals, that together with a curriculum built on a cognitive
behavioral intervention for driving, can offer an effective solution for
communities to help capable autistic individual become licensed drivers, who are
confident in their driving ability and able to more fully participate in
community life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Stage-1 project seeks to plan for a
full pilot deployment with multiple types of civic partners and support
providers – including community-based training centers and clinics, schools, and
others – toward an effective, low-cost, commercializable, driving-instruction
platform, with a value proposition that offers increased independence and
expanded career options for individuals with autism. An AIDT prototype has been
tested and demonstrated in Nashville, Tennessee, and San Diego, California. The
research in this Planning Grant will involve a large group of civic entities in
a community-engaged, mixed methods quantitative and qualitative data collection
process to identify context determinants that are important to address within
the AIDT system and in constructing a training protocol in preparation for
Stage-2 pilot deployment across vocational rehabilitation, clinical services and
education sites. The project expects to learn how to make the AIDT system
adaptable to use within multiple employment contexts and multiple employment
outcomes of relevance to stakeholder communities, how to make the AIDT outputs
responsive to community service providers’ needs for maximal useability and
minimal training demands, and how to finance its long-term sustainment and
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program — Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs — and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.