* 2228679
* CIVIC-PG Track B Digital Twin-based Framework for Development of Schools as Smart &amp; Connected Community Resilience Hubs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Douglas Toomey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

As the most recent United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) report describes, climate change and the growing frequency and severity
of disasters could soon outpace humanity's capacity to adapt. The severity of a
disaster can be amplified by inadequate infrastructure investment, social
marginalization, and a reduced capacity to adapt when a vulnerable community is
impacted. Strengthening vulnerable communities’ resilience and capacity to adapt
is, therefore, a key challenge for emergency managers and community leaders. In
this NSF CIVIC-PG project, we develop a community-led framework for adapting a
public school to become a pilot Community Resilience Hub (CRH) for a community
in the city of Portland, OR. CRHs are trusted, community-led facilities to
support citizens before, during, or after a disaster event. This research and
demonstration project will improve community self-sufficiency reaching more
community members in need before, during and after a disaster event (e.g.,
wildfire, earthquake, flood) while also establishing the value of developing a
network of CRHs in conjunction with community and city leaders and first
responders. The research will elucidate strategies and logic for development of
a network of CRHs that can be replicated in other communities across the United
States. The findings of this project will be disseminated through collaboration
with a NIST-sponsored Global City Teams Challenge SuperCluster and will be
instrumental to the future development of CRHs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
CIVIC-PG project will take critical steps toward developing a transformative
vision of how local CRHs can connect to form a Community Resilience Network
(CRN) leveraging the CRH sociotechnical infrastructure framework and serving
communities across a larger geographic area during a disaster event. We lack an
in-depth understanding of the dynamic characteristics of disruptions and the
emergency response needs that evolve during a multi-hazard disaster event. The
project’s primary goal is to investigate how “digital twin” technology can
facilitate establishment of community-led CRH sociotechnical infrastructure that
integrates evolving community needs, resources, and conditions to facilitate
emergency response, timely information-sharing, resilient connectivity, and
resource distribution across a network of CRHs in response to disaster events.
This will lay the foundation for establishment of a CRN that leverages updated
city management and community-led strategies to expand CRH resource resilience
capacity, distributed disaster response (across vulnerable communities and
CRHs), and data-driven decision-making on disaster response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge
which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department of Energy's Vehicle Technology
Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
Directorate and Federal Emergency Management Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.