* 2228170
* Planning Grant: Building a Community Learning Ecosystem For Climate Change Resilience in Northern Colorado
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2025
* Lucinda Shellito, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2025
* USD 295,964.00

The planning grant builds capacity for an intentional Climate Resilience
Learning Ecosystem in northern Colorado that helps students and faculty at the
University of Northern Colorado (UNC) connect with local community members and
institutions. Through these connections, those involved will build deeper
understanding of climate change and its regional impacts in order to address
imminent local challenges presented by climate change. Climate change solutions
and adaptations require local buy-in to address issues within the community, and
future generations (i.e., undergraduate students) will need an understanding of
how climate disrupting events (e.g., drought, wildfire, flood, heatwaves) impact
diverse people, disciplines, and systems. Continuing to sustain human
civilization critically depends on individuals from all backgrounds
understanding what is happening in our natural and social environments and
empowering them to make decisions that will ensure a sustainable future.
However, there is presently a lack of structure for effective collaboration
across academia, social institutions, and communities, inhibiting targeted
action on projects that promote long-term sustainability. The proposed Climate
Resilience Learning Ecosystem is a community-based approach that identifies
problems and solutions within local spheres of influence to build climate change
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this learning ecosystem is to
strengthen society-wide climate change education, resilience and adaptation
through community projects and stakeholder engagement by answering the question:
what does climate resilience look like for our community? To this end, the work
has three primary objectives: (1) identify how to prepare students to work with
community stakeholders on local projects that build community resilience to
climate change impacts and ability to adapt; (2) build expertise about climate
change resilience among faculty from a broad array of disciplines; (3) develop
resources for community members to empower them to make decisions and take
action around climate change challenges. The resources, activities, and outcomes
developed through this process will contribute to activities and the body of
knowledge concerning the efficacy and framework for building a learning
ecosystem, and how a learning ecosystem can contribute to climate
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work involves three phases. In Phase 1,
the PIs work with a community facilitator to map the local community landscape
for building inclusive connections across disciplines and communities. Phase 2
involves local situational analysis with community groups to identify climate-
related issues that the PIs have the capacity to address. Phases 1 and 2 lay the
groundwork for a summer institute (Phase 3) that brings together UNC faculty,
students, and local community groups to learn from each other, identify
strategies for addressing local climate challenges, and evaluate the need for an
implementation grant. This project engages students, faculty, and community
members from a wide range of backgrounds, ages, and levels of professional
development with the goal of developing and documenting a learning ecosystem to
support collaborative climate resilience projects and solutions. These
activities form the foundation of future climate sustainability and interaction
of currently disparate sectors and groups in northern Colorado. The fledgling
learning ecosystem community supported by this project will ultimately have a
clear vision of how they want to move forward into the future. Most importantly,
participants will understand how climate change will impact them individually
and collectively in the northern Colorado community and how the community can
work together to build resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.