* 2228522
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Bridging the Gap between Essential Emergency Resources and Services and the Deaf and Hard of Hearing Community in Monroe County NY: A Geospatial-Visual Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Brian Tomaszewski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) project is a vision to identify and
bridge specific gaps in essential emergency resources and services for the Deaf
and Hard-of-Hearing (DHH) community in Monroe County, New York. Situated within
Monroe County, Rochester New York is home to the largest per capita population
of DHH people in the US. Stage 1 pilot project activities will be undertaken
between three partners - (1) the Rochester Institute of Technology and the
National Technical Institute of the Deaf, (2) the Monroe County Office of
Emergency Management, and (3) the Rochester Recreation Club for Deaf. The
project represents a unique coupling of academic research with the DHH community
and emergency management. Project goals include identifying DHH community
emergency service gaps, creating and evaluating DHH emergency communication
tools, identifying educational pathways for incorporation of knowledge about the
DHH into emergency management and geospatial technology practice, and
identifying pathways for the DHH to become part of the emergency management STEM
workforce and volunteer efforts. To the best knowledge, this would be the first
NSF research effort to directly address the topic of bridging the gap between
emergency services and DHH communities. Results will be generalizable to other
community contexts with special needs populations beyond Monroe County NY for
broader project national impact and legacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issues related
to the DHH and emergency management cycle have received little attention from
emergency management researchers and discussion in the academic literature.
Project research questions designed to scale from a planning project to a Stage
2 rapid deployment project are: R1: What are the spatial relationships between
the DHH community and hazards that may reveal specific gaps in emergency
services for the DHH?; R2: What are the messaging and communication needs of the
DHH community during all phases of the emergency management cycle? R3: What
pedagogical practice is needed for education and workforce development of
emergency management practitioners on the needs of the DHH community during all
phases of the emergency management cycle? Methods used include (R1) Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) machine learning to compare DHH populations with
hazards for event prediction, decision making, and targeted messaging, (R2) 3D
modeling to simulate how signage can be used in time-sensitive emergency
situations where the DHH cannot hear warnings and user-centered design with the
DHH community on graphical emergency communication devices, and (R3) the
organizational approach of the incident command system (ICS) to investigate the
relationship between ICS operation and DHH
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.