* 2228903
* RII Track-4:NSF: Characterization of Extractable Organic Fluorine as an Indicator of Total PFASs to Close the Fluorine Mass Balance in Potable Reuse Scenarios
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Leigh Terry, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 194,928.00

This project seeks to bridge the gap between academics and the wealth of
practical knowledge held by the industry and practitioners to build upon water
research at the University of Alabama (UA). Per-and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFASs) have been produced since the late 1940s in industrial and consumer
applications due to their desired functionality and production capability. There
are currently 4,700 PFAS on the global market, yet most research and regulations
primarily focus on ~30 targeted PFASs. There is an unknown burden of PFAS
contamination in our water and wastewater facilities. This project will allow
researchers from UA to conduct studies at the Water Tower to learn new PFAS
characterization techniques and to create industry and utility partnerships
outside the walls of isolated research laboratories. This research seeks to
learn a transformative approach to measure extractable organic fluorine (EOF)
while quantifying the proportion of organofluorine attributed to known PFAS to
close the fluorine mass balance in potable reuse scenarios. This work will
provide training for one graduate student, and results will be integrated into
undergraduate curriculum and research. The research collaboration formed through
this project will help develop capacity at UA to advance progress toward a
standardized EOF method for all utilities, providing additional opportunities to
educate and train graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project will provide a fellowship to an assistant professor and
training for a graduate student at the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa. This
work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at the Water Tower
Institute in Burford, GA. The goal of the proposed project is to create
partnerships with the Water Tower and use their laboratories and demonstration
facility with live flows from the adjacent advanced wastewater treatment
facility, The F. Wayne Hill Water Resources Center (WRC), to test the
overarching hypothesis that bulk organofluorine measurements can be a key
indicator of Per-and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs, CnF2n+1-R)
contamination. The project will seek to develop methods to close the fluorine
mass balance in wastewater treatment whose effluent supplies an indirect potable
reuse treatment facility. The project will use combustion ion-chromatography
(CIC) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods that
are characterization tools to measure extractable organic fluorine (EOF) and
targeted PFAS. Two objectives will carry out the research plan: (1) Establish
scholarly collaborations with investigators at The Water Tower and learn EOF-CIC
and LC-MS/MS characterization techniques to characterize total extractable
organofluorine while quantifying the proportion of organofluorine attributed to
known PFAS in potable reuse scenarios, and (2) Determine the occurrence of
unknown PFAS in environmental samples and close the fluorine mass balance for
potable reuse scenarios. The collaboration developed between UA and The Water
Tower will generate high-quality undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities in the field of water reuse and wastewater treatment while
building upon UA's water research mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.