* 2228671
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: The Development of Salt-Tolerant Plant Communities for Coastal Climate Resilience in Environmental Justice Areas Such as East Boston, Massachusetts
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Kannan Thiruvengadam, EASTIE FARM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 49,500.00

Coastal populations face unprecedented threats from rising sea level, increased
frequency and severity of storms, degradation of protective wetlands, and tidal
flooding. Many coastal communities, especially those in urban settings, are
especially vulnerable, not only due to their geography, but also as a result of
“societal comorbidities” including industrial pollution, adjacency to utility
and chemical hazards, economic disadvantage, and language isolation. This
community-driven research project entails the mobilization and empowerment of
community groups and involvement of local middle/high students in participatory
citizen research and piloting of nature-based solutions to wetland degradation
and flooding that address specific concerns related to environmental justice and
unprecedented climate change in an East Boston MA pilot site. East Boston is a
type example of the intersection of the above factors, with additional stressors
of the rising cost-of-living, real estate development, and displacement. This
research pilot project attempts to flip the dynamic of vulnerability and
resilience by providing a community-driven, inclusive, and equitable process
that involves all key stakeholders in considering risks and new solutions in-
situ. Success of the pilot would enable community residents, activists,
researchers, and other local groups to have greater economic and educational
opportunities associated with the implementation and upkeep of the nature-based
infrastructure that prepares the land for water-related disasters. Broader
impacts of the research include developing nature based solutions to climate
change and increasing community resilience to flooding. It also involves local
citizens in the science and provides improved living conditions for a low-income
coastal community. Outcomes of the pilot will be used as a template that can be
used to increase resilience in other similarly positioned coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to build upon and
weave together academic-based research results for optimizing marsh diversity
for sustained ecosystem services. It will include aspects of industry-based
research on bioremediation and civic discussions on post-industrial land use.
The project will provide intellectual advancements including: (1) increased
understanding of the interactions between communities of salt-tolerant marsh
organisms and their impact on water management and contaminant control that can
contribute to the framework for nature-based solutions research; (2) an
adaptable methodology for how community-driven-research can effectively inform
inclusive planning for climate preparation; and (3) broad, community-wide
improvements to the local knowledge base and community scientific literacy. The
approach employs, engages, and empowers the participation of local residents in
community planning. It also offers informed perspectives from researchers and
other experts in the co-production of solutions and their implementation of
these which improves the likelihood of coastal community resilience in the face
of climate change and sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in
response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing
climate: pre-disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and
is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.