* 2228018
* Student Support to Attend the International Workshop on MXenes; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 1-3 August 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2022
* USD 29,820.00

This award provides participant support for attendees of the International
Workshop on MXenes: Addressing Global Challenges with Innovative 2D
Nanomaterials to be held at Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1-3
August 2022. The workshop focuses on the latest research and development
activities in MXenes and other novel 2D nanomaterials. The students and faculty
present through oral and poster sessions their latest research results to the
broad materials science, materials chemistry, materials processing and advanced
manufacturing communities. Priority is given to students who are women or who
come from underrepresented minority groups. This approach promotes diverse
participation at the workshop, in the short term, and in STEM fields, in the
long term. This award benefits the nation through the education of a skilled and
diverse materials and manufacturing workforce, which is better prepared to
provide transformative solutions the challenges in their chosen fields. The
workshop plays an important role in supporting and sustaining the important
field of MXenes and 2D nanomaterials, a technology that is pervasive and impacts
across all industrial sectors with benefits to society. This workshop is timely
because of strong interest in the U.S in fostering the research and development
of this technologically important novel material system that exhibits many
useful and unique properties and potential
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participant support is expected to
benefit the students' professional, scientific and technical development.
Attendance at the workshop gives the students and faculty a broader view of
materials chemistry, ceramics, advanced manufacturing, their fundamentals and
applications. Workshop topics include fundamentals of MXenes and 2D
nanomaterials, synthesis and scalable nanomanufacturing, process development,
microstructural analysis, and process modeling, monitoring and control.
Attendees will learn about state-of-the-art research in their technical areas
via access to several technical and professional development talks by leading
domestic and international speakers. Students and young faculty enhance their
communication skills through oral and poster presentations and in-depth
discussions of their work with peers in their technical areas. This interactive
experience significantly broadens student education, increases their enthusiasm
for their research topic, acquaints them with expectations for scientific
careers, and exposes them to new approaches for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.