* 2228645
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Community Food Mobilization in Chicago
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Weslynne Ashton, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,963.00

The Chicagoland Food Research-Centered Pilot Project (ChiFood-RCPP) addresses a
pressing research need identified by communities of Black, Indigenous and People
of Color (BIPOC) food practitioners: how to restructure the food production,
distribution and consumption system to center their aspirations of creating
equitable access to nourishing and culturally-affirming foods, while self-
determining the scale and scope of their work in the food system. The pilot
project uses the Good Food Purchasing Initiative (GFPI), a policy platform
adopted in both the City of Chicago and Cook County, as a vehicle for local
public institutions, BIPOC producers and workers to chart pathways to achieve
these goals. The team will conduct research in social, geographic and data
sciences along with design and management, to investigate processes for
innovating public procurement processes, while incorporating diverse values, and
social, economic and environmental objectives. ChiFood-RCPP advances multi-
disciplinary research to build access to essential resources and services that
meet community needs. The pilot will uncover and test pathways to operationalize
equity goals through food policy work, in partnership with key stakeholders.
Coalitions of researchers and practitioners throughout the U.S. can replicate
these pilot approaches with diverse participants across the food value chain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades, Black, Indigenous and People of Color (BIPOC)
activists have leveled critiques that the values, culture and infrastructures
shaping food markets and policies perpetuate racial disparities in food
producers’ and consumers’ access to food, foodways, economic benefits and health
outcomes. Vertically-integrated food businesses dominate the food supply chain,
operating with knowledge and capital to play on massive economies of scale,
which limit the ability of small and BIPOC-owned businesses to compete on level
playing fields. This project addresses asymmetries in the food system by
exploring and developing data and models centered on the goals of BIPOC food
practitioners, meal recipients and advocates. It places these resources in their
and procurement officials' hands to ensure research findings are relevant,
actionable and self-sustainable. Researchers will explore 1) mechanisms for
incorporating diverse stakeholders’ values, meanings and visions into food
systems transformation; 2) data and models that advance equitable local food
supply chain development; 3) prototypes of network, policy and participatory
structures to engage BIPOC food communities (producers, workers, entrepreneurs,
eaters) in culturally-affirming, scale-appropriate strategies; and 4) a roadmap
of frameworks and pathways to systemize an inclusive food system culture that
honors a plurality of values and practices, offers market channel flexibility
and guides community food mobilization goals. This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.