* 2228314
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Leveraging Existing Fiber-Optic Cables to Identify and Manage Urban Environmental Hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Zhen Lei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Cities around the world are dealing with the compounding challenges of aging
infrastructure and climate change. This manifests as issues such as leaky sewer
pipes, chronic flooding, and geotechnical failures. Many of these issues are
related to the subsurface environment that plays many critical roles for cities,
but for which there is a lack of real-time information. Moreover, communities
that are socio-economically disadvantaged and/or composed primarily of racial
minorities are commonly more exposed to more environmental hazards than those in
the majority population or neighborhoods with higher incomes. Cities are in need
of cost-effective and equitable ways to identify, monitor and prioritize
interventions to manage these issues. This research leverages existing
telecommunication fiber-optic infrastructure that is nearly ubiquitous in all
cities. The approach involves a novel, optic fiber, subsurface, environmental
sensor network. The project targets locations that have fiber option cables and
that are subjected to certain types of infrastructure issues and hazards such as
subsidence or land failure, leaking sewer pipes, or poor drainage. Data will be
collected from select locations that leverage existing cables and sensors (e.g.,
sewer flow sensors) or other data on environmental hazards (e.g., sinkholes,
flooding reports, or inventory data for landslide proneness), information that
comes from city partners. These external sensors are used to validate the fiber
optic sensing against traditional sensing approaches and/or environmental hazard
data. This project allows demonstration and testing of new real-time, high
spatial resolution, easy-to-implement, low cost, sensing system that has
potential to revolutionize how installed city infrastructure is managed to
address civic challenges and create smart, sustainable cities. Because of its
setting, aging infrastructure, and involvement of researchers with municipal
groups, Pittsburgh PA was selected for the initial implementation. Broader
impacts include development of a new type of urban infrastructure and ground
hazard monitoring and warning system, improved city services, and new insights
and lessons learned that can facilitate broader implementation of this
potentially impactful, yet low-cost tool for urban
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research planning phase will establish
scientific foundations that enable the civic partners to expand the
implementation of the fiber optic cable, geophysical, sensing technology
citywide to identify and monitor environmental and infrastructure hazards. The
effort will deploy the newly developed intervention to inform city and urban
decision makers to help them manage infrastructures hazards in a more cost-
effective, timely, and equitable manner. If successful, this project will
improve early warning capability for multiple hazards in urban areas, help
manage and minimize these hazards in cost-effective and equitable manners,
impact the design of future infrastructure networks and more resilient cities,
develop workforce for implementation of the technology, and highlight potential
opportunities for urban planners to increase environmental equity in the siting
of telecom optical fibers. This project is transformative because the technical
and practice outcome based on telecom dark fiber we demonstrate in this project
could be used for other smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in
response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing
climate: pre-disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and
is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.