* 2228661
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Co-Creating a Community Platform to Improve Services for People on the Homelessness Continuum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Sherri Greenberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Homelessness encompasses a wide range of lived experiences, from housing
instability to reintegration from incarceration, couch-surfing to street
homelessness, and episodic to chronic, with some people having multiple
experiences, changing over time. As a challenge facing communities nationwide,
it is vital to ensure that policymakers and community members have high-quality,
up-to-date, data and information about homelessness and the people who are
experiencing it. This project will bring together people experiencing
homelessness, policymakers, and other community organizations to design a
platform for data sharing and collaboration. The platform will help to ensure
that people experiencing homelessness can access services and resources, while
also providing the best evidence possible for how social service organizations
can best leverage their resources to serve this community. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Our government-nonprofit-university collaboration proposes to co-
create and pilot a community platform supporting data integration efforts
allowing for more timely and tailored provision of wrap-around services when,
where, and by whom they are most needed. The City of Austin previously has
invested in more effectively using its data – a key example is the Affordable
Housing Search Tool, which resulted from the 2019 Code for America Summit. The
Downtown Austin Community Court (DACC) innovative Intensive Case Management
program provides services to people on the homelessness continuum, including
substance abuse treatment, counseling, assistance with public benefits
applications, job search assistance, and temporary housing. Good Systems, a UT
Grand Challenge, has partnered with DACC and other City of Austin departments to
improve services for people on the homelessness continuum, including over 60
interviews with case managers and service providers, and over 100 surveys from
people on the homelessness continuum. This platform will include a public-facing
dashboard providing information at the Austin City Council District level
creating a shared interface enabling service providers, users, and community
members to obtain and share information about resource availability and needs.
The back-end of the system will serve as a digital twin for the City of Austin,
allowing for more accurate prediction of when and where resources will be
needed, which will only be accessible to trusted organizational partners who
complete a memorandum of understanding and a data sharing agreement. The system
will empower users to make evidence-based predictions about future service and
resource needs. Service providers will be enabled to provide more timely and
tailored services to proactively address these community needs. Hence, the
platform will bridge the gap between essential resources and services and
community needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.