* 2228620
* SAI-R: A Community-Centered Decision-Making Framework for Microgrid Deployment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Chien-fei Chen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electric power grid is among the most
critical of American infrastructures. All citizens and businesses depend on the
integrity and resilience of the electric grid. Yet some groups are more
vulnerable than others to disruptions caused by extreme events. Low-income
households, senior citizens, people of color, and renters are most likely to be
affected by energy insecurity and energy burdens during extreme events. This SAI
research project provides equitable and sustainable solutions by designing
mobile community microgrids to enhance power system resilience and address
critical issues of energy justice and insecurity. Mobile community microgrids
(MCMs) are small-scale electric networks powered by renewable energy resources
that can be transported wherever needed. The project optimizes the design and
placement of MCMs, balancing the unique needs of low-income households,
community acceptance, and government regulations to ensure energy equity and
justice and to maximize resilience against extreme events. The research advances
an interdisciplinary collaboration between social science, electric supply, and
community planning to improve the resilience and vitality of underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microgrids are commonly developed based on
technical and economic metrics. It is challenging to consider social and
behavioral factors in the optimization process. This project develops a social
psychological optimization method for the design and community acceptance of MCM
technology. A community-centered decision-making framework based on social
psychological and behavioral concepts is developed. The focus is on the adoption
of MCMs to prioritize the needs of low-income households and enhance power grid
resilience. Surveys, discrete choice experiments, behavioral interventions, and
community co-design are used to evaluate acceptance of MCMs, estimate
willingness to pay, and understand the community’s needs. The social, behavioral
and economic factors are integrated into the design of MCMs using big-data
analytics of real-time smart meter data and survey data. The project engages
critical stakeholders, including vulnerable local populations and policy
decision-makers. Priority is placed on the integration of diversity and a
culture of inclusion in the research process and community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences, the Directorate for
Engineering, and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.