* 2228064
* Planning Grant: Moving Forward Together - Transforming Arctic Geosciences for Alaska Native Sovereignty and Science
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Richard Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With this 2.5 year planning grant, the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) will
lay the foundation for graduate geoscience education that is attractive to and
supportive of Alaska Native, first-generation, and other students from
underrepresented communities. Utilizing Indigenous methodologies and principles
of knowledge co-production, the project leaders prioritize building partnerships
across and beyond campus with Indigenous communities and leadership which
requires a focus on process, dialogue, relationships, and respect. This
transformative approach will converge the presently siloed disciplines of
geosciences, social sciences, and Indigenous studies present at UAF and in the
broader science community. The primary project partners are the UAF Alaska
Native Success Initiative, the UAF Department of Equity and Compliance, and the
First Alaskans Institute. In addition, the program will bring together currently
disparate Diversity, Equity and Inclusion groups across the UAF campus, existing
student groups such as Geoscientists of Color (GeoColor), the UAF faculty
accelerator, and other related projects at UAF such as the NSF Tamamta Project
and the Alaska Arctic Observatory and Knowledge Hub. This effort will include
activities that will lay the foundation for a CTGC implementation proposal that
is centered around convergence of entities, disciplines, and initiatives across
and beyond the UAF campus, institutionalizing a teaching, learning, and research
environment that is inclusive of multiple ways of knowing, and contextualizing
the transformation of geosciences at UAF within diverse and specific educational
opportunities, including experiential and cross-cultural learning. Activities
will include a program of workshops, training, dialogues, and establishing the
basis and framework for a mentoring program and a culture
camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Momentum has been building in the Geosciences at UAF
toward institutional transformation and a new, transdisciplinary graduate degree
program in Earth System Science is currently under institutional review. One
important aspect of this program is the solid integration of sustainability
science and the human dimension through a Sustainability Concentration. The
proposed activities will be directly integrated into this transdisciplinary
Sustainability Concentration of the newly designed Earth System Science program
at UAF. The thematic focus is rapid change in the Arctic including climate
change, impacts, and adaptation as well as hazard mitigation. Alaska Native
peoples are especially vulnerable to climate extremes, with values and identity
rooted in deep relationality between humanity and the natural world and
compounding impacts arising from historical legacies of colonization and
splintered governance that complicate response efforts. The climate is warming
in northern latitudes at over twice the rate of other parts of the globe. Rural
and Alaska Native communities throughout the state, many of which are accessible
only by air or water, are among the most vulnerable, facing threats to key areas
of concern such as salmon, large mammals, human health, and community
infrastructure from extreme events such as flooding, high winds, erosion,
increased rainfall, increased wildfire, and more extreme weather. Thus, there is
an urgent need for Indigenous expertise in addressing these issues in Alaska and
the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.