* 2228034
* Data Analytics for High Throughput Drug Screens
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jasmine Foo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 542,927.00

This grant will contribute to the advancement of national prosperity and
economic welfare by developing techniques for the design and implementation of
precision drug treatments for cancer patients. A single tumor typically contains
heterogenous cells that differ in their response to different drug treatments.
Even small subpopulations of drug-resistant cells may cause tumor recurrence and
therapeutic failure. The project will develop tools to identify the distinct
sub-populations of cells present in the tumor based on its response to therapy,
leading to personalized treatment plans for cancer patients and the development
of new methodologies for deconvolution of mixed signals. The associated
educational activities will include mentoring graduate and undergraduate
students, developing course content related to the work, and short summer school
for high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will use the
differential response of the sub-populations to the drug under study to identify
subpopulations and quantify their initial fraction as well as their individual
dose response. Models assuming no interactions between the sub-populations as
well as models with both linear and nonlinear interactions will be considered.
This requires the formulation of statistical inference problems based upon
approximations of the likelihood function of sample path trajectories of non-
Markovian process models capturing the underlying cellular population dynamics.
Identifying estimates of the parameters requires solving constrained
optimization problems with highly nonlinear and non-convex objective
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.