* 2228544
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: A Coordinated Food Hub Network and Farm to Institution Program: Building Bridges between Small Local Farmers and Institutions in New York State Capital Region
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Food access is one of the largest social problems in the United States. The
challenge of accessing healthy foods is especially pronounced in communities of
disadvantaged populations. Ironically, small local farmers and producers of
healthy foods struggle to make a living. In states across the country, the
numbers of family own food producers have steadily declined since the 1960s.
This project proposes to develop a Local Food Cooperation (LFC) program that
integrates (1) a state-level food hub network which enables the coordination of
multiple regional food hubs, and (2) regional Farm to Institution programs that
address regional food insecurity and inequity. The proposed LFC program would
provide a platform for information exchange and, possibly, trading so that food
hubs in different regions can collaboratively leverage the surpluses to provide
a stable supply. The program will also enable local food processors to process
and pack food at a competitive price. The program would be able to engage
regional distributors to use their distribution and transportation capabilities
and local resources to efficiently connect supply and demand. This program would
help small food producers to gain the necessary knowledge and technological
skills to use the platform, and to get needed certifications. Finally, by
integrating institutional customers into this program, it is possible for
suppliers and customers to exchange information about needs for products and
availability of healthy foods in a timely manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the team will prepare all work for a pilot test that will (1) collect
data and update the existing food consumption forecasting models; (2) integrate
research-based technical modules into the information exchange and trading
platform, which would include demand and supply prediction and matching, as well
as distribution and transportation optimizers; (3) assess the effectiveness of
different governance structures; (4) test the financial arrangements that will
help attract participants to the program and also ensure the program’s financial
self-sustainability; (5) evaluate the benefits and costs of the LFC program and
its transferability and scalability. The proposed project will significantly
improve the state-of practice of food supply chain operations by integrating
pioneering research into a community-based program. It will also contribute to
the state-of-art of freight demand forecasting, as the project will use newly
collected food production and consumption data to enhance existing freight
production models, making them more accurate in predicting food production and
consumption, and institutional consumer behavior. This project is in response to
the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between
essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.