* 2228257
* EAGER: ANT LIA: Persist or Perish: Records of Microbial Survival and Long-term Persistence from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Alexander Michaud, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2024
* USD 263,460.00

Ice cores from glaciers and ice sheets provide detailed archives of past
environmental conditions, furthering our understanding of Earth’s climate.
Microorganisms in the West Antarctic Ice Sheet are buried over glaciological
time and form a stratigraphy record providing the opportunity of analysis of the
order and position of layers of geological events, with potential links to
Southern Hemisphere climate. However, microbial cells that land on the ice sheet
are subject to the stresses of changing habitat conditions due to burial and
conditions associated with long-term isolation in ice. These processes may lead
to a loss of fidelity within the stratigraphic record of microbial cells. We
know little about how and if microorganisms survive burial and remain alive over
glacial-interglacial time periods within an ice sheet. This analysis will
identify the viable and preserved community of microorganisms and core genomic
adaptation that permit cell viability, which will advance knowledge in the areas
of microbiology and glaciology while increasing fidelity of ice core
measurements relevant to past climate and potential future global climate
impacts. This exploratory endeavor has the potential to be a transformative step
toward understanding the ecology of one of the most understudied environments on
Earth. The project will partner with the Museum of Science, Boston, to increase
public scientific literacy via education and outreach. Additionally, this
project will support two early-career scientists and two undergraduates in
interdisciplinary research at the intersection of microbiology and climate
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will provide the first
DNA data based on single-cell whole genomic sequencing from the Antarctic Ice
Sheet and inform whether post-depositional processes impact the interpretations
of paleoenvironmental conditions from microbes. The goals to determine the
taxonomic identity of viable and preserved microbial cells, and decode the
genetic repertoire that confers survival of burial and long-term viability
within glacial ice, will be achieved by utilizing subsamples from a ~60,000 year
old record of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Divide (WD) Ice Core. WD samples will
be melted using the Desert Research Institute’s ice core melting system that is
optimized for glaciobiological sampling. Microbial cells from the meltwater will
be sorted using fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and individually sorted
cells will have their genomes sequenced. The fluorescence-based methods will
discern the viable (metabolically active) cells from those cells that are non-
viable but preserved in the ice (DNA-containing). The genomic analysis will
identify the taxonomy of each cell, presence of known genes that confer survival
in permanently frozen environments, and comparatively analyze genomes to
determine the core set of genes required by viable cells to persist in an ice
sheet. The outcomes of this work will expand the potential for biological
measurements and contamination control from archived ice
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.