* 2228988
* Control of dentate gyrus function and context discrimination by CCK+ interneurons
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Simon Pieraut, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2028
* USD 800,000.00

Efficient memory processes rely on our brain's ability to store similar
experiences as distinct memories. This process, performed in part by a structure
in the brains of mammals called hippocampus, facilitates memory discrimination
and is affected in brain disorders like dementia and post-traumatic stress
disorders. As a result, animals and people suffering from these disorders
experience difficulties recalling or accurately retrieving memories. Our
understanding of how the hippocampus encodes similar experiences as distinct
memories, allowing for easy discrimination during recall, is still limited.
Recent advancements in neuroscience suggest that coordinated activity between
excitatory and inhibitory neurons enables a specific computation known as
pattern separation within the hippocampal circuit. This computation transforms
similar input patterns into highly dissimilar output patterns and is thought to
be the basis for memory discrimination. In the proposed research, the
investigators aim to determine the contribution of a specific type of inhibitory
neurons called cholecystokinin-expressing (CCK) neurons to the hippocampal
circuit’s function. Their long-term goal is to enhance our understanding of
critical computations, like pattern separation, performed by this brain region,
which are crucial for memory discrimination. As part of this project, the
investigators also provide a strong educational and training environment to
students and new generations of scientists with a strong emphasis in recruiting
and training minorities and under-represented groups in STEM, and they
participate in outreach programs, such as the Big Brother Big Sister event
organized by the Reno Museum of Natural History, which they use as a platform to
share their research with the general public and students of all
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to determine the contribution
of CCK neurons to hippocampal circuit function, focusing on the plasticity of
CCK neurons during the developmental period of juvenile mice. Their previous
work demonstrates that environmental enrichment (EE) leads to increased synapses
formed by CCK neurons in the dentate gyrus, suggesting their involvement in the
maturation of hippocampal function and pattern separation. For the proposed
work, they use an EE paradigm in mice and take advantage of viral mediated gene
delivery technique combined with optogenetic approaches to manipulate the
activity of the CCK neurons. They determine how the remodeling of the inhibitory
CCK network adjusts the computation in the DG. In the first Objective of the
project, they determine the contribution of CCK neurons to feedback and
feedforward inhibitory microcircuits, both of which can impact pattern
separation. In the second Objective, they measure the change in pattern
separation and filtering performance of the DG induced by the EE using a novel
in-vitro electrophysiological protocol. Together their research aims to unravel
the mechanisms underlying pattern separation by exploring the involvement of CCK
neurons in the hippocampal circuit. By increasing our understanding of these
fundamental computations, they will shed light on the processes that support
efficient memory functioning and potentially contribute to the development of
novel therapeutic approaches for memory-related
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Modulation
Program of the Neural Systems Cluster in the BIO Directorate and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.