* 2228614
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Coastal smart network for implementing equitable adaptation in Santa Cruz, CA
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Anne Kapuscinski, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This research co-develops a smart coastal change monitoring plan for the city of
Santa Cruz, California via affordable, equity-centered tools for collaborative
adaptation that can be adopted and scaled to other coastal cities and
communities. Adaptation of coastal cities to climate change is limited by their
capacity to monitor key tipping points as well as insufficient public engagement
and buy-in. To combat climate change and sea level rise, the city of Santa Cruz
has developed a series of adaptation pathways that serve as iterative roadmaps
providing a cascading sequence of actions that are triggered when a system gets
close to its tipping point. At this stage, which is indicated by monitoring of
the system, the next phase of adaptation is triggered. Such triggers have
already been defined by the civic organizations for local beaches, cliffs,
bluffs, and shore protecting riprap. The issue being faced, however, is having
affordable technology for measuring these systems so approach to the trigger
point can be quickly, unequivocally, and accurately identified and having
community buy-in for the next stage of adaption. This research focused on
creating a computer-based dashboard for to assist in interactive decision making
as well as creating community awareness of the situation and impending changes
and providing a vehicle for them to engage more effectively and in a timely
manner with city and civic organizations on the adaptation and moving to the
next stage. The community engagement plan examines the power dynamics that shape
policy which is essential to inform integration of science within social
learning by vulnerable communities. Third, innovative communication
technologies, including virtual reality and gamification, can build equitable
visions and consensus around adaptation to climate hazards. Broader impacts of
the work include integration of city, coastal change, monitoring technologies
with other data to extend geographic coverage, inform land use managers and
decision makers, as well as improve coastal hazard prediction. It can also be
used to develop new flood/erosion warning systems and advance adaptation local
community understanding and buy-in. Second, the project advances understanding
of how to monitor both social and geophysical triggers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research addressed two prime questions: (1) What configuration
of technologies and practices cost-effectively establishes a smart coastal
change monitoring network for a heterogenous coastline, enhances data-driven
hazard preparedness, and is replicable in other settings and (2) What
integration of technology and communication tools are cost-effective,
sustainable and foster community engagement, decision-making, and equity working
with diverse groups on risk solutions? Financial factors for replicability will
inform choices of technologies, software and network configuration, the
deployment plan, civic engagement, and long-term maintenance of the program.
Existing and new technology options will be explored based on available data,
cost, and community involvement such as using smartphones and social media,
video detection, remote sensing and other solutions. For the first question,
this work co-develops, with frontline community groups, a communications and
engagement plan that includes culturally sensitive community outreach. The
groups participate in planning and scoping activities, building on prior
collaboration in co-designing innovative interaction tools in the City (e.g.,
virtual reality, phone apps and games) designed to increase participation of
vulnerable communities in coastal hazards planning. This work will be in
preparation of a follow-on activity (CIVIC Stage 2 proposal) from which a pilot
project will be implemented to test designs and tools that interact with the
monitoring network to build resilience. If successful, this work would be
scalable and translatable to other coastal cities and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.