* 2228848
* I-Corps: Enhanced Radiation Curing From Plant Derived Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Jayaraman Sivaguru, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of eco-friendly compounds that can be used in photocuring systems.
Photocuring is a ultraviolet (UV)-crosslinking technique to add firmness to
materials including resins for semiconductors, material formulations for
automotive coatings, and ophthalmic lenses. This technology is customizable for
many industries through its efficient and tunable compound production. The
technology has advantages over current methodologies as it features: a) cost and
time savings; b) better safety during manufacturing; c) high performance
standards; d) sustainable biobased systems; and e) suitablility as a substitute
for current formulation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of biomass-derived UV and visible light active
compounds that can be employed for efficient radiation curing to produce high
performance materials. Vibrant colors play a critical role in various chemical
and biological processes. Translating these colors to curing technology is
challenging as it requires rational manipulation of photochemical properties.
This technology translates plant-based compounds that can be fine-tuned for
radiation curing with both UV and visible light with a higher efficiency.
Currently employed UV cure systems often suffers from surface tack, surface
residue, migration (both at the surface of the material and into the air), high
photoinitiator loading for formulations, coloring of the cured system,
inefficient surface cure with light emitting diodes (LEDs) and/or visible light,
limitations on cure depth, and environmental concerns. These plant-based
compounds have superior photochemical, photophysical and curing properties than
the conventional compounds featuring similar
chromophores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.