* 2228861
* FMSG: Eco: Distributed Eco-Manufacturing Using Radio Frequency Heating of Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,01/31/2023
* Micah Green, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Distributed chemical manufacturing aims to utilize stranded resources, enable
flexible and mobile production, and reduce the environmental footprints
associated with conventional centralized manufacturing. Distributed chemical
manufacture can be enabled by electrification (i.e., a “Power-to-Chemicals”
paradigm), which has garnered interest due to the promise of low carbon or
renewable electrical energy sources replacing conventional fossil fuel heating
processes. In this Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project, the
investigators will develop a new chemicals manufacturing process based on
electrical power, rather than fossil fuels. The key to this approach is the use
of nanomaterials that rapidly heat up in response to electromagnetically
generated radio-frequency (RF) fields; this allows for a completely new way to
deliver heat in chemical reactors. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in this project and receive training at both the labscale (reactor
design) and industry scale (techno-economic analysis). The undergraduate
researchers will be be mentored by collaborators in industry. In addition, a
Research-Experience-for-Teachers will engage high-school and college instructors
from West Texas to develop learning modules for workforce training, particularly
as related to efficient utilization of shale gas resources to ensure U.S. energy
security while minimizing carbon emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RF susceptor
materials, particularly carbon nanomaterials, show a rapid heating response when
exposed to RF fields. The investigators recently demonstrated a hybrid
susceptor/catalyst capable of providing thermal energy for catalytic methanol
reforming. This concept will be extended to a promising candidate reaction,
propane dehydrogenation (PDH). Specific research objectives are: (1) construct
and investigate PDH reactors with RF susceptor/catalyst hybrid packed beds
coupled with external RF applicators. Rate expressions will be developed, and
heat generation and heat/mass transfer will be analyzed using experimentation
and computational models (in consultation with industry partners), and (2) lab-
scale data will be analyzed in large-scale sustainability and process model
integration to assess the economic/environmental impact of the manufacturing
techniques. The ability to volumetrically heat using RF fields could address the
chief scientific obstacles to the “Power-to-Chemicals” eco-manufacturing
initiative. By focusing upon the industrially relevant heat-transfer limited
endothermic catalytic process of propane dehydrogenation (PDH), and actively
collaborating with Dow Chemical, the specific technical impact is anticipated to
bring a transformational change in the application of renewable electrical power
to distributed chemical manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future
Manufacturing award was supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation and the Division of Electrical, Communications and
Cyber Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.