* 2228678
* Student Travel to the Cornell, Maryland, Max Planck Pre-doctoral Research School
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,974.00

This grant supports the Cornell, Maryland, and MPI pre-doctoral Research School
(CMMRS), a week-long summer school held at the Max Planck Institute for Software
Systems in Saarbrucken, Germany, August 2922. For the fourth consecutive summer,
the CMMRS will introduce world-class research to students (undergraduate and
masters), and engage them, one-on-one and in small groups, with leading
researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 CMMRS researchers span a
wide range of areas, including computer systems, heterogeneous architectures,
machine learning, data visualization, security and privacy, formal methods, and
programming language design. The summer school exposes students, early in their
careers, to the breadth and diversity of computer science (in particular
computer systems) research, hopefully making them more likely to pursue doctoral
degrees and eventually, careers in research. The support from this grant funds
travel and accommodations for approximately 25 students from the United States
to attend the summer school. In line with previous editions of CMMRS, special
attention is given to recruit women and minority students to attend the
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.