* 2228601
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Co-Design of Integrated Energy and Mobility Hubs for Service and Resiliency
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Carla Lopez del Puerto, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) Project aims to develop decision support
tools and designs that support community-led collaborative initiatives to
improve energy and transportation services. Recent natural disasters have
underscored the vulnerability of the nation’s electric power grids and
transportation networks, as well as the catastrophic social, economic, and
environmental consequences that follow their failure. In response to this
reality, this project’s vision is that communities, particularly those most
vulnerable, must have access to tools that can empower them to collaboratively
establish resilient, decentralized, clean power generating systems that meet
their basic electricity needs and that can drive their transition to emerging
transportation modes and services. To this end, the project will advance
research on the design and implementation of integrated energy and mobility
micro hubs that can provide support, even in the aftermath of natural disasters,
to the critical services required to ensure the health, prosperity, and welfare
of communities. In addition, the research project will explore the development
of education and training initiatives to prepare the workforce needed to install
and maintain the micro hubs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the
project include: i) create analytical frameworks and tools that can aid in the
co-design of low-cost, clean energy micro hubs (i.e., small scale power
generation systems) that support more resilient electric power services, ii) use
the frameworks to co-design, build and install prototypes of the energy micro
hubs in communities in Puerto Rico, iii) develop strategies that leverage the
power generated in the energy hubs to support new shared mobility options, iv)
and develop models for the implementation of workforce development-training
programs that help communities to implement and drive innovations that address
their needs. Lastly, using the experiences in Puerto Rico with the service hubs,
the project aims to identify lessons that can help other communities in the
continental US bridge energy and mobility gaps. The planning grant objectives
are to: i) identify energy, transportation, and workforce service gaps in rural
communities located in Puerto Rico, ii) explore to what extent collaborative
energy and transportation hubs can address the needs of the communities, and
iii) explore and document models and data that can be leveraged to advance the
design of the service hubs, while also advancing new workforce development and
business models associated with the multi-use micro-
hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.