* 2228982
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Toolkits for Creating Interaction-powered Energy-aware Computing Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yang Zhang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2025
* USD 315,000.00

The explosion in the number of “smart” computing devices has led to the need to
design power solutions that reduce their ecological footprint and electronic
waste. One possible answer is “self-sustaining” systems that harvest power from
electromagnetic, solar, and other sources, reducing the need for batteries and
external charging. This project looks at a novel kind of self-sustaining power
source, one where systems draw energy from how people use them, for instance
through button clicks or motion of the device. These user interactions are a
promising source of power, but require careful management on the part of device
designers since both the timing and types of interactions can be unpredictable
and must be designed primarily to meet users’ needs rather than power goals. The
research team seeks to deepen the understanding of information and resource
needs of novice designers of self-sustaining systems and to create tools that
help developers manage those needs. This in turn will improve sustainability in
the design of computing systems, with the goal of developing power sources and
development methods that generalize to a wide set of device design contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured around three research thrusts.
The first is to better understand user needs, through a combination of
observations of novices and experts programming self-sustaining systems,
interviews, and surveys. The second is to create modules to harvest energy from
interactions, providing developers with profiling tools and composable
mechanisms enabled by a generic backbone system. The third is to develop
toolkits that link the first two thrusts: supporting the development,
deployment, and assessment of self-sustaining computing systems by providing
guidance to developers on harvester selection, mechanism design, energy
profiling, debugging, and beyond. These three research thrusts will be
complemented by a comprehensive evaluation with a series of technical
validations and user studies. This project will adopt common qualitative and
quantitative evaluation techniques including A/B tests, Likert-scale
questionnaires, semi-structured interviews, experimenters’ observations, walk-
through demonstrations, evaluation through demonstrations, and pair programming.
Overall, this research effort will guide the creation of tools to support future
developments of self-sustaining computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.