* 2228805
* A computational approach to identify non-linear sequence similarity between lncRNAs
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Joseph Calabrese, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2026
* USD 662,630.00

The goal of this proposal is to develop a computational approach to identify
non-linear sequence similarity between long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). A
substantial portion of the RNAs produced by eukaryotic genomes can be classified
as lncRNAs, which have little or no potential to encode for protein. LncRNAs are
essential across kingdoms of life owing to critical roles in gene regulation.
However, progress in the field has been stifled by a lack of computational tools
to identify meaningful similarity between lncRNAs. Unlike protein-coding genes,
lncRNAs are not constrained by codon usage, evolve rapidly, and achieve function
by employing structures or proteins in ways that are not well-understood. Thus,
lncRNAs with similar functions often lack any semblance of linear sequence
similarity, yet owing to a lack of other options, linear alignment remains the
predominant approach for sequence comparison in the lncRNA field. As a result,
studies of one lncRNA rarely inform the understanding of others, and among the
thousands of unstudied lncRNAs, it is nearly impossible to computationally
identify those that encode meaningful functions. However, prior research has
demonstrated the proof-of-principle that when compared to linear alignment, non-
linear forms of sequence comparisons can provide exponentially more information
about the biological properties of lncRNAs, including a modest ability to infer
molecular function. In this project, researchers will develop and validate
software that will enable any biologists, regardless of computational expertise,
to perform quantitative, non-linear sequence comparisons from essentially any
computing resource, including a personal laptop. In concert with the development
and validation of the new software, the project will provide high-quality
mentored research experiences and sustained career guidance for undergraduate
students hailing from underrepresented or underprivileged backgrounds, thereby
encouraging their entry into science and promoting equity, diversity, and
overall excellence in computational biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigative team recently developed an approach called SEEKR (sequence
evaluation through k-mer representation), which compares sequences by their
relative abundance of substrings called k-mers. SEEKR provided some of the first
evidence that lncRNAs with analogous functions can harbor similarities that are
invisible by conventional forms of linear sequence alignment. Despite this
success, SEEKR remains limited in its utility. Most notably, it is unable to
identify regional similarity between lncRNAs, and has no means to consider local
nucleotide context in similarity evaluations, each of which are essential
components of lncRNA functionality. Moreover, SEEKR is qualitative and provides
end-users with no ability to assess significance of its similarity scores, a
critical component of all broadly-used sequence comparison tools. Thus, while
SEEKR was an important proof-of-principle, it falls well short of the reliable
and broadly applicable tool that the field needs to identify meaningful non-
linear similarity between lncRNAs. To address these shortcomings and provide
biologists with better tools to identify relationships between sequence and
function in lncRNAs, this research will apply a statistical approach called the
hidden Markov model (HMM) to develop a python-based software package, hmmSEEKR,
that would give biologists the ability to identify regional and whole-transcript
similarities in k-mer content between any set of lncRNAs. An early version of
hmmSEEKR enabled the identification of known protein-binding domains and
functionally characterized lncRNAs from within the mammalian transcriptome,
feats that to the knowledge of the investigative team, have not previously been
achieved, including using SEEKR. hmmSEEKR will be rigorously validated and tuned
by identifying commonalities in protein-binding profiles between a set of known
lncRNA functional domains and other lncRNA-like domains from within the
transcriptome. Findings will be published in open access journals, including
recommendations for default parameters, and a vetted version of hmmSEEKR will be
deposited in GitHub and the Python Package Index. A usage manual and links to
results will also be posted on
https://www.med.unc.edu/pharm/calabreselab/seekr/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.