* 2228360
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Novel shared transportation services to improve rural-urban commutes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Vikash Gayah, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

While dense urban regions serve as the core employment centers in the United
States, a large fraction of the population still lives in rural/suburban
communities that are characterized by large geographic areas and low population
densities. This creates a spatial mismatch between where people live and work,
which is exacerbated by low housing supplies and high housing prices in cities.
Rural public or shared transportation services are not efficient for transit
agencies to provide and maintain, as they generally carry fewer passengers per
vehicle than urban services. Due to a geographically dispersed demand, such
services also suffer from infrequency and long stop spacings. This forces
commuters to rely on (primarily) single-occupant private automobiles. Such
commute trips are expensive for low-income rural residents, are extremely
damaging to the environment, disproportionately contribute to congestion, and
negatively impact disadvantaged and/or vulnerable communities. The project aims
to identify and pilot innovative shared transportation solutions that can
enhance mobility and accessibility of rural-urban commuters. It will focus on
commuters in Perry County, a suburban of the Harrisburg, Pennsylvania region as
a case study for this larger, problematic issue in the United States. The
results can serve as a model for other rural communities that struggle with the
commuter problem, helping transportation officials identify similar strategies
that can be successful in their areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
create knowledge on the feasibility requirements of different identified shared
transportation options through surveys of rural commuters, employer interviews
and existing data sources. It will also evaluate the effectiveness of the most
viable solution for the study area via a pilot test. In the first step, the
planning project will assess latent travel demand in rural areas and overall
demand for shared mobility options, taking attitudes toward ride sharing into
account. Multiple innovative and flexible shared transportation solutions for
the rural-urban commute will then be designed and explored, combining
traditional transit system structures (e.g., mobility hub, trunk with branches
or commute clusters) with ride-matching services and real-time information
systems to specifically overcome the geographic challenges of serving rural
communities. Comparing different mobility strategies will advance the
understanding of the costs and benefits of each strategy for rural-urban
commutes. The implementation of such solutions can provide significant benefits
to the society by improving commute options for disadvantaged populations and
enabling them to join the labor force more easily, and by lowering congestion
and emissions through the reduction of single-occupant vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge
which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department of Energy's Vehicle Technology
Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
Directorate and Federal Emergency Management Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.