* 2228765
* SAI-P: Integrating Human Behavioral Uncertainty in Participatory Design of Infrastructure in Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Snehasis Mukhopadhyay, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Watershed management is a top priority for the
nation. The management of watersheds must attend to floods, droughts, water
quality, and ecological systems. Such management is shifting from centralized
gray infrastructure solutions (dams, reservoirs, water-wastewater treatment
plants) to approaches that incorporate decentralized and nature-based
infrastructure solutions (wetlands, grassed waterways, stream buffers, rain
gardens, green roofs). This SAI planning project examines how watershed
communities can influence the design of nature-based infrastructure and how the
design of such infrastructure can be inclusive of different stakeholders. The
design of nature-based infrastructure is most effective when implemented as an
interconnected network of landscape practices at multiple geographic locations
across the entire rural and urban terrain. This process requires a deep
understanding of the physical and biological laws that govern how water is
stored, regulated, and routed in the natural and built environments of the
watershed, and of the perceptual and cognitive processes related to watershed
stakeholders who influence what type of infrastructure solutions are implemented
and where. This planning project develops such understanding to enable a
holistic, sustainable, and resilient watershed management
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI planning project focuses on mathematical
and computational frameworks for characterizing and coping with behavioral
uncertainty in participatory design of nature-based infrastructure at watershed-
scales. The project investigates the role of diverse perceptual and cognitive
processes utilized when people interact with digital visualization interfaces
during design of nature-based infrastructure. It also develops novel,
computational and interactive participatory design methods based on modeling
approaches for coping with behavioral and physical uncertainty in the design of
climate-resilient solutions at watershed-scales. The project draws on theory and
research on human-centered interactive optimization for watershed systems,
perceptual and cognitive psychology, and multi-model approaches for adaptive
control. The planning activity includes data collection and workshops to develop
a use-inspired research plan to support fast, accurate, and adaptive
participatory design in watershed communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE)
Sciences, the Directorate for Geosciences, and the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.