* 2228149
* SBIR Phase I:  Internet of Things (IoT)-Enabled Smart Filter
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Sid Chaudhuri, POLLUX TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 269,498.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a novel solution for
air filter monitoring that will have a positive impact on public health, the
environment, and the US economy. The technology is based upon the direct
measurement of the filter status using photosensors, smart signal processing
algorithms for accurate filter soiling condition determination using the sensor
data, and the Internet of Things (IoT) for control and communication. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), "Ambient air pollution kills about 3
million people annually... About 90 percent of the world's population is exposed
to levels exceeding WHO limits." While air-filtration technology alone cannot
solve the overwhelming problem of ambient air pollution, it must be an integral
part of a comprehensive solution. With data driven decision making to eliminate
premature filter replacement and to reduce costs, the proposed technology will
propel the usage of high-quality filters more ubiquitously, leading to enhanced
public health. With 150 million heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems in operation, and quarterly filter replacement, an estimated 600 million
filters are manufactured and thrown away every year. A reduction of 50% of the
filter waste will have a significant positive impact on the environment because
of reduced manufacturing and waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will leverage the accuracy of
photosensors in detecting the degree of filter blockage by sensing transmitted
light through the filter. Underlying the seemingly straightforward solution is a
set of complex technical challenges. Due to the uneven structure including
pleats and frame obstructions, the sensor data are inherently noisy. A software-
controlled actuator will place the sensor in front of the filter and take data
from multiple locations of the filter. A smart algorithm will be developed to
extract a parameter from the analysis of the data set that would be an accurate
proxy for the particle size removal efficiency defined in the American Society
of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers standard which in turn
is expected to be a sufficiently accurate indicator of the true filter age.
Using the IoT capability, the sensor data will be collected in the cloud, where
the smart algorithm and control software will be stored. The final objective is
to determine the optimum point for filter replacement by comparing the parameter
with a threshold parameter derived from a predetermined maximum particle size
removal efficiency and airflow resistance based on indoor air quality
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.