* 2228782
* FMRG: Eco: CAS-Climate: Reimagining Cement Manufacturing for Carbon Neutrality (NeutraCEM)
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Diana Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Portland cement is the primary binding agent in billions of tons of concrete
used every year for construction of nearly all forms of physical infrastructure.
Its worldwide production, amounting to 4.5 billion tons per year, is responsible
for ~8% of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions and ~25% of all industry
carbon dioxide emissions. Cement manufacturing is among the hardest industries
to decarbonize because the carbon dioxide emissions are unavoidable results of
essential chemical reactions (e.g., decarbonation of limestone to produce lime
and carbon dioxide) and high-temperature processes powered by carbon dioxide
-intensive combustion of fossil fuels. As the U.S. embarks on a once-in-a-
century infrastructure revival program, while also committing to slash carbon
dioxide emissions by &gt;50% by 2030 (to limit global warming to 1.5 degree
Celsius, as per the Paris Agreement), there is an urgent need to disruptively
transform cement manufacturing, especially considering that the production-and-
use of Portland cement is poised to grow to &gt;6 Gt by 2030. This project
reimagines cement production through end-to-end technological breakthroughs that
features a solar energy-powered, two-stage process: a novel electrochemical
decarbonation process to produce lime without attendant carbon dioxide release;
and ultrafast production of cement via a novel high temperature synthesis
procedure. The two-stage process enables unprecedented manufacturing
capabilities; with cost-, energy-, and carbon dioxide -efficiencies
substantially better than those of contemporary manufacturing technologies. The
project is supported by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), and co-funded by the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) in MPS, the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and
the Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources (EHR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to enable the production of Portland cement, as well as other lime-based
cements, in a carbon -neutral and energy-efficient manner. To achieve this goal,
the project advances several technological innovations: (1) Low-temperature,
carbon-neutral decomposition of limestone into lime; (2) Ultrafast production of
cements, that are physically and chemically similar to their commercial
counterparts, via a high temperature synthesis procedure; (3) Use of renewable
energy, in lieu of fossil fuels, to power all sub-processes of cement
manufacturing; and (4) Synergistic use of advanced experiments, thermodynamic
and multiphysics simulations, and artificial intelligence to optimize the
manufacturing process, that results in a family of sustainable, next-generation
cements. Outcomes of this work are expected to substantially advance
understanding of process parameters that influence the kinetics, efficiency, and
quality of the products from both stages of the manufacturing process. A simple,
easy-to-use software, with hardwired thermodynamics and machine learning
engines, will be developed to aid manufacturers in ascertaining optimal recipes
based on their cement production targets. The integrated education and workforce
development plan emphasizes training of next generation of sustainable
manufacturing researchers and engineers through conventional modalities, as well
as novel means such as bootcamps, and workshop for advanced-skills training of
skilled technical workers (STWs) and industry
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.