* 2228392
* Collaborative Research: Ranges: Building Capacity to Extend Mammal Specimens from Western North America
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* William Duncan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 04/30/2027
* USD 60,201.00

The specimens contained in natural history collections contribute to scientific
progress and social wellbeing. Their unique value comes from the high-quality
information they contain and the documentation indicating how they were
collected. Of particular value are trait measurements that document how species
interact with each other and how they vary though time, for example, when
responding to environmental changes. Unfortunately, traits for museum specimens
are often only available in non-digital and non-standard formats. This limits
the ability of researchers to find and use them to their full potential. This
award will establish the Ranges Digitization Network (“Ranges”). The goal of the
network is to digitize traits from over one million mammal specimens in 19 U.S.
natural history museums. The network will produce datasets that are in standard
format and easy to find in online biodiversity platforms, such as iDigBio. This
will allow researchers to build better baselines for biodiversity and improve
predictions of how mammals respond to changing environments. Ranges will also
spark collaboration among the museum community and data scientists, creating
solutions usable broadly. The network will employ a diverse human workforce in
digitization and research tasks, and it will engage the public through citizen
science activities and museum exhibits. This will address a major remaining
digitization challenge for U.S. museums, to expand utility of specimens and use
them to create new scientific knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitization of
U.S. natural history museums over the past two decades has improved data sharing
and research capacity in the life sciences. Among the most important data
associated with museum specimens are the morphological and reproductive traits
of individuals. These traits are informative about ecology, evolution, and
responses of organisms to environmental change. Unfortunately, traits from
specimens remain incompletely digitized across museums and hard to locate on the
internet. This inhibits their discovery and use at a time of pressing global
change. Ranges will digitize and publish traits from approximately 1.2 million
non-marine mammal specimens from western North America. The project focuses on
this region due to its complex topography and climate, and because it is a
center of mammalian biodiversity. The specific goals of the network are to
extend existing software tools, develop new standards for mammal trait data, and
coordinate digitization across museum partners. New, digital trait data on
biodiversity data platforms such as iDigBio will transform data accessibility
and foster new evolutionary, ecological, and biomedical research. Ranges will
also collaborate with the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to
ensure compatibility with trait data collected throughout the lifetime of that
network. Using the above approaches, Ranges will lay a foundation for building
an extended specimen network for mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.