* 2228562
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: A GIS-Based Digital Platform for Promoting Sustainable, Equitable, and Resilient Access to Healthy Foods in Response to Natural Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kaiqi Xiong, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Food security has been increasingly threatened by poor crop production, high
food prices, and supply chain failures. There is an urgent need to improve food
security in the aftermath of natural disasters, such as flooding, hurricane, and
drought. The common food bank approach for hunger relief and disaster response
is far from being sustainable and equitable due to its limited nutritious
options, reactive operations, and logistical barriers. This CIVIC project aims
to create and validate a Geographic Information System (GIS)-based digital
platform that not only promotes sustainable and equitable access to healthy
foods but also is resilient to natural disasters and supply chain disruptions in
the face of a changing climate. Specifically, the platform will help the
communities by providing a robust solution to healthy food access. The project
will make special consideration of socially vulnerable populations by increasing
their food access during crises. Priority and reimbursement are given to
economically disadvantaged households; volunteer riders are assigned to help
with food delivery for people with limited mobility. Moreover, the platform has
the potential to be transferred to and scaled up in other cities or regions
since the marginal cost is low. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to improve food security during natural disasters by developing a GIS-based,
decentralized digital platform with special consideration for socially
vulnerable populations. It focuses on conducting a pilot study in the Tampa Bay
Area and adopting the sharing economy business model to connect consumers
directly with local food growers. The platform builds a map interface to collect
and share essential information with the community, integrates GIS to identify
the most vulnerable neighborhoods, and matches them with food supplies. It
implements a dedicated emergency mode to mitigate food insecurity,
inaccessibility, and inequity. The platform, once finished, can crowdsource
real-time data via a map interface; spatially match the food demand and supply;
optimize the location and route choices for the food delivery; enable hassle-
free food purchase for everyone and reimbursement for people in need; switch to
an emergency mode to meet the surged demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a
changing climate: pre-disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and
mitigation—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland
Security, and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.