* 2228345
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Community Knowledge-Inspired Decisions for Schools (Community KIDS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,969.00

Children spend significant time inside school buildings. Therefore, the
environmental conditions in the schools impact the learning environment and
directly influences both the health of kids and their educational outcomes. The
loss of academic achievement and cognitive performance due to exposure to
environmental toxins like lead (Pb) in drinking water and airborne pathogens is
difficult to reverse. Thus, improving school building environments and
infrastructure can impact a community’s future by improving the health and
learning outcomes of its children. This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC)
research evaluates technologies that create healthy water in Flint, Michigan,
schools with similar activities to improve air quality in a follow-on Stage 2
project. The research also involves working with parents, guardians, teachers,
and school administrators to develop communication and information sharing
methods to build trust and knowledge around the technologies put in place to
protect children while they are in school from various toxins and contaminants.
Work in this Stage 1 project focuses on removing lead in drinking water because
it is a known neurotoxin that is harmful to childhood brain development, even at
low concentrations. Traditional methods used to remove lead are linked to
increases in bacteria in drinking water, thus posing other potential harmful
impacts. Project research focuses on identifying the broad range of technical
and social elements that lead to unhealthy water in school environments. It
employs novel, community-resident panels for the co-production of knowledge to
inform and improve the understanding of researchers and school administrators of
parent and student concerns and the questions they have about the Flint school
system's environmental safety. The panels and other community outreach
activities will be used to develop community support and trust in solutions to
keep the air and water of the public school system healthful so children can
thrive and learn. Broader impacts of the work include new technology for the
early warning of contaminant/toxin breakthrough in drinking water filtration
systems and the testing and documentation of novel community-interaction
processes for rebuilding trust in municipal services that have lost the trust of
the community. Results of the study, if successful, have the potential to scale
to other communities with similar problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on community interaction and the development, installation, and use of
filtration technology and methodologies for school building hydration stations
that creates a healthy learning environment for school-aged children using the
Flint, Michigan school system as a pilot. It will also explore the potential and
value of student/staff/parent learning using community-trusted, transparent
methods for getting the word out and building trust in civic service providers.
The work will initially focus on performance and development of technology for
an early warning systems indicating the need for filter changes for 78 advanced
point-of-use drinking water hydration stations that were installed in Flint
Community Schools February 2022. Researchers from the University of Michigan and
groups of students, teachers, and parents will participate in a process to
design practical and sustainable maintenance and monitoring plans for the
stations and guide how timely hydration station performance information is
shared with the community. The community piece involves creation of a Project
Planning Advisory Council that generates interview questions to understand
concerns and thoughts of individual, organizational, and institutional
stakeholders. Although being used initially for Flint, the approach can be
scaled and deployed nationally. Interview questionnaires will help identify
major gaps in our knowledge about the use and performance of drinking water
filtration stations, understanding negative perceptions regarding school
drinking water in areas with a history of poor water quality, and gaps and
themes across different interviewees with a range of ages, roles, and expertise.
The process will provide a better understanding of the perceptions and tensions
that exist around safe water in school buildings. The approach recognizes the
critical, sustained involvement and local knowledge of trusted community
individuals that is required for technical solutions to municipal problems to be
effectively implemented and maintained over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services &amp; community
needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security,
and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.