* 2228259
* SAI-P: Exploring the Infrastructure Available to Scientists to Communicate Strategically
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* John Besley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 143,985.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists face increasing demands to
communicate with a diverse range of audiences. Communication professionals offer
a robust infrastructure to help with this, but scientists often lack substantive
access to this infrastructure. Scientists especially lack access to experts who
can help them identify and prioritize concrete goals and then develop evidence-
based paths to achieving those goals. This SAI planning project begins to design
and prioritize a set of integrated projects to support the communication needs
of the scientific community. The project gains a better understanding of why
scientists rarely use strategic communication guidance. It also begins to
develop a path towards increasing scientists’ access to such infrastructure.
Improved use of a sophisticated communication infrastructure will support broad
dissemination of scientific discoveries to stakeholders, policy makers, and
society while also improving scientists’ capacity to integrate other society
members’ insights and priorities into research
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI planning project lays the foundation to
help the scientific community make more evidence-based, strategy-minded
communication choices to improve their contributions to society. Current science
communication infrastructure may limit scientists’ ability to access strategic
communication guidance for three reasons. These include limited demand for
strategic advice, limited funding for strategic support, and limited access to
strategy-minded people. Interviews with scientists, practitioners, and science
communication experts are used to prioritize where within this landscape to put
additional research focus and design future, collaborative projects. By thinking
of strategic communication as a form of scientific infrastructure, this SAI
planning activity lays the foundation for enhanced and better utilized resources
with which scientists can communicate in the context of their research to both
disseminate their insights and learn from the insights of
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.