* 2228299
* Unique Turbulence Dynamics in Hurricane Boundary Layers and Improving Their Parameterizations in Numerical Weather Prediction Models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Jun Zhang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2025
* USD 508,227.00

Hurricanes have been the costliest natural disaster in US history thus far by
causing billions of dollars in damage. Ocean warming and climate change can
exacerbate tropical cyclone destruction by increasing the frequency and
intensity of future major hurricanes. Only four recent hurricanes — Katrina,
Sandy, Maria, and Harvey — resulted in more than $450B in damages and about
5,000 fatalities. Thus, it is imperative for the scientific community to better
understand and forecast hurricane dynamics and its turbulent winds in order to
effectively mitigate their economic ramifications. Although turbulence plays a
significant role in hurricane evolution, it is neither thoroughly understood nor
parameterized in hurricane flows. Given the remarkable impacts of future
hurricanes on humans and the lack of a reliable turbulence scale model for such
rotating flows, a high-fidelity hurricane model is now essential. This project
aims to address this knowledge gap using a combination of numerical weather
prediction (NWP) models and observations to thrust forward the understanding of
hurricane turbulence, and to develop practical methodologies for improving
hurricane forecasts in NWP models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides
pathways to new frontiers in turbulence theory and modeling of hurricane flows.
In particular, the driving hypothesis of the project is “turbulence dynamics in
hurricane boundary layers (HBLs) are significantly different from typical
atmospheric boundary layers (ABLs) due to rotation in HBLs and their large
Rossby number (centrifugal/Coriolis force); therefore, existing turbulence
models in NWPs limit the accuracy of hurricane forecasts.” This hypothesis will
be tested by answering these open research questions 1) How do hurricanes
modulate the characteristic mixing length scales and turbulence dynamics in the
HBL? and 2) How should the horizontal and vertical turbulent fluxes of an HBL be
parameterized in NWPs compared to typical ABLs? To answer these questions, a
unique combination of high-fidelity large-eddy simulations (LESs), NWPs, and
observations will be employed. The preliminary results support the project’s
central hypothesis by demonstrating remarkably different turbulence structures
and energy spectra in HBLs when compared to typical ABLs, and substantial
improvements in NWP’s hurricane forecasts when current turbulence models are
altered. Hence, addressing the above questions will advance the field of
physical and dynamic meteorology by elucidating the distinctive turbulence
mechanisms in hurricanes compared to conventional much-studied ABLs. Other
notable expected outcomes of the project include an extensive dataset of high-
resolution LESs of HBLs, new physics-based turbulence closures with rotation
correction that are specifically designed for real hurricanes, and a dataset of
improved hurricane simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.