* 2228479
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Assessing the Performance of Green Stormwater Infrastructure for Climate Adaptation and Coastal Resilience in the City of Cape Canaveral, Florida
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Jason Evans, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* John Taylor
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,871.00

This project plans to establish an urban hydrology monitoring network within the
City of Cape Canaveral, Florida, through a participatory charrette process. Like
many coastal communities, Cape Canaveral is confronted with the stressors of
growing flood risk and harmful algal blooms in nearshore waters. A combination
of antiquated infrastructure in the built environment and accelerating climate
change is amplifying the impacts of both urban flooding and algal blooms,
resulting in increasing threats to public safety, ecosystem health, and private
property. The Cape Canaveral municipal government, in collaboration with its
academic and community partners, is planning to design, implement, monitor, and
assess nature-based green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) as an approach for
mitigating these current and future stressors. This GSI monitoring network will
provide important benefits for Cape Canaveral and the broader Indian River
Lagoon watershed of eastern Florida, while also demonstrating opportunities for
optimizing and assessing GSI performance in similarly vulnerable coastal
locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GSI refers to a set of stormwater management
practices that are designed to maintain, restore, and/or mimic pre-development
hydrologic conditions within built environments. These practices are being
increasingly promoted as a tool for reducing flood risk, improving water
quality, enhancing urban habitat, and creating valuable green space amenities.
However, GSI has not yet been adopted at scale in much of the U.S., including
areas – like much of coastal Florida – where existing stormwater infrastructure
systems are largely maladapted to climate change-driven flood risks and often
identified as a primary pollutant load source into impaired aquatic ecosystems.
A relative lack of monitoring and performance data, ambiguous permitting design
standards, and misunderstood maintenance protocols are all commonly cited as key
barriers to the wider application of GSI, in Florida and elsewhere. To help
overcome these barriers, Cape Canaveral is motivated to serve as a partner and
host for an applied research program that comprehensively tests the field
performance of GSI interventions for mitigating locally severe stormwater-based
flooding and non-point nutrient load issues. Key research goals for the fully
implemented project include characterization of stormwater infiltration rate-
capacity, areal nutrient-load reduction performance, and public valuation of GSI
systems as a municipal amenity. Results are anticipated to facilitate greater
GSI research and adoption in the imperiled Indian River Lagoon watershed, home
to 1.5 million people and often described as the most biodiverse estuary in
North America, and broadly impact the evolution of GSI monitoring practices in
urbanized coastal communities across the world. This project is in response to
the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate:
pre-disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a
collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.