* 2228632
* The Small Mammals of the Paisley and Connley Caves: Disentangling Drivers of Diversity in Pleistocene Extinction Survivors
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Rebecca Terry, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2026
* USD 911,531.00

The project will test how climate change and humans have altered small mammal
communities over the last 17,000 years. Paleontological studies have greatly
increased our understanding of the ecological impacts of climate change and the
extinction of large-bodied mammals at the end of the last Ice Age. Little is
known, however, about how climate change, human impacts, and the loss of large
mammals have shaped the ecology of the smallest extinction survivors: mammals
under 3 kilograms (e.g., squirrels, rats and mice). This is despite the
important and diverse roles that small mammals play in ecosystems. This
knowledge gap is not only a problem for paleontology; ecologists also don’t
fully understand the direct and indirect ways that climate change and human
impacts are changing the ecosystems in which we live today. Studying how the
smallest mammals have responded to major ecological disruption will thus help us
better predict how mammalian communities today are likely to shift in the
future. This is important because ecosystems today are often changing in ways we
cannot predict using climate change alone. In addition to testing how small
mammal communities have changed over time, this project will develop a Virtual
Field Trip that will educate participants on the Great Basin’s natural and
cultural histories. This activity will provide training to undergraduate and
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher and engage elementary age
students and teachers in rural Oregon schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet this
challenge, this research will use the paleontological and archaeological records
of the Paisley and Connley Caves. The caves are in the northwestern Great Basin,
a now-threatened ecoregion that was central to the peopling of the Western
Hemisphere. Fossils will be used to estimate the diversity and function of small
mammal communities from 17,000 years ago to today. Radiocarbon dating of these
fossils, and surveys of modern small mammals, will help answer questions about
how climate change and human presence have together shaped biodiversity in the
past and the present. The research will also study how small mammal communities
today differ from what they were like just before European contact. Thus, the
research will highlight the importance of museum collections and the value of
fossils for Modern conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.