* 2228266
* NSF-DFG: Hierarchical Design and Additive Manufacturing of Metallic Programmable Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xinghang Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2025
* USD 452,928.00

Programmable mechanical metamaterials (PMMs) have unique mechanical properties
and functionalities through specific geometric designs without changing the
material composition. Current PMMs are primarily made of polymer, which cannot
sustain high stress and temperature. Metallic PMMs can be used under these
extreme conditions, and have potential applications for aerospace, automobile
and biomedical industries. However, an existing scientific challenge is that a
simple translation of the proven polymer PMM design into metals is unsuccessful
because most metals have magnitudes lower elastic strain limit than polymers
leading to a low lifetime under cyclic loading. Without a complete structural
redesign, the required mechanical properties would be extremely challenging to
achieve in metallic PMMs. Although additive manufacturing (AM) offers the
potential to fabricate complex geometry, the small dimension and complex
geometry required to achieve functionality in metallic PMMs have reached its
resolution limit. Hence, there is an urgent need to explore the fundamental AM
processing mechanism that can achieve desirable small features with acceptable
defect density and residual stresses. This project leverages the unique
expertise of the Purdue team on manufacturing and Freiburg team on design to
tackle this challenge. The international collaboration will enable students from
both institutes to develop a solid foundation in both experiments and
simulations through videoconferences and annual student exchanges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to apply laser powder bed
fusion to fabricate metallic PMMs and understand fundamentally the influence of
hierarchical design and AM processing on microstructures, defect density,
elastic strain limit and fatigue resistance. The project team plans to develop
an integrated experimental and modeling platform that can significantly improve
fundamental understandings on the manufacturing of metallic PMMs with superior
mechanical performance (large global strain and fatigue resistance). This
research will integrate AI-assisted computer design, AM modeling and processing,
characterization and mechanical testing to identify architectures that can
sustain large global strain with minimal local elastic strain. Purdue’s
capability on in-situ small scale mechanical testing in SEM and Freiburg’s
capability on fatigue testing of small structures will be integrated to
understand the underlying deformation and fatigue mechanisms. If successful,
this project will generate new knowledge about the influence of AM processing
conditions on generation of internal defects and residual stress, as well as the
consequent impact on fatigue properties of metallic PMMs. This project is also
expected to lead to new structural redesign of PMM coupled with AM for metallic
materials that offers the promise to sustain large elastic deformation, high
stress and fatigue resistance, not attainable in polymeric
PMMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.