* 2228555
* SAI-P: Coupling Regional Economic Development with Transportation Planning for Sustainable Emerging Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Lori Dickes, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,954.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many regions of the country, economic
development creates increased demand for transportation infrastructure. This can
be especially challenging for small- and medium-size cities, where such
development can impact quality of life in both positive and negative ways. This
SAI planning project identifies opportunities to better couple economic
development activities with transportation infrastructure investments, with a
particular focus on maximizing the quality of life of current and future
residents of small- and medium-sized growing towns and cities. It brings
together diverse stakeholders to better understand current practices in this
coupling and to identify barriers for improving such coupling. A top priority is
to ensure that proactive coupling of economic development and transportation
planning allows for an equitable distribution of the positive and negative
impacts of development across residents of a community. The project produces a
research agenda through focus groups on topics including coupled economic
development and transportation infrastructure planning, equity in quality-of-
life development impacts for community residents, and improving equity in
coupled regional development and infrastructure planning. The focus groups
include stakeholders in local and regional government, transportation
authorities, community groups, and researchers. The project aims to provide a
roadmap on how emerging cities can leverage economic growth in a sustainable and
equitable manner over the next several decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI
planning project combines stakeholder-engaged participatory research methods,
transportation network analysis, and operations research models for long-term
infrastructure planning. The project develops methods for proactive investment
in transportation infrastructure to meet increased demand resulting from
economic development. This approach helps to ensure that the quality of life of
current and future community residents is not detrimentally impacted by such
development and, ideally, improves through it. The planning activity also
provides insight about how best to improve equity in economic development
impacts (positive and negative) across community residents. The implementation
of participatory research methods co-produces knowledge on the current practical
barriers that limit better coupling between economic development and
transportation infrastructure while facilitating the transition of results into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.