* 2228633
* Planning: CIVIC-PG Track B: A Community-Designed Intersectional Food Access Rights for Marginalized communities (IFARM) Hub
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Jeffrey Rose, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,995.00

Food and housing security are linked contexts necessary for health, stability,
and sustainability. In response to community-identified needs to improve food-
and housing-related outcomes for people experiencing homelessness (PEH) in an
urban setting. This planning grant will bring together expertise from PEH,
civic, and academic collaborators to pilot a community-designed, systems-based
intersectional resource hub. An Intersectional Food Access Rights for
Marginalized communities (IFARM) Hub will be co-designed with PEH and community
members, and co-located and linked with services, programs, and initiatives
supporting various aspects of food and housing security. The IFARM Hub will
bridge gaps between essential food resources and community needs for those
experiencing food and housing insecurity in the underserved Glendale community
on Salt Lake City’s west side. The IFARM Hub will use participatory, systems-
based, intersectional approaches and methodologies to aggregate housing, health,
social, transportation, and technology services to meaningfully increase healthy
food and resource access. In collaboration with PEH and the nonprofit Green
Phoenix Farm (GPF), the project will connect PEH with essential community
resources, including nutritious foods, by extending GPF’s services and
integrating it with other community-based organizations while concurrently
assessing increased reach to broader housing- and food-insecure populations.
Siting the IFARM Hub at the GPF, which employs women experiencing homelessness,
leverages existing strengths of the farm’s off-grid solar array, which powers
the farm’s refurbished shipping containers and reclaimed materials, including a
walk-in cooler, produce packaging facility, computer lab, and office. The IFARM
Hub will be housed in this shipping container-based infrastructure, inclusive of
vertical space, to increase production, extend GPF’s seasonal growing capacity,
and deepen integration with local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will work closely with PEH, community groups and key stakeholders to
design mixed-methodology assessment plans to appraise the feasibility and
effectiveness of the IFARM Hub. We will identify indicators of success from
multiple stakeholders’ perspectives, with particular attention to needs
identified by PEH, and anticipate increased access to nutrient-rich foods by
larger numbers of PEH will be a key effectiveness outcome. Maintaining fidelity
to community-engaged research practices, our research will identify key
stakeholders in underrepresented communities, define success in health and
social outcomes according to PEH and community collaborators, derive key metrics
of health and social outcomes, identify current connectivity gaps, identify
technological resources necessary for a sustainable community hub, and identify
key facilitators and processes necessary for scaling the IFARM Hub for PEH to
other comparable urban settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the CIVIC Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department
of Energy's Vehicle Technology Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.