* 2228624
* I-Corps: Development of a Deep Ultraviolet Laser
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Hiroyuki Nakamura, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a narrow bandwidth continuous wave laser that emits deep
ultraviolet (UV) light. One of the key challenges in UV laser technology is
long-term stability as UV laser beams tend to degrade the various materials used
inside the laser system, including the window and mirror coatings and laser
crystals. The proposed technology is designed to achieve efficient output of
deep UV light as well as limit the degradation of laser mirrors in the cavity.
Currently, the demand for the UV technology is increasing in the fields of
materials science and quantum technologies. Further, UV laser technology is
thought to be a key enabling technology for the field of quantum computing. In
the future, the proposed laser technology potentially may be useful in other
areas including biomedical research such as gene-editing, semiconductor
inspection and patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the potential development of a compact and modular frequency conversion stage
that emits continuous wave deep UV laser beams at the wavelengths of 190-200 nm.
The proposed technology is designed to achieve efficient output of deep UV light
as well as limit the degradation of optical components in the laser cavity.
Initially, the proposed technology has two target applications: Photoelectron
spectroscopy and cold atom research. Both applications require deep UV lasers,
while cold atom research additionally requires the use of continuous wave laser.
In addition, the wavelength of the laser is designed to be tunable, an advanced
functionality not available in commercial continuous wave laser systems working
in UV wavelengths, which may facilitate configuration of the laser for different
applications. This proposed light source may accelerate materials research and
quantum technologies including ion-based quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.