* 2228725
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: Neutral Atom Based Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Dana Anderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

Non-Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Information technology is a major driving
force of modern science and technology, having advanced human civilization
throughout the past century. Quantum information technology, built upon
fundamental quantum mechanics principles such as superposition and entanglement,
can solve important problems that are intractable with current classical
information technology. This center research is anticipated to revolutionize
computing and communication technology with far-reaching societal impacts. The
success of quantum information technology development in the US demands the
establishment of a productive and sustained quantum information science and
engineering (QISE) community that involves many US institutes for research,
education, and workforce development. This project expands the current small-
scale quantum research efforts at the University of Texas at Dallas (UT-Dallas)
to establish a robust QISE community to serve Texas and the US. Key research and
education components of the project include: i) Quantum network, sensing, and
simulation research based on controlling cold atoms; ii) Multiple faculty hires
and long-term institutional support; iii) Establishment of QISE undergraduate
minor and graduate Master programs; and iv) Quantum workforce development and
outreach activities through collaborations with industrial partners and
established nationwide quantum information centers. These activities enable the
development of cutting-edge quantum technology while providing education and
training for students, from K-12 to graduate school, to become the quantum
scientists and engineers needed to develop a sustainable quantum information
technology future of the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Cold neutral atoms have emerged as a prime contender for
various quantum information processing tasks due to exquisite control and
reproducibility, but still face many challenges, such as combining multiple
setups to build improved quantum sensor networks and realizing analog atomic
quantum information processing. The goal of this project is to build a QISE
research and education hub at UT-Dallas based on neutral atom quantum platforms.
The project includes three research thrusts: i) Quantum networks of sensors with
neutral atoms in optical tweezer arrays; ii) Analog quantum signal processing
and sensing using an atomtronics approach with ultracold atomic physics; iii)
Quantum simulation and computation with intermediate scale neutral atom quantum
computers. These research projects can significantly advance the field of QISE
through building a powerful neutral atom quantum sensor network for probing non-
local physical quantities, engineering novel atomtronics circuits for analog
quantum signal processing, and understanding complex quantum dynamics utilizing
many-body physics and quantum circuit design
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.