* 2228681
* Collaborative Research: Statistical mechanics of dense suspensions - dynamical correlations and scaling theory
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 269,703.00

This award supports research and education on dense suspensions, specifically a
collection of rough particles suspended in a fluid like water: cornstarch is a
good example of such a system. Similar dense suspensions include cement,
ceramics, and mud. These suspensions are often so packed with particles that
small changes in flow rate may cause them to stop flowing and jam into a solid.
Surprisingly, a predictive theory for this behavior is lacking. One obstacle is
figuring out how interactions between two particles cause the behavior seen when
many particles are put together. The research supported by this award is focused
on creating understanding using a combination of theory, numerical simulations,
and analysis of experimental data. Since the behavior of suspensions is easily
accessible in experiments and numerical simulations that show good agreement,
they are an ideal system for exploring the larger question of how materials
change properties due to flow conditions. The team is committed to outreach and
diversity-in-education efforts: a novel approach to exposing the basic science
through on-stage dramatization will be undertaken with collaborators in New York
City, while both investigators will mentor undergraduate research students with
recruitment from under-represented groups a priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research and education to develop understanding of microscopic
correlations and macroscopic behavior in dense, shear-thickening suspensions.
Using a discrete-particle simulation approach that incorporates particle
frictional contact at stress above a threshold level, the behavior of the
discontinuous shear thickening (DST) and shear jamming (SJ) transitions will be
explored. The focus will be on measuring dynamical, or motion variable,
correlations such as the spatial and temporal correlation of fluctuating
velocities and rotational motions. This will be complemented by analysis of
divergent shear and normal stress as jamming is approached; the analysis will
apply methods of crossover scaling, a renormalization group method especially
useful when behavior is influenced by two singular points: this is seen in the
current system as it undergoes two forms of jamming, one due to geometrically-
determined frictionless contacts at vanishing stress and the other due to
stress-induced frictional contacts at large stress. The continuum description of
suspension flow in a novel direction, by extension of recent approaches to
describe the emergent elasticity of jammed amorphous packings will also be
investigated. This direction of work is based on a postulate that rigidity on
progressively larger scales is induced by increase of the stress, which in a
sufficiently dense suspension leads to a percolation of rigidity and jamming;
the continuum theory is based in the investigation of motion correlations by
simulation. To explore more complex kinematics, simulation of a spatially
varying flow mimicking active microrheology, in which a probe particle is pulled
through a dense suspension, will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.