* 2228095
* Planning Grant: From Classroom to career: Building a Culture of Access for Geoscientists with Disabilities
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Michele Cooke, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2025
* USD 259,931.00

In the geosciences, the perception of disability as a barrier to a successful
career and the inaccessible culture of degree programs discourage many people
with disabilities from starting or staying in geoscience degree programs.
Disabled degree-holding individuals in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) disciplines also have a significantly higher unemployment rate than their
non-disabled peers (NCSES, 2021). Until there is change in the prevailing
culture of inaccessibility and normalize the support and success of disabled
geoscientists, there will be continued exclusion of many from the geosciences.
Today’s disabled early career geoscientists are the vanguard of the ‘ADA
generation’, born after the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act in
1990. The ADA generation doesn’t just hope for accessible learning and work
conditions, they expect it. As the ADA generation comes of age, there is need of
better characterization of the disabled experience in the geosciences across all
career stages (see Kingsbury et al, 2020). There is also a compelling need to
examine the biases and racism within the Disabled identity. While access
barriers impact us all, racism compounds the biases faced by disabled BIPOC
individuals (e.g. Garcia, 2019), yet little is known (outside of anecdotal
evidence) about how that impacts students and career professionals in the
geosciences. The leaders of this project aim to solicit input from - and build
community with - geoscientists from diverse backgrounds, all career stages, and
work sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disabled geoscientists with diverse academic
experiences and life paths are realizing disabled scientists need more than
anecdotes and individual advocacy to transform the culture of geosciences. The
goal of this planning grant is to facilitate this culture change by first
identifying and characterizing significant barriers faced by people with
disabilities on geoscience career paths by surveying disabled geoscientists
within the community and then strategizing specific initiatives that could
address those barriers via a hybrid workshop attached to a national geoscience
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.