* 2228539
* Massive MIMO for Underwater Acoustic WiFi Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yahong Zheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 376,000.00

Underwater wireless communication remains a critical bottleneck to advancing
ocean technologies and sustainable ocean development. The existing underwater
acoustic communication networks suffer from low bandwidth and low efficiency due
to harsh acoustic channel conditions and large propagation delays. This project
takes advantage of space resource and utilizes massive MIMO (Multiple-Input-
Multiple-Output) schemes for the Access Point (AP) of underwater acoustic WiFi
networks. The objective of the proposed research is to drastically increase the
network throughput and bandwidth efficiency by joint MAC-PHY layer optimization.
The proposed research will benefit ocean technology and blue economy in several
aspects: the utilization of underwater WiFi will drastically reduce sound
pollution in the ocean as acoustic WiFi network facilitates low-power low-range
communication and reduces high-power long-range transmission; a successful test
bed for underwater WiFi networks will likely promote underwater robotics and
Internet of Underwater Things (IoUT), which in turn can enhance the capability
of ocean sensing and big data collection; the proposed research has the
potential to be transferred to the field and will likely play a critical role in
enabling IoUTs. The educational plan includes developing assessment tools for
measuring curiosity and creativity in student learning, attracting undergraduate
students into research, and incorporating competitions in classroom
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explicitly factorizes the large
propagation delays between mobile nodes and the massive MIMO AP into the sum
throughput utility function and employs a Deep Q-Learning Neural (DQN) Network
to learn the optimal spatial-temporal precoding policy in the dynamic acoustic
environment. The proposed research is divided into two intertwined tasks. The
first task is the throughput optimization and protocol design, which formulates
the massive MIMO precoder and MAC time allocation of the uplink and downlink
links into a Stochastic Dynamic Programming (SDP) problem considering both
statistical channel state information and propagation delay profile. A 2-layer
decomposition and DQN network are used to combat the curse of dimensionality and
solve the SDP. The optimal solutions are translated into practical signaling
designs of the WiFi AP transmitter and receiver. The second task is the hardware
implementation and testbed design, which includes an AP with a 36-transducer
massive MIMO array and a set of mobile nodes each with 4-8 transducers. The
integrated testbed will be used to conduct field experiments and to collect data
for DQN training. The innovative approach to protocol design and resource
allocation is likely to result in a breakthrough in underwater acoustic
communication and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.