* 2228351
* I-Corps: Direct air capture and sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2)
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Bu Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a low-cost direct air carbon capture and sequestration
technology. To combat climate change and meet climate goals, a large-scale
ramping up of technologies for direct air capture and removal of carbon dioxide
may be needed. There is a strong commercial interest for low energy cost,
inexpensive, and scalable solutions to reduce carbon dioxide. The proposed
technology may respond to this market demand by offering a permanent,
verifiable, and low-cost solution for removing carbon dioxide from the air. In
addition, the proposed technology simultaneously may upcycle landfilled
industrial wastes as carbon-negative cementitious material which may help to
reduce the environmental footprint of cement production. Because the waste
impoundments are often located in low-income and underserved communities,
commercialization of the technology may provide economic benefits to these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a technology that utilizes industrial waste materials to directly
capture carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. The CO2 is then stored as a
stable mineral. The proposed technology is based on a two-step mineral
carbonation method that utilizes alkali carbonate solutions as intermediary
reagents to extract alkalinity from solid mineral waste feedstocks. This method
stems from fundamental research on mineral dissolution and carbonation, which
led to the discovery that mineral dissolution may be significantly enhanced
under alkaline conditions in the presence of alkali carbonates. By
synergistically enhancing mineral dissolution and solution pH, hydroxide
solutions similar to those used by the current state-of-the-art strong hydroxide
liquid-based direct air capture processes may be rapidly generated from the
solid feedstock under ambient conditions. Direct coupling of mineral carbonation
to direct air capture eliminates capital and energy intensive units, such as the
calciner, slaker, and compressor, potentially minimizing the energy use and
capital cost for direct removal of carbon dioxide from the air. In addition,
because the mineral carbonation process proceeds through a gel-mediated
dissolution/precipitation mechanism, the carbonated mineral feedstocks show
enhanced pozzolanic properties, which may allow them to be upcycled as
cementitious materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.