* 2228113
* RAPID: Structural Assessments for Buildings Exposed to a Corrosive Environment: Data Collection at the Blue Heron Paper Mill, Historical Industrial Site at Willamette Falls, Oregon
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Michael Bailey, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 119,902.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will collect and analyze
perishable data on historical buildings. The Blue Heron Paper Mill Site located
by the Willamette Falls in Oregon City, Oregon, has a very intriguing history
and was recently purchased by the Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde with the
intent to restore the falls to their natural state and preserve some of the
oldest structures. The site presents a unique opportunity to perform rapid
investigations to collect and analyze perishable data on these historical
buildings and develop new knowledge in the area of building assessments in
corrosive environments. This industrial site contains a wide range of structure
types (steel frames, concrete frames, timber frames, masonry walls and massive
concrete walls) that were built over a period of 150 years and that employ many
construction details that are common in older structures. The data collected and
the results of the research will be applicable to many buildings in coastal
communities throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lidar data sets
collected from these buildings will support the development of new methods to
analyze and synthesize large data sets as well as integrate visual observations
and material testing to quantify structural deterioration damages. The challenge
in developing artificial intelligence (AI) technologies to find and quantify
damage in structural systems using lidar data is the need to train the methods
on existing data sets that show a wide range of damage states. The data to be
collected from this site will provide an extensive training data set relevant to
structural components common to older buildings. Development of such AI
technologies for fast identification and quantification of damage would be
transformative for the natural hazards research community and would expand the
ability to learn from archived lidar datasets. The collected dataset will be
available to researchers to serve as high quality training data in algorithm
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.