* 2228213
* Advancing Culturally Responsive Team Learning for Underserved Students in the STEM Classroom: Motivation and Engagement Across Different Class Modalities
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Eric Baer, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/28/2027
* USD 585,861.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by contributing to the need for
a multiculturally competent and diverse STEM workforce by advancing the
understanding of team learning and its role in student engagement, persistence,
and success. The use of team learning is widely acknowledged as important in
STEM learning, retention, and career preparation, with a disproportionately
positive impact on students from groups that have been historically
underrepresented in STEM. Still, there is a knowledge gap as to how to implement
this strategy effectively in a two-year college context with diverse student
populations. The primary question this project will address is how to make team
learning effective in two-year college STEM learning environments, particularly
those serving large numbers of students from underrepresented groups and non-
traditional students. The results will inform ways to create an inclusive
classroom climate as a strategy to retain more students in STEM and ultimately
broaden participation in the STEM workforce. Project results should also inform
mechanisms that are aimed at creating successful transfer pathways from two-year
institutions to four-year colleges and universities. Additionally, this project
plans to study the effectiveness of team learning in the new educational
landscape brought about by the pandemic, where online and hybrid class
modalities are now the norm in two-year colleges. This project has the potential
to be transformative by informing how to adapt team learning practices for
student success in non-face-to-face class modalities, an immediate need at all
higher education institutions. The project will support the design and adoption
of novel teaching strategies through faculty training and publicly available
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project hopes to achieve three goals: 1)
identify and explain psychosocial predictors of student engagement in team
learning through student surveys and interviews; 2) articulate and explain
differences in student versus instructor perception of team learning through
surveys of STEM faculty; and 3) develop, test, evaluate, revise and disseminate
a set of practices for culturally responsive team learning. The project uses a
novel approach by investigating both individual and cultural psychosocial
factors impacting team learning engagement and perception within
Bronfenbrennerâ€™s Ecological Approach model. While the model has been used
extensively in the education field, this project extends it to team learning in
STEM. Finally, the project hopes to leverage the research findings to empower
faculty to apply a justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion framework to team
learning. Through summer institute workshops and a community of practice, STEM
faculty will design and implement changes for both online and face-to-face
classes. To test model validity, a pre-and post-survey will be administered to
students. These results will be paired with faculty self-reflections and
formative assessments of team learning to evaluate effectiveness of the teaching
modifications and provide a set of recommendations for future practices. The set
of recommendations will be disseminated through conference presentations, peer-
reviewed papers targeting an interdisciplinary audience, and a website with
resources, modules, and rubrics to allow other institutions to use and adapt.
The predictive model of effective team learning will benefit the STEM education
community by paving the way for further research into culturally competent
education. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in
Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education
supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges.
The program description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in
undergraduate STEM education at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.