* 2228140
* GOALI: Thermo-catalytic Decomposition of Natural Gas Coupled with Regeneration: Nanostructure Connections and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Randy Vander Wal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2025
* USD 368,899.00

Hydrogen has several present-day uses including fertilizer production, refining,
and boosting natural gas combustion for power generation. Presently hydrogen for
these uses is generated by steam-methane reforming, an energy intensive process
producing considerable carbon dioxide and consuming substantial water. In
contrast thermally driven catalytic decomposition of methane can produce clean
hydrogen uncontaminated by reforming byproducts. Thermally driven catalytic
decomposition produces hydrogen using roughly half the input energy of steam
methane reforming. Operating with renewable energy, thermally driven catalytic
decomposition could supply hydrogen for power generation and transportation
based on hydrogen fuel cells free of carbon dioxide production. Effectively
decarbonizing methane by producing solid carbon in addition to clean hydrogen,
thermally driven catalytic decomposition can facilitate the transition to the
hydrogen economy. This project promotes elementary and high-school engagement in
science though summer science camps and after-school
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon is an ideal catalyst for thermally
driven catalytic decomposition given its high temperature stability and
resistance to poisoning. Yet its activity declines with reaction time.
Surprisingly, deposited carbon nanostructure has not been examined by microscopy
nor connected with its initial activity and decline. The project goal is to
realize thermally driven catalytic decomposition as a semi-continuous process
via coupling thermally driven catalytic decomposition with a regeneration
reaction for the carbon serving as catalyst. Thermally driven catalytic
decomposition will be conducted using synthetic natural gas representing
realistic pipeline mixtures. Regeneration will be conducted by gasification,
using carbon dioxide or water, separately or as mixtures. The experimental
approach will systematically resolve reaction parameters and their interactions
upon thermally driven catalytic decomposition metrics of methane conversion,
hydrogen yield and product selectivity and key kinetic metrics: reaction rate,
reaction order and activation energy. A similar approach will be applied to
regeneration reactions, individually and coupled with thermally driven catalytic
decomposition. Reaction rates will be correlated with carbon structure, thereby
developing structure-activity relationships specific to both thermally driven
catalytic decomposition and regeneration (gasification) reactions. Kinetic
models for thermally driven catalytic decomposition and gasification – both
resolved by carbon structure, will be developed with experimental input, using
an open-source chemical kinetic modeling code. Fundamentally, this study seeks
to connect carbon structure and activity as a fundamental metric for thermally
driven catalytic decomposition and gasification
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.