* 2228530
* CIVIC-PG Track A: Smart Kids and Cool Seniors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project helps low-income seniors cope better with the compounding threats
of heat stress, poor air quality, and poor ventilation in public housing. It is
a collaboration between the urban community of Elizabeth, New Jersey, and
researchers at Rutgers University. Poverty imposes multiple stressors that limit
opportunities for youth and increase cumulative environmental health risks for
vulnerable people. Solutions should empower these people and members of the
broader community to act more effectively. Thus, the project brings seniors and
youth together for a common purpose in a STEM education program for
disadvantaged youth in public housing. The youth and their university
collaborators will deploy an inexpensive sensor network to measure environmental
conditions outdoors throughout the city, and indoors in seniors’ apartments, and
will share insights based on the data collected with community members in real
time so that they can act accordingly. This project should build a firmer basis
for (1) residential actions to avoid exposure to heat stress and poor air
quality, (2) community group actions to advocate for regulation of prominent
outdoor air polluters and an indoor right to cooling, (3) municipal actions to
prioritize civic improvements, and (4) housing authority actions to improve
environmental conditions within apartment buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project deploys a large number of inexpensive, moderate-quality air pollutant
and temperature/humidity measurement sensors in a network with real-time remote
data retrieval at a grid of fixed points, augmented with mobile sensors—personal
exposure monitors—carried by youth accompanying seniors on their normal trips
around the city. The university research team will create a modeling platform
that monitors sensor performance, interpolates local environmental conditions
based on the sensor data, compares outdoor and indoor conditions, and pushes
actionable information and recommendations to residents by means of cellphone
apps, a local-access TV channel, and video displays being installed off-budget
in stairwells buildings owned by the housing authority. This platform will serve
a community engagement process that brings youth and seniors together around the
common goals of reducing seniors’ cumulative environmental vulnerabilities and
increasing children’s exposure to STEM knowledge. The project: (1) focuses on
human agency in the multi-level urban context; (2) applies machine learning
techniques to help solve budgeting tradeoffs between sensor quality and
coverage; (3) extends digital twinning strategies to handle both indoor and
outdoor problem solving; and (4) empowers communities to identify realistic
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.