* 2228307
* SAI-P: Developing Long-Term Socio-Technical Research Programs with Electric Cooperatives
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Keith Taylor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most electricity in the United States is
delivered by large utilities. But a significant segment of the population is
served by electric cooperatives, mostly in rural areas. These are community-
owned and community-managed electric utilities that have shown great innovation
in their self-governance. Electric cooperatives have built portfolios of
distributed resources that achieve economies of scope. Yet they are now seeking
to adapt their electric grids to a world with less centralized fossil-fueled
generation and more decarbonized and electrified distributed energy resources.
With societal demands for new technologies, organizational competencies, and
business practices to transition from fossil fuel combustion to cleaner electric
end uses, electric cooperatives are facing intense pressure to adapt. This SAI
planning project builds new and deeper capacity-building partnerships between
university researchers, land grant university extension services, and rural
electric cooperatives for research-to-action programs. The aim is to advance the
collective innovation and management of rural energy transitions while improving
the quality of life for rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rural electric
cooperatives maintain coupled socio-technical infrastructure systems consisting
of connected physical electricity-system assets and social systems of governance
and institutions surrounding their physical infrastructure. This project builds
capacity to identify, manage, and innovate around the dynamics of the physical
and social infrastructure systems of rural electric cooperatives. The goal of
this project is to establish a model of “Long-Term Socio-Technical Research”
(LTSTR) programs wherein locally situated interdisciplinary researchers,
extension services, and rural electric cooperatives build durable partnerships
for knowledge-to-action programs, elevation of community stakeholder
participation, and durable consumer-centric energy transitions. This project
seeks to understand effective models for long-term university-cooperative
utility partnerships and develop strategies for strengthening the impact of
these partnerships on rural community vitality over time. LTSTR programs provide
a platform to facilitate short-term researcher- and student-led projects, along
with training to support a decarbonized and electrified future with rural
communities. In partnership with utility and community partners, this SAI
planning project builds a strategy for expanding and formalizing engaged
research methods in diverse contexts across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.