* 2228357
* UHTC Conference - Ultra-High Temperature Ceramics: Materials for Extreme Environment Applications V
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Gregory Thompson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 7,800.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “Ultra-High Temperature
Ceramics: Materials for Extreme Environment Applications V” conference bring
together the community of scientist and engineers in Snowbird, UT, in June 2022.
The conference is focused on discussing state-of-the-art in ultrahigh
temperature ceramic (UHTC) processing, characterization and properties. Given
the renewed interest in this field the meeting is very timely and relevant to
the ceramics scientific community and plays an important role of research
dissemination and fostering scientific collaboration. It provides an ideal
environment for junior scientists and engineers to become integrated into the
field. Support from the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research
enables supporting up to five individuals that are either graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, or early career individuals. Particular attention to
supporting individuals from groups that are historically underrepresented in the
STEM disciplines is achieved through this travel participant/registration
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-High Temperature Ceramics (UHTCs) - which
includes transition metal carbides, nitrides, and borides - are a family of
compounds that display a unique set of properties, including extremely high
melting temperatures (&gt;3000 deg. C), high hardness and good chemical
stability and strength at high temperatures. The combination of properties makes
these materials candidates for a variety of high-temperature structural
applications, including engines, high-speed vehicles, plasma arc electrodes,
cutting tools, and advanced nuclear fuel usages. The conference’s focus on the
scientific status of UHTC and the ability for leading experts to share their
developments will ensure a continuation of new ideas and nurture collaborations
that provide distinct advancements in a class that are ever more relevant to
meet the demands placed on materials in extreme environments. The travel award
is used to enable graduate, post docs, and/or early professionals, particularly
those from underrepresented demographics in STEM, to participate in the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.