* 2228821
* I-Corps: Biological Extraction and Purification of Rare Earth Elements
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Buz Barstow, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of an environmentally friendly, biology-based technology to extract
and purify rare earth elements (REE). REE are elements from the periodic table
consisting of the lanthanides elements as well as scandium and yttrium. They are
essential ingredients in important modern technologies such as computers and
catalysts, as well as many clean energy technologies such as windmills and
electric cars. Currently, there is limited mining and purification of these
critical minerals undertaken in the US. The proposed technology uses engineered
bacteria to cleanly extract and purify REE from recycled and waste materials
that are readily available in the US. Options for REE feedstocks include
recycled electronics, coal ash, and various catalysts among other materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the potential
development of engineered bacteria capable of extracting and purifying rare
earth elements (REE). The proposed technology uses the bacterium Gluoconobacter
oxydans to produce an acidic biolixiviant capable of leaching REE into a
solution from an REE-containing material. In addition, various strains of the
bacteria Shewanella oneidensis are engineered to have binding sites on their
membranes specific for a particular REE, which allows individual REEs to be
adsorbed from a mixture. Individual REEs are then desorbed from the bacterial
membranes to create a pure solution and precipitated from the solution as an
oxide or carboxylate. Results at lab scale have shown that the engineered
bacteria may produce a biolixiviant that will leach REE out of a feedstock into
solution with a reasonably high efficiency and the relative affinity on the
bacterial membrane for REE may be modified to enhance purification. The proposed
technology may be used to extract and purify REE from waste such as coal ash as
well as other feedstocks, providing a steady supply of
REE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.