* 2228120
* Fostering Collaboration, Amplifying Impact, &amp; Sustaining Access to Support Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2028
* USD 6,545,596.00

The Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program supports a diverse community
of grantees led primarily by educators at community and technical colleges. ATE
funded projects and centers, in collaboration with their industry and education
partners, create innovative programs in the high-tech applied STEM fields
critical to the US economy and develop thousands of valuable resources,
activities, and events each year. ATE Central grew out of needs raised by the
community to help ensure that all the resources created were made available in
one place and sustained over time. ATE Central is now also an information and
communication hub for the community, providing dynamic services and tools that
support grantee work and an archiving service that helps sustain NSFâ€™s valuable
investment. This project will extend and enhance existing ATE Central core
components, as well as providing innovative new tools and services designed to
foster collaboration within and beyond ATE, amplify the impact and efforts of
the community, and sustain ongoing access to and extend and expand the impact of
the valuable resources and materials developed by ATE
grantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATE Central project team will create and
deliver a new set of community-responsive solutions, tools, activities, and
services and extend existing core ATE project components to support and amplify
the work of ATE grantees. The proposed Convergence Labs and ATE Works will be
created and delivered in collaboration with ATE center and project staff to help
provide unique opportunities to explore how melding fields and technologies is
influencing and driving innovation. ATE Informatics will support grantees,
funders, and other stakeholders with a better understanding of the evolution of
the community, pulling together available programmatic data from inception to
present, showcasing potential trends, gaps, and future directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collective work of the ATE community and ATE Central
impacts a diverse set of stakeholders including students, faculty, and industry
partners. ATE Central shares out information and metadata about the deliverables
and resources created by ATE grantees. The project will expand the awareness and
reach of these critical ATE materials beyond ATE, via efforts like the STEM
Curriculum Dissemination Channel and harvesting of metadata by organizations
from the digital library and education communities like the STEM Exchange and
OAIster. The project's ongoing commitment to Universal Design will help ensure
all stakeholders, including those with disabilities, can make use of these
valuable resources. The Archiving Service will help protect NSF's investment and
provide long- term access for current and future grantees, as well as those from
the larger education community, extending and increasing the adoption,
adaptation, and impact of the work of ATE grantees. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.