* 2228533
* Collaborative Research: SAI-R: Dynamical Coupling of Physical and Social Infrastructures: Evaluating the Impacts of Social Capital on Access to Safe Well Water
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Daniel Aldrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 508,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to a safe supply of drinking water is
essential for the health and welfare of all people. In many places, private
wells are the primary source of water for residents. This SAI research project
examines the availability of potable drinking water to individuals and
households in settings where private wells are the predominant source of water
for residents. Maintaining a safe supply of drinking water may be particularly
challenging for residents who lack broad access to social support, as reflected
in geographic connections to other communities. This support may be especially
important in the aftermath of natural disasters and related hazards that disrupt
water supplies. This project uses data on the mobility of cell phone users to
characterize the social assistance that residents call upon. Methods are used to
account for unequal representation of different groups in such datasets. The
analysis considers other variables that may cause variation in water quality,
such as demographic and socioeconomic factors. Water quality is evaluated with
samples of private wells and surveys with owners. The project places high
priority on sharing important findings with stakeholders, including extension
services and health departments. The project also contributes to middle and high
school curricula that will be shared and used in diverse public school
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple, complementary datasets are leveraged to
examine the ways in which advantageous positions in social networks may
contribute to better water quality in private wells, particularly in geographic
settings that have been impacted by recent flooding. Social networks are
constructed from data on the mobility of cellular phone users, and new
algorithmic approaches are developed to address the biases that typify these
data. Upon constructing these networks, measures of positions in social networks
are used to predict variation in the contamination of private wells. The
algorithmic approaches developed for graph neural network analysis will have
broader potential applications in similar research that seeks to account for
biases in the representativeness of large archival datasets, including biases
that disadvantage vulnerable populations. The project involves multiple
students, contributing to the training and education of early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.