* 2228841
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: Developing Research and Education Programs in Quantum Information Science and Engineering with Research on Locally Tunable 2D Topological Superconductors
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Suresh Muknahallipatna, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, remarkable progress has
been made in quantum information science and engineering (QISE), particularly
for quantum computing, quantum sensing, quantum communications and quantum
simulations. With the rapidly expanding interest and investment, education and
workforce development efforts in QISE are becoming increasingly critical,
particularly in the country's rural regions. This five-year project is designed
to develop research and education capacities in the emerging field of QISE at
the University of Wyoming through close collaboration with Purdue University,
where QISE research and education programs are established and productive. This
project contains two essential components: 1) conducting a cutting-edge research
project of exploring exotic properties (for example, topological
superconductivity) of two-dimensional (2D) quantum materials for next-generation
quantum computers; and 2) developing education programs at both undergraduate
and graduate levels for future workforce in QISE at the University of Wyoming.
This collaborative effort is expected to break the existing barrier, increase
participation, and build the critical mass of research and education in QISE in
Wyoming, thus maintaining its economic competitiveness and fueling
transformative scientific advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Developing novel quantum technologies for future advanced
computing has been an urgent need and a technology race worldwide. To maintain
economic competitiveness, sustain national security, and fuel transformative
scientific advancement in a time of rapidly expanding interest and investment in
QISE, relevant education and sustainable workforce development efforts are
becoming increasingly critical. In collaboration with Purdue University, where
QISE research and education programs are established and productive, a team from
the University of Wyoming is undertaking this important and critical task. This
collaborative activity develops methodologies to manipulate the coupling between
electronic, structural, and topological degrees of freedom in atomically thin
topological superconductors and to design and fabricate novel topological
Josephson junction architectures for future fault-tolerant topological quantum
computing. Theoretical analysis and modeling further enable the fundamental
understanding of the physics of topological superconductivity and Majorana
fermions at the 2D limit. This collaborative project also establishes the
necessary infrastructures for developing the future workforce in QISE at the
University of Wyoming by developing new degree programs at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels, recruiting new faculty, and constructing
state-of-the-art facilities. The team further pursues mutual interactions with
industry and national laboratory partners to offer research/education
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. The academic degree
programs and workforce development plan provide unique research and educational
experiences for Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science students at the University of Wyoming. This collaborative
effort is expected to set up a national educational model for expanding QISE-
related research and education activities in the countryâ€™s rural regions and/or
institutions with no or underdeveloped QISE programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.