* 2228974
* SWIFT: Instantaneous Feedback-based Adaptive Communications and Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 749,999.00

This research program investigates instantaneous feedback-based adaptive
communications (IFAC) for next generation wireless communication systems. The
proposed IFAC enables sub-bit-level real-time adaptation of the wireless
communication signal to exploit dynamic tradeoffs in spectral efficiency,
reliability, and latency based on the instantaneous feedback from the receiver.
Most conventional systems are designed for message-level link adaptation based
on the average noise power without utilizing sub-bit-level noise observation.
Such message-level feedback schemes are suboptimal for emerging and future
applications that require ultra-reliable low latency communication (URLLC) in
massive machine-type communication networks where the number of devices can be
much greater than that of today's consumer mobile cellular networks. This
research program will investigate the feasibility of instantaneous feedback-
based wireless communication systems to attain a superior performance closer to
the theoretical channel capacity and reliability limit, outperforming state-of-
the-art conventional approaches. The proposed IFAC has great potential as a
critical enabling technology for the next generation (beyond 5G) URLLC that
targets 100 micro-second latency and 99.99999% reliability for short message
transmission. Attaining such stringent URLLC goals with IFAC can enable various
classes of new applications including autonomous micro-robots, intelligent
automated factories, and virtual/augmented reality systems for people with
disabilities. The proposed research program includes undergraduate- and
graduate-level curricula development as an integral part. It will contribute to
new course materials that cover interdisciplinary topics that range from the
wireless communication theory and data-driven reinforcement learning to real-
time hardware system prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed IFAC scheme
is inspired by an early result by Viterbi in 1965 that utilizes instantaneous
feedback for reliable communications. The term "instantaneous" in the proposed
IFAC indicates that the feedback latency is negligible as it is significantly
shorter than the average symbol length. In the original Viterbi's work,
instantaneous feedback was a theoretical assumption that was not realizable in
practical systems at that time. However, the proposed research aims at
demonstrating the feasibility of end-to-end real-time systems to show that
instantaneous feedback is indeed possible thanks to the advancement of digital
integrated circuit technologies that attained astonishing 9 orders of magnitude
(a factor of a billion) improvement since 1965. IFAC is a rate-less scheme that
adapts to the channel realization at the sub-bit level to optimize the spectral
efficiency, error rate, and/or the latency given the target outage probability.
This research program will study various IFAC schemes that are constructed with
an application-specific optimization criterion as a Markov decision process or
reinforcement learning problem for the instantaneous feedback decision at the
receiver. IFAC can enable highly adaptive, online learning based novel methods
for massive machine-type communication, accomplishing superior efficiency and
performance that are unattainable from conventional wireless communication
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.