* 2228584
* Planning: SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Recovering from Expected Flooding Under Residential Buildings (REFURB)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Richard Smith, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

REFURB will use technology to improve recovery from and preparation for
persistent and increasingly severe basement flooding that impacts the Eastside
of Detroit, Michigan. Our focus is in neighborhoods that contain older homes
connected to aging sewer systems that are undersized, and poorly maintained due
to racially driven development policy and investment decisions. Recent research
has explored the limitations of managing stormwater through landscape changes,
but success is contingent on the type of soil, plants, size, and frequency of
storms. In coastal communities, homes need to be “safe to fail” because flooding
is currently inevitable. Consistent with NSF’s mission, this work will progress
science to improve individual well-being. REFURB will also lead to increased
effectiveness of partnerships, which are needed, but do not presently exist.
Additionally, data and knowledge built during this work will be used to
integrate community perspectives into curricula to enhance a pipeline for social
workers, communications professionals, and engineers to work in climate
resilience and disaster mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals
are to: (1) Use flood damage reports, environmental and other data to develop
provisional, proof-of-concept level risk maps to be used to target adaptations
of critical infrastructure to mitigate future flooding vulnerability; (2)
Describe the attributes and supports required for effective and equitable
disaster recovery and mitigation based on a participatory action case study with
at-risk communities working to improve flood prevention, climate resilience, and
data access; and (3) Develop understanding of the social structures, systems,
and community science literacies necessary for early-warning, response, and
flood risk preparedness for residents who lack digital access through a
participatory action case study with at-risk communities. REFURB will convene
work groups from impacted community residents to co-produce knowledge required
to support resilience (i.e., the ability to return to a new normal after
disasters) to climate-induced flooding. The first goal will include better
techniques to assess the condition of residential sewer pipes and optimize
infrastructure investment. A convergent approach combined with robust community
engagement will ensure the knowledge about innovative technologies will be
scalable and generalizable. Second, building on existing partnerships, this
project will develop a community-based framework for improving resilience to
climate change. Third, this project will advance techniques used to communicate
risk and enhance disaster recovery in communities where not all have
smartphones. By learning how people in neighborhoods interact with technology
needed to make homes “safe to fail”, findings will inform other urban
communities experiencing climate-induced flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living
in a changing climate: pre-disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and
mitigation—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland
Security, and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.