* 2228183
* Conference: 2022 Cyber-Physical Systems Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Frankie King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 382,154.00

The purpose of this project is to plan and organize the 2022 National Science
Foundation (NSF) Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Principal Investigator (PI)
Meeting. This meeting convenes all PIs of the NSF CPS Program for the 13 time
since the program began. The PI Meeting is to take place during the Fall of 2022
in Alexandria, Virginia. The PI meeting is an annual opportunity for NSF-
sponsored CPS researchers, industry representatives, and Federal agency
representatives to gather and review new CPS developments, identify new and
emerging applications, and to discuss technology gaps and barriers. The program
agenda is community-driven and includes presentations (oral and poster) from
PIs, reports of past year program activities, and showcase/pitch new CPS
innovations and results. This will be a hybrid PI meeting. It will include both
in-person and virtual elements. This will be the first CPS PI meeting that
includes extensive in-person attendance since the pandemic. The virtual
component of the PI meeting will also enable a larger community of researchers
spanning academia, industry, and Government to also
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual PI Meeting serves as the only
opportunity where the NSF-funded CPS Principal Investigators meet to share their
research, discuss new research opportunities and challenges, and explore new
ideas and partnerships for future work. Furthermore, the PI meeting is also an
opportunity for the academic research community to interact with industry
entities and government agencies with vested interest in CPS research and
development. The PI Meeting is a forum for sharing ideas across the CPS
community. It has played a major role in growing the community across a broad
range of sectors and technologies, and performing outreach to others who have
interest in learning about the program and participating as future proposers,
transition partners, or sponsors. The 2022 PI meeting will feature lightning
talks from researchers, poster sessions, special topic workshops, demonstrations
and keynotes from leaders in the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.