* 2228173
* Implementation Grant: Implementing Novel Solutions for Promoting cultural change In geoscience Research and Education (INSPIRE)
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,926,203.00

Implementing Novel Solutions for Promoting Cultural Change In Geoscience
Research &amp; Education (INSPIRE) program delivers a multi-faceted solution for
transforming culture, shifting power, and authentically engaging underserved
communities within the transdisciplinary earth and environmental sciences.
INSPIRE will mentor, train, and develop early-career researchers and
professionals historically underrepresented in the geosciences. By strengthening
relationships between research institutions and Minority Serving Institutions
(MSIs), INSPIRE will decolonize geoscience, prioritize engagement of communities
through co-design of research programs, and promote the equitable sharing of
geoscientific knowledge broadly across our nation. INSPIRE will foster a just,
equitable, and inclusive geoscience research community that reflects the
diversity of the nation and is rooted in multi-directional listening and
knowledge transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSPIRE will focus on two cohort
populations of future geoscience leaders at the transition points where they are
often lost: 1) prior to graduate school; and, 2) prior to tenure. Bridge
Scholars (post-baccalaureates) will be supported and trained through a climate-
focused Bridge-to-PhD program that will include enrolling in graduate-level
classes, participating in research, and launching an evidence-based self-
affirmation component, the Armor Project. Visiting Fellows (early career
faculty/researchers at MSIs) will gain skills and experience for developing
community-focused geoscience research through their home institutions with
collaborative support from - and partnerships with - Columbia University
scientists. Reciprocal visits from Columbia hosts/mentors to the Visiting Fellow
home institutions will be an integral part of their collaboration and will
strengthen institutional partnerships. Participants from both cohorts will
engage with communities in New York City to gain experience with community-
focused co-design of geoscience research. The Columbia geoscience community,
including its alumni, will participate in coordinated action of mentoring and
support, and will offer networking opportunities to members of both cohorts. A
Council of Cultural Advisors of scientists and scholars from MSIs and BIPOC
leaders in STEM will provide guidance and feedback on program directions through
communications and biannual meetings. Together with their mentors, host and
collaborators, INSPIRE’s 14 Visiting Fellows and 16 Bridge Scholars will become
agents of change who will propagate aspects of this novel research and education
ecosystem into multiple institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSPIRE will deliver
novel solutions for systemic change and cultural transformation long overdue in
the geosciences. It will support and sustain Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and
Accessibility (DEIA)-centered programs, and will create resources and
opportunities for new programs to flourish. The envisioned cultural
transformation will increase the creativity, equity, relevance, and impact of
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.