* 2228687
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Community-Based Research meets Systems Approach: Closing the Loop on Child Lead Poisoning
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Heidi Beidinger-Burnett, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Even in communities where lead (Pb) exposure pathways are well understood, there
are significant barriers to getting resources to the most affected individuals.
These disparities in access to healthcare lead to a generational disadvantage as
the households that face lead poisoning are disproportionately composed of
racial minorities that live in low-income neighborhoods. This CIVIC research is
at the intersection of community-based research and technology-driven
frameworks. The goal of this research is to understand how to close
communication gaps among households, healthcare providers, and policymakers.
This has the potential to increase access to in-time health care, and enables
quick and aggressive interventions via an app to be developed to tie all
relevant parties together to improve the coordination of care to prevent child
lead poisoning. The initial target community is St. Joseph County, Indiana. The
research engages all relevant stakeholders in the process of lead poisoning
diagnosis, intervention, and remediation/abatement. Broader impacts of the work
include better health outcomes and less lead poisoning in children from low-
income neighborhoods as well as engagement and training of engineering and
chemistry undergraduate students. Students will be involved in developing
accessible educational materials to inform households about the risks of lead
exposure, especially in children, with the goal of helping community members
identify and pursue lead assessment/abatement resources to protect the health of
their loved ones. Student teams involved in the Stage 1 and follow-on Stage 2
program, if funded, will receive experiential learning opportunities and work
with communities to translate community challenges into problem statements and
help with the implementation of possible solutions. Research findings and
developed technologies and informational materials will be scalable to other
localities in the US and elsewhere with high soil and home lead
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Community-Based Participatory
Research encourages multidisciplinary case review teams to evaluate the
effectiveness of interventions, an understanding of the relationship between
individual, community, provider, and system factors is presently underexplored.
This prevents the critical insight necessary to create risk reduction
strategies, improve clinical pathways, and eliminate barriers to care. Through
the CIVIC Stage 1 planning period, an interdisciplinary and multi stakeholder
group of community members, health providers, researchers, and policymakers will
be convened to understand the targeted community and the overlapping roles and
responsibilities that each group has in closing the loop of lead detection in
children and connecting households to resources that provide abatement
interventions. These design thinking sessions and discussions will inform a
framework for deploying community health workers, who work directly with
impacted communities, and provide informational and technological solutions in
the form of an app which will be co-designed by the community and university
researchers as part of the pilot project. In the following Stage 2 project, the
app and identified solutions will be deployed and evaluated alongside the
performance of a previously developed, low-cost, lead, screening kit through a
pilot program. The techno-sociological framework will enable a greater
understanding about if and how the voices of marginalized patients are being
heard, understood, and acted upon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in
response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap
between essential resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a
collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.