* 2228263
* Heat Transfer Model for the Assemblage of Firebrands Over Surface Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ali Tohidi, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2025
* USD 343,370.00

Firebrand shower, also known as ember attack, is the ignition of spot fires due
to the generation, transport, and accumulation of embers over vegetation or
structural components away from the active fire lines. Although spot fires
contribute to rapid wildfire growth and are known to be responsible for
significant damages incurred at the Wildland Urban Interface incidents, the
current understanding of the heat (energy) transfer mechanisms from firebrands
to the exposed surfaces is incomplete. The primary aim of this project is to
establish a fundamental knowledge of the heat (energy) transfer from firebrand
depositions to the recipient surfaces. The outcomes of this project directly
inform wildfire simulators by enabling a physics-based spot fire ignition module
leading to more accurate forecasts and estimation of wildfire risk. The project
will also encompass educational activities such as mentoring and training
undergraduate and graduate students, engagement with stakeholders and
practitioners, and creating collaborations between different
engineering/scientific disciplines to address challenges in fire
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to quantify
the heat transfer from the accumulated firebrands to the recipient surface using
a systematic, scalable, and accurate quantitative approach. Specifically, the
project performs the following tasks: First, conducting numerical simulations
using a four-way coupled method to identify the effects of firebrand properties
and their interactions within the boundary layer on the deposition patterns over
an inert flat surface. Second, incorporating surface fuel morphology into the
computational domain, using X-Ray Computed Tomography (XCT), and quantitatively
discern its influence on firebrand deposition patterns and heat transfer. Third,
leveraging the generated data from high-fidelity simulations, developing a data-
driven heat transfer model, and testing its accuracy. The developed model makes
the findings applicable for large-scale (operational) wildfire simulators,
culminating in the development of a physics-based spot fire ignition module. The
results are expected to provide insights into dominant heat transfer mechanisms
involved in the spot fire ignition process and establish a computational
framework for quantifying the energy transfer from reacting particles to the
surrounding walls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.