* 2228124
* Implementation grant: NewGeo: A Newark Geo-ecosystem for cultural transformation and systemic change in the geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,299,787.00

The Newark Geoscience Ecosystem (NewGeo) is a transformative learning geo-
ecosystem model uniting Newark-based institutions and organizations in the
growth of a geoscience workforce prepared to solve urban environmental
challenges through cross-sectoral collaboration. Rutgers University Newark leads
NewGeo, a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with an anchor institution mission
centered on community engagement, science in the urban environment, and
inclusive excellence through integration of diversity and inclusion in all
pursuits. Through experiential learning opportunities, NewGeo graduate students
build partnerships with Newarkâ€™s government, industry and education sectors,
teach and mentor K-16 students, and collaborate with non-profits and community-
based organizations. This instills a sense of civic responsibility in graduate
students and the aspiring geoscientists they mentor. This project cultivates a
geoscience workforce that is representative of and prepared to engage with the
local citizenry to tackle environmental and climate stresses and injustices. The
NewGeo faculty and administrators promote inclusive, collaborative, and positive
environments in the geo-ecosystem; implement and become practitioners of
strategies to encourage and support students, individuals, and communities from
marginalized and minoritized groups; and formalize relationships and
institutionalize best practices for effective partnerships and whole system
change. All NewGeo participants influence and inspire their professional and
social networks, share within their communities of practice, and disseminate
outcomes to the broader geoscience community for adaptation and adoption of the
NewGeo model for cultural transformation at multiple
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NewGeo creates community-centered career pathways
for participants from minoritized and marginalized groups and engages a
traditionally excluded non-academic community in the scientific discourse.
NewGeo is spearheaded by a graduate student cohort that transforms their
education and challenges geoscience culture through collaborative, self-directed
engagement with non-academic partners. Graduate student environment community-
outreach graduate assistants (ECO GAs) leverage their academic preparation and
build career skills through place-based experiential learning experiences in
collaboration with NewGeo partners. Activities include embedded community-based
internships, K-12 outreach, volunteerism, mentoring of undergraduates, and
professional and leadership development. Faculty and administrators activate
their capital as change agents for revolutionizing the geosciences (CHARGE) to
induce cultural transformation. The cohort is CHARGEd to research, create,
institutionalize and disseminate NewGeo best practices, policies and procedures,
while engaging in self-guided and reflective professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.