* 2228510
* SAI-R: Designing an Improved Information Infrastructure for Better Decision Making in Pharmaceutical Supply Chains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American medical system experiences
recurrent shortages of critical pharmaceutical products. Efforts to address drug
shortages depend on significant innovations in data collection, identification
of critical data, and tools for converting the data into desired action. This
SAI research project addresses this need to design a new Information
Infrastructure for pharmaceutical supply chains. The research focuses on three
important challenges to inform the design of a new infrastructure. One is
developing secure mechanisms for sharing information. Another is enhancing the
analytical structure to support decision-making. The third is to achieve a
better understanding of the diversity of decision-making behaviors and how these
behaviors are influenced by the available information. The research supports the
development of transparent policies to address pharmaceutical supply chain
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with experts on drug shortages and
pharmaceutical policy, a diverse set of stakeholders, and the private technology
sector, the project is organized around four research thrusts. Thrust 1 develops
new and realistic models of human behavior of pharmaceutical supply chain
stakeholders, focusing on the inputs into decision-making. Thrust 2 advances
understanding of human reasoning and decision-making through methodological
innovations and development of new analytical methods for extracting actionable
data that characterize behaviors. Thrust 3 introduces new network-based metrics
for identifying risks and vulnerabilities within complex systems and extends the
metrics to address spatio-temporal considerations in service networks. Thrust 4
considers new models for balancing the needs of privacy, security, and
transparency through development and comparison of prototype service systems
that build on the principles of data harmonization and differential privacy. The
research focuses on the pharmaceutical industry, but this convergent and
integrative research approach serves as a reusable model for other areas of
decision-making and analysis of system-wide effects of changes in
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.