* 2228069
* SBIR Phase II:  An omics-based computational drug design and discovery platform for next generation microbiome therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Mohammad Soheilypour, NEXILICO, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project focuses on the human gut microbiome, the complex and dynamic
community of microorganisms residing in the gastrointestinal tract. The gut
microbiome influences a variety of human diseases, such as Type 2 Diabetes and
inflammatory bowel disease. Collectively, these diseases afflict more than 120
million people and cost more than $580 billion in patient treatments in the US
annually. The current standard care of treatments for many of these diseases
have variable efficacy and serious side effects. There is increasing interest in
modulating the gut microbiome using microbiome therapeutics, i.e., therapeutics
comprising living bacteria, as a new generation of drugs for difficult-to-treat
diseases. However, the industry currently lacks a reliable approach to
systematically and cost-effectively developing effective microbiome
therapeutics. Specifically, the largest barrier to microbiome therapeutic
development is the lack of predictive preclinical models to translate early-
stage research into drug discovery and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to address the barrier to the use of microbiome
therapeutics by developing a first-of-its-kind computational platform, as the
first comprehensive, computational, drug design and discovery platform.
Currently, the development of microbiome therapeutics is based on a series of
experimental and statistical steps that identify the potential microbial strains
for target therapeutic candidates in an empirical and iterative process. As a
result, this approach requires extensive iterative in vitro and in vivo
experiments, which substantially increase the length and cost of the development
programs. These challenges have resulted in an inefficient and unpredictable
microbiome therapeutic development process, limiting the number of efficacious
microbiome therapeutics that could save millions of lives worldwide. This
project addresses these challenges by reliably and cost-effectively identifying
therapeutic candidates for a wide range of indications. This platform could
replace the current iterative and unpredictable development process in the drug
discovery stage. The utility of the platform will be demonstrated by developing
new therapeutic candidates for Type 2 Diabetes and validating the efficacy of
these candidates in preclinical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.