* 2228198
* Implementation Grant: The Center for Diverse Leadership in Science - Transforming the Geoscience Culture to become more Diverse, Equitable, and Just
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,991,481.00

This project will build on an existing model for cultural transformation in the
geosciences that has been developed by the Center for Diverse Leadership in
Science. The social context of doing science is emphasized through leadership
development, the practice of team-based science, and through intentional
relationships and partnerships that disrupt traditional hierarchies. One
component of this effort will study how to impact people to grow their awareness
of and respect for different knowledge systems in geoscience, and pro-social
skills, to thereby have the capacity for healthy, effective, transdisciplinary
geoscience research and practice. The project leaders will examine the impact of
the program on participantsâ€™ identities as scientists and cultural change
agents. The program activities will focus on moving cohorts of early career
fellows through the educational and career trajectory being intentional about
their environment, and providing mentorship with peers, previous trailblazers,
and trained faculty for leadership, modeling, and network development. Project
leaders will maintain continuity and health in relationships with people and
partners, including regional community-based organizations, tribal authorities,
and minority-serving institutions, so they can continue to steer efforts for
community-driven science, engaged research, and respectful collaborative
experiences. At the same time, project leaders will support community- and
network-building initiatives led by early career fellows, including the
Environmental Justice Working Group, Veterans in Green STEM, and the Navajo
Scholars Network. Project leaders will continue to organize and work to engage
departments, universities, and professional societies in the shared learning and
practices in support of equity, cultivating institutional contexts by impacting
professionalization processes and implementing change
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage geoscience early career
fellows, community experts who are honorary fellows, faculty fellows, and core
staff, adding to more than 100 individuals per year. This project will provide
opportunities for empowering, supporting, and retaining people from structurally
excluded groups in earth system science and green STEM fields, including people
of color, LGBTQIA+, veteran, and disabled geoscientists and community members,
to become the innovators, scientific, and social leaders needed by society. This
work will build capacity in the geosciences and in academic and non-academic
institutions for community-centered work relating to environmental science and
justice that includes diverse ways of knowing and knowledge creation. Project
leaders will train the next generation of geoscientists, who will learn from
each other, from academics, and from community experts, thereby contributing to
workforce development and innovative science. The fellows will grow and apply
their knowledge of geoscience and enhance their skills as leaders and champions
of diversity, equity, inclusion, justice, access, and belonging. Project leaders
propose that cultivating leadership skills through communities of learning and
practice will not only have immediate impact but will enable the network of
environment- and community-focused scholars to share their experiences and
lessons learned with their peers and mentees for years to come. This project
will support sustainable and equitable partnerships between the Center,
universities, community-based organizations, and tribal authorities, and the
activities will have impact beyond participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.