* 2228884
* SaTC: CORE: Small: LESS DOUBT: Learning Efficiently form Statistical Samples-Demonstrating Outcomes Using Better Tests
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Philip Stark, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 172,376.00

It is important to bolster the integrity of and trust in U.S. elections. This
project develops methods and software to simplify and reduce the cost of
providing strong evidence that reported winners really won--or correcting the
results if not. The key statistical tool is a risk-limiting audit (RLA) using a
trustworthy paper record of the votes. This project increases the efficiency
(reducing the legwork needed to confirm outcomes when outcomes are correct),
flexibility (to accommodate constraints imposed by local laws, regulations, and
technology), and applicability of RLAs (to accommodate more voting rules and to
make it affordable to audit every contest in every election). The project builds
and publishes open-source software implementing the improvements and is working
with state and local election officials to pilot the
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An RLA is any procedure with a known maximum
chance (the risk limit) of not correcting a reported contest outcome if that
outcome is wrong. RLAs correct outcomes by manually tabulating a trustworthy
record of the validly cast votes. RLAs can be reduced to multiple instances of a
core statistical problem: testing whether the mean of a bounded list of
nonnegative numbers is less than or equal to 1/2. This project develops improved
methods for sequential and batch-sequential tests of such hypotheses using
simple random samples, cluster samples, stratified samples, and Bernoulli
samples. The methods involve test statistics that are nonnegative
supermartingales under the null. Tests that adapt by "learning" the true mean
from the sample can improve efficiency substantially, as can adaptive stratified
sampling designs that preferentially draw from strata where the null appears to
be false--leading to a generalization of the multi-armed bandit
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.