* 2228731
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Community-Science Partnership to Enhance Stormwater Adaptation under Climate Change
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,998.00

Rapid urbanization under conditions of climate change accelerates stormwater
flooding, often occurring beyond the capacity of communities to respond with
traditional infrastructure. Blue-green infrastructure (BGI) is a globally
recognized “nature-based” alternative that supports urban climate-change
resilience through landscape-scale management. A grand challenge for adapting to
climate change, especially in urban areas, lies in how to innovate, mobilize,
and sustain knowledge at the community level to enhance benefits of BGI in ways
that are people-centric and socially equitable. The project contributes to
growing scholarship on emerging equity principles in the field of urban greening
and examines how communities can effectively engage in critical components of
climate adaptation to accommodate different needs and unequal opportunities
across urban areas. Scholarship on BGI maintenance in the U.S. highlights how
the challenges of funding, expertise, and equity can undermine efforts to
sustain BGI investments over time. Therefore, new seek to develop new forms of
community-engaged BGI governance practices and processes (including monitoring
and maintenance) that can enhance stormwater adaptive capacity and climate
resilience in ways that do not increase burdens of labor or reproduce patterns
of urban inequality. While our focus is BGI in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex,
a rapidly growing region facing increased stormwater flooding due to climate
change, this project seeks to develop scalable innovations that can enhance
community participation in other urban contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
goal of this planning grant is to strengthen an emergent community of practice
that will co-create a community-scientific research observatory dedicated to
enhancing urban adaptation to climate change. Working with community partners
and cooperative extension volunteers and specialists, we have identified three
project objectives. First, we will establish a community-science working group
based on existing and emerging community partnerships. Second, we will design,
execute, and assess a pilot community-based green infrastructure asset
management (C-GAM) tool. We will modify existing green asset management tools
using community engagement (co-development, implementation, validation,
reflection/dissemination) to co-create other societal criteria (i.e., equity,
resiliency) to evaluate BGI implementation. Third, we will convene a multi-
stakeholder workshop to co-design the Stage 2 proposal. The project’s C-GAM
training and implementation plan contributes to STEM education to enhance
community knowledge of urban ecology, urban water, and BGI engineering. Our
project’s educational and assessment materials will be designed for wider
dissemination through community-ambassadors to increase community knowledge and
engagement with BGI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-
disaster action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a
collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.