* 2228300
* Point-of-Collection Sample Pretreatment and Preservation with Porous Super-Absorbent Polymer (PSAP) Beads for Wastewater Surveillance Testing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Konstantinos Konstantinidis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Wastewater surveillance (WWS) has emerged as a versatile platform for monitoring
and tracking the spread and transmission of infectious diseases. The basic
premise of WWS is that the detection and quantification of microbial and virial
biomarkers extracted from samples of untreated wastewater can be used to monitor
the onset, spread, and transmission of infectious diseases in communities.
Currently, wastewater samples for WSS measurements need to be refrigerated at
4Â°C immediately after collection and processed within 24 h to increase the
accuracy of the results. These requirements lead to an inevitable reliance on a
cold chain for collecting, transporting, and storing wastewater samples, which
might not be feasible both logistically and financially in resource-limited
settings. The overarching goal of this research is to design and synthesize
novel porous polymer beads that could absorb the collected wastewater with the
goal of preserving the samples and the target pathogens within the beads without
the need for a cold chain. The successful completion of this project has the
potential to improve accuracy and lower the cost of WSS testing which will
facilitate its adoption in resource-limited settings with underserved
populations. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of a graduate student at Georgia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewater surveillance (WSS) can complement existing
clinical and diagnosis tools for monitoring the spread and transmission of
infectious pathogens and disease. However, a cold chain for the collection,
transport, and storage of wastewater samples is typically required. To overcome
this challenge, the Principal Investigators (PIs) proposes to investigate the
design, synthesis, and evaluation of porous super-absorbent polymer (PSAP) beads
that could absorb wastewater samples and capture the target pathogens at the
point of collection with an initial focus on viruses with 20-200 nanometers in
size. The specific objectives of this research are to 1) design and tailor the
composition, structure, physicochemical, and functional properties of PSAP beads
to optimize the selective capture of target viral pathogens from wastewater
samples; 2) demonstrate the effectiveness of PSAP beads for wastewater sample
pretreatment and preservation; 3) investigate the mechanisms of PSAP beads for
the preservation of testing targets; and 4) validate the new PSAP beads by
benchmarking their effectiveness against the standard sampling methodology using
ongoing WWS monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 on the Georgia Tech campus as test cases.
The successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the development and validation of more effective sampling devices
and protocols to advance the implementation and deployment of WWS in in
resource-limited settings with underserved populations. To implement the
education and training goals of the project, the PIs propose to leverage
existing programs at Georgia Tech such as the SURE (Summer Undergraduate
Research in Engineering/Sciences) program to recruit and mentor undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups to work on the project. In addition, the
PIs plan to involve all the project graduate/undergraduate students with the
Georgia Tech campus WWS program and provide them with the opportunity to learn
cross-discipline skills needed to work on a transdisciplinary project that
converges microbiology with materials science and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.