* 2228359
* Collaborative Research: Development and Applications of GEOS-Chem Atmospheric Chemistry in CESM and MUSICA
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Louisa Emmons, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2025
* USD 718,313.00

The objective of this project is to further the development of the GEOS-Chem
atmospheric chemistry capability within the NCAR Community Earth System Model
(CESM). The modularization of GEOS-Chem components will enable these components
to be deployed in a variety of different models. This project is expected to
contribute to a better understanding of atmospheric chemistry in the climate
system and to improve air quality predictions within the context of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three objectives of this project are to: (1)
implement modular GEOS-Chem components into the Multi-Scale Infrastructure for
Chemistry and Aerosols (MUSICA) model, including the: (a) photolysis frequency
calculations, (b) chemical mechanism including the adaptive mechanism
autoreduction, and (c) wet deposition module; (2) apply the GEOS-Chem capability
within CESM to better understand ozone air quality over East Asia and its
connection to background tropospheric ozone; and (3) apply the GEOS-Chem
capability within CESM to better understand aviationâ€™s effects on tropospheric
ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the GEOS-Chem modeling
community, including hundreds of research groups worldwide and more than fifty
US university groups, to engage more effectively with the CESM modeling efforts
at NCAR. The project will support graduate students at both Harvard and
MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.