* 2228035
* Planning: SCC-PG: Smart, Sustainable, and Equitable Green Stormwater Systems in Urban Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Xun Jiao, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,305.00

Urban communities are increasingly including Green Stormwater Infrastructure
(GSI) in their watershed management plans to manage stormwater in cities.
Stormwater programs are scientifically limited by a lack of knowledge of the
longevity of GSI, how real-time adaptive control can improve performance, and
lack of process for using collected data in new GSI designs and policy. Further,
there is no scientifically robust method to consider social equity in GSI design
and planning. To overcome these challenges, and achieve sustainable stormwater
management, solutions must use other available technologies in new ways that are
co-created with community members woven into the planning-design-implementation
process. The project hypothesizes that this challenge can be met using smart
systems that can: 1) create and expand opportunities for GSI, 2) improve the
sustainable function of these systems, and 3) address community infrastructure
needs and preferences to overcome issues of inequity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this planning proposal is to develop a roadmap to combat the
community-stormwater challenge. This project will accomplish this by forming a
task force, Community Science Work Group, of a cross-disciplinary team of
researchers, government agencies, community and industry partners to create a
roadmap to develop a set of computer technologies and tools to design smart,
sustainable, community driven, equitable GSI systems for urban communities. This
will be accomplished through continuously engaging with community stakeholders
to incorporate preferences and technical and societal interactions (e.g., GSI
co-benefits) at all levels. This project will establish channels to build and
engage a project team for a future proposal to effectively use technology in
urban environments to respond to the stated community needs. This current
project will also explore if emerging computing technologies can help meet
community-stormwater challenges through an iterative stakeholder engagement
process, which would lead to new science in urban stormwater systems and a new
avenue for application of computer technology. This project will broaden
community understanding and engagement in GSI infrastructure, increase GSI
ecosystem services and community resilience, and ultimately improve the urban
environment and contribute to social equity. Through tightly intertwined cross-
disciplinary research and outreach goals, this project provides a transformative
benefit to society by providing a fair and open community driven platform to
improve citiesâ€™ efforts to effectively address federal water quality and safety
needs and establish new frontiers for urban sustainability. This planning
project will serve as a vital start to build a platform to alleviate the
community-stormwater challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.