* 2228471
* Collaborative Research: SAI-P: Public Multi-Access Edge Cloud (pMEC) as a Community-Based Distributed Computing Infrastructure for Emerging Real-Time Applications
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* William Lehr, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 60,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information technology infrastructure enables
a wide variety of applications that serve almost every facet of contemporary
life. Cloud services (mass storage and high-end computing power) are now
commonly used as networks have become faster and more widespread. The
introduction of even higher-speed wired and wireless (5G) access is pushing the
boundary of cloud computing even farther. Commercial mobile network operators
are now investing in multi-access edge cloud (MEC) technology, in which
individuals and small enterprises support a self-organizing nexus of shared
computing resources in a way that overcomes some of the limitations of long
distance fiber. If the deployment of MEC platforms is left entirely to private
investment by large service providers, it is likely that many people will not be
served or served only by a single provider, leaving many end-users and
communities without access or with access to services that are too expensive or
otherwise fail to meet their quality-of-service needs. This SAI planning project
develops the concept of an open collaborative public multi-access edge cloud
(pMEC). The public edge cloud is designed to self-organize through voluntary
contributions of under-utilized computing power within the community. A public
edge cloud infrastructure makes it possible for users in under-served
communities to access massive, close-in computing power without depending on the
expensive services of large network operators. By broadening access to the
internet and computing infrastructure of the United States, a public edge cloud
capability promotes and sustains the nation’s competitive advantages in the
global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design of the public edge cloud
infrastructure requires a multi-disciplinary effort in which technology
development is informed by business models and by cost and performance
properties that promote end-user adoption. This SAI planning project focuses on
technology considerations for the pMEC along with viable economic and business
models with end-user adoption properties necessary to enable and sustain
widespread deployment. The project develops preliminary architectural level
designs for distributed public edge cloud deployments, identifying necessary
enhancements to the emerging technical standards for 5G and cloud. It also
develops plans for incentive-compatible business and cooperative governance
models for the proposed community edge cloud to motivate initial deployment and
sustainable operations. A small proof-of-concept prototype demonstrates the
basic pMEC concept. Collaborations are developed to evaluate stakeholder
behavioral responses regarding willingness to adopt and participate in proposed
pMEC deployments. Delivering on the promise of public edge cloud infrastructure
depends on growing multi-disciplinary collaborative research drawing on social,
behavioral, and economic sciences in partnership with computer science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.