* 2228770
* AGS-FIRP Track 1: Undergraduate Field Experience in Atmospheric Chemistry at the Storm Peak Laboratory in Spring 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lynne Gratz, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2024
* USD 46,463.00

This award will provide funding for a 3-day field-based research experience at
the Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL). SPL is a Community Instruments &amp; Facilities
(CIF) site supported by the NSF Facilities for Atmospheric Research and
Education (FARE) program. Sixteen undergraduate students from Colorado College,
which is a Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI), will participate. These
participants will be students enrolled in an upper-division elective course for
Environmental Science majors at Colorado College. The overall goal of this
field-based course component is to provide a diverse group of Colorado College
undergraduate students majoring in Environmental Science or related subjects
with an experiential learning opportunity in atmospheric chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participating in the project will be introduced
to core facets of the scientific research process, including research question
development, field study design, measurement techniques, data analysis, and
synthesis of information. A major outcome of this course will be to aid in the
preparation of undergraduate Environmental Science and other science,
technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) majors at Colorado College for their
post-graduation career paths. The proposed project will also contribute to the
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce and improved STEM education
by providing an educational opportunity that enables students to gain experience
and professional skills in environmental instrumentation, field-program design
and execution, scientific collaboration, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.