* 2228600
* Planning: CIVIC-PG Track A: Pilot - Community Resilience through Engaging, Actionable, Timely, High-Resolution Air Quality Information (CREATE-AQI)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Heather Holmes, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,994.00

More than forty percent of all people in the United States — over 137 million
people — live in areas with unhealthy levels of air pollution due to particulate
matter or ozone. Communities with poor air quality are predominately found in
the Western US in underserved areas. The Western US periodically experiences the
worst air quality in the nation as a result of winter-time inversions,
wildfires, and dust storms. It can be difficult for individuals in these
locations to limit pollution exposure based on air-quality forecasts. This is,
in part, because many areas do not have air quality forecasts; and available
forecasts are limited to ozone and particulate matter smaller than 2.5 microns
in diameter. The forecasts also do not account for differences in terrain and
air pollution sources that can lead to inaccuracies. This research enables
resilience of pilot western communities by providing actionable, timely, high-
resolution, air quality information on the neighborhood-scale with actionable
air quality information and tools for decision makers to act on this
information. This research integrates engineering innovations and community
engagement by focusing on links between neighborhood-scale, automated, air
quality forecasts and cost-effective, air quality measurements. It creates tools
and guidance for decision makers to actively reduce short and long-term exposure
to air quality hazards (i.e. ozone and particulate matter between 2.5 and 10
microns). Using cost-effective environmental sensors and smart data analysis
techniques, this work empowers citizens, scientists, and policy makers to make
data-driven decisions about air quality and its hazards. This is particularly
relevant for under-served communities that bear a disproportionate share of air
pollution environmental burdens. Broader impacts of the work not only include
actionable information for improving local air quality which will benefit the
health of the communities where it is employed, but also provides a rich
framework for student education and sustainable job opportunities that have the
potential for attracting students to fields in science, engineering, and
mathematics. It also supports infrastructure and communities in Utah, which is
an EPSCoR state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on existing
innovations in sensing and forecasting infrastructure as well as strong civic
partnerships between university researchers, the Utah Division of Air Quality,
and the Utah Department of Health and Human Services. This pilot has interwoven
technical, civic partnership, and team-building goals. Project deliverables
include high-resolution (hourly, 4-km, horizontal resolution) and automated
numerical forecasts of air pollution hazards related to ozone and air borne
particulate matter in the 2.5 and 10 micron size range. The latter particles are
primarily associated with winter thermal inversions, wildfires, and dust events,
all of which cause serious health issues like asthma. This work will impact both
urban and rural communities. The research also includes a technology development
and deployment piece of novel, cost-effective, air quality sensors that are able
to measure community-scale differences in the up to 10 micron-sized dust
particle ranges. The data can be integrated into existing community monitoring
networks. The work also provides a framework, co-developed with civic partners,
that can be used by decision makers to help translate high-resolution, air
quality information into action that results in the reduction of air pollution
exposure to those living in western communities. If successful, the approach and
technology has the potential for scaling to other locations around the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.