* 2228092
* CPS: Small: Learning How to Control: A Meta-Learning Approach for the Adaptive Control of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 05/31/2026
* USD 483,188.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) enabled manufacturing systems form a particularly
important class of cyber-physical systems (CPS). IoT-enabled manufacturing
systems have a physical fabric woven from a heterogeneous mix of machines
carrying and processing materials across the factory floor. The cyber fabric for
these systems is a heterogeneous mix of wired and wireless digital communication
networks enabling the global visibility of the data streams used to manage the
physical fabric’s workflows. These IoT-enabled systems are complex CPS with a
great deal of modeling uncertainty. The physical and cyber fabrics are open to
an external environment that can shift in an abrupt and unpredictable manner.
Such shifts may be due to changes in customer work orders or due to
environmental changes that cause traffic congestion in the cyber fabric’s
wireless networks. The dynamics of both fabrics are coupled since congestion in
the physical fabric may create congestion in the cyber fabric and vice versa.
This complexity and uncertainty stand as major obstacles to the broader
acceptance of IoT technologies by U.S. manufacturers. To lower the risk in
adopting IoT technologies, this project proposes developing meta-learning
methods that learn how to control complex CPS found in IoT-enabled
manufacturing. This project will develop algorithms and software implementations
of the meta-learning approach to controlling CPS. The project will benchmark the
method’s performance on a testbed capturing the complex interactions between an
IoT-manufacturing system’s physical and cyber fabrics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses meta-learning algorithms for the control
of complex and uncertain cyber-physical systems. The approach adopts a new type
of machine learning model called a behaviorally ordered abstraction (BOA). This
model has greater cross-task generalization capacity, better sample efficiency,
and greater interpretability than other deep learning methods. This modeling
approach allows the project to address issues regarding the robust stability of
deep reinforcement learning by embedding meta-learning in a generalized
regulator that learns “how” to configure controller synthesis across all tasks.
This project will evaluate the project’s “learning-how-to-control” framework on
a multi-robotic testbed mimicking the use of WIFI connected robots moving
materials across a factory floor. The project will investigate how to transfer
the models and policies learned on the testbed to IoT-enabled factories found in
local manufacturing facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.