* 2228311
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Novel Fuel-Flexible Combustion to Enable Ultra-Clean and Efficient Waste-to-Renewable Energy in Changing Climate
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Lulin Jiang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to simultaneously address the two priorities defined by the
City of Waco (Waco) including limited surface area for landfills, and energy
demand especially during extreme weather due to global warming. Currently,
converting Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) in landfills to fuels for energy results
in very viscous oils that are hard to burn efficiently and cleanly. We propose a
process that will operate efficiently and cleanly regardless of the MSW
composition with minimal pre- and post-processing to help decrease surface area
needed for landfills, provide resilient energy and help combat greenhouse gas
emissions (GHGs) that contribute to climate change both from combustion and from
landfill emissions. Carbon dioxide (CO2), other pollutant emissions such as
particulate matters, unburned hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides from combustion
significantly contribute to global warming. Additionally, methane is the second
most important GHG with a 20-year global warming potential ~83 times higher than
CO2, and organic MSW in landfills is a significant methane emission source. This
project will therefore simultaneously decrease GHGs from landfills and recover
energy in the waste using the novel waste-to-energy combustor with near-zero
emissions for renewable power and heat. Success of this novel concept will
therefore decrease local waste treatment burdens and boost energy resilience in
a changing climate. The scalability and multi-fuel capability will help satisfy
energy needs of underserved groups, and the communities at large under an
extreme weather event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a multi-
fuel pilot combustor that can cleanly convert local MSW to liquid and gaseous
fuels and combust them with minimal postprocessing. Challenges to clean and
efficient combustion of waste-based fuels addressed here are (1) accommodating
variations in fuel composition and properties and (2) efficient and low emission
combustion of the highly viscous oils/condensates fuels. Objectives of Stage 1
include (1) preselecting a waste-to-fuels process informed by Waco and (2)
demonstrating efficient combustion of waste-fuels generated in (1). The
preselection defines the waste-to-fuel path and key parts for the fuel-flexible
pilot combustor will be tested on site at the Waco facility in Stage 2. Scaling
analysis will also be examined in Stage 2 based on example community profiles in
partnership with Waco and Baylor’s School of Social Work. In addition to
conventional publications, results will also be disseminated through informal
education at Baylor’s Mayborn Museum through the NSF Portal-to-the-Public
program, and collaboration with Waco and Mission Waco Urban Reap, and
transferred to commercialization through Baylor’s lab-to-market
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster action
around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration between
NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.