* 2228340
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Improving Outcomes for People Directly Impacted by Incarceration Through Civic Studies Education that Includes Meaningful Employment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* JILL WEINBERG, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project in the NSF CIVIC Innovation Challenge program expands upon the
Boston-based program of the Tufts Educational Reentry Network, MyTERN, that
combines Tufts University courses with community-based resources, cultivating
knowledge, skills, and capacity for increased civic engagement among formerly
incarcerated people. There are many daunting barriers people and their local
communities face with social reintegration into community life following release
from prison after long prison sentences. Successful reentry into the community
includes securing housing and employment, obtaining a high school or college
education, and addressing substance use and other mental health needs. The
proposed project takes an approach to social innovation where education in civic
studies and community engagement are central aspects of a robust reentry
program. The multipronged approach of the reentry program that this project
envisions is expected to decrease recidivism and increase the social-emotional
health of marginalized communities most impacted by incarceration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a plan for a social innovation
program to substantially reduce recidivism, building on the MyTERN program at
Tufts University, creating new internships with MyTERN, providing greater
reintegration and civic engagement opportunities, increasing its capacity for
more sustainable impact on individuals, communities, and the society at large,
and measuring the outcomes and benefits of the program to the community and for
the returning citizens. It focuses on the qualitative impacts of the reentry
program on securing employment, continuing education, social and emotional well-
being, and community engagement measures, a type of data not typically captured
by reentry studies that generally focus on recidivism. It identifies local
organizations supporting civic engagement in the fields of reentry, recovery,
and workforce development, and brings together innovators and civic
entrepreneurs with local and state government agencies. The internship-
employment sites will also be cultivated from among the network of community
organizations that the Tufts’ Tisch College of Civic Life has established for
undergraduate interns to work on social issues affecting the local community.
The research findings will be broadly shared among academic, local and national
community-based audiences, non-profit organizations, and government agencies
working with formerly incarcerated people or reentry
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track B. Bridging the gap between essential
resources and services &amp; community needs—and is a collaboration between NSF,
the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.