* 2228243
* I-Corps: Tree-based artificial intelligence (AI) models for financial fraud detection
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Miguel Carreira-Perpinan, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of fraud detection software for use in financial services, such as
banks and credit card companies. Fraud detection is a costly problem with annual
losses of billions of dollars to banks, merchants, and customers. Another cost
is reputational, as cardholders reduce patronage to merchants after transaction
declines. This team seeks to provide fraud detection artificial intelligence
(AI) software for commercial banks with an accuracy that exceeds industry
standards, potentially saving banks millions of dollars. The technology is based
on a fundamental innovation in learning decision trees and forests which makes
it possible to improve the state of the art in fraud detection along several
fronts: a superior predictive accuracy and fewer false positives; a faster
prediction time, necessary for processing many transactions per second; and
models that are explainable and trustworthy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based fraud detection that can be framed as a binary classification
problem, where a transaction is classified as legitimate or fraudulent. Current
practical fraud detection systems often use decision trees and forests trained
on large datasets of past transactions. However, learning a tree from data
requires solving a very difficult mathematical optimization problem. Until
recently, this was approximated using heuristic algorithms dating from the 1980s
which provide suboptimal models. The proposed algorithm, based on modern
optimization principles, seeks to find much better solutions while scaling to
large datasets. The technology may result in more accurate models, but also in
shallower trees, which are easier to explain and audit and which can compute
predictions faster. The technology can also learn more general types of tree-
based models, which may lead to further improvements in performance in
applications such as credit scoring, and in the legal, government and public
health sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.