* 2228242
* Conference on Scholarly Teaching and SoTL in Linguistics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Michal Temkin Martinez, Linguistic Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,830.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building capacity for
scholarly teaching in the undergraduate linguistics curriculum. The conference
on Scholarly Teaching and the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SoTL) in
Linguistics will be the first of its kind. Participants will gain a better
understanding of evidence-based instructional practices and collaboratively
identify ways in which linguistics can help improve undergraduate STEM
instruction more broadly. Faculty teaching linguistics at an undergraduate level
along with graduate students interested in undergraduate teaching will be
invited to the conference. Three overarching questions will guide the
conference: (1) What are the strategic steps that can be followed as a
discipline to elevate the use of evidence-based teaching approaches and the
status of SoTL work as scholarly work within linguistics? (2) How can teachers
of linguistics advance justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (JEDI) in their
classrooms and in the discipline? (3) How can linguistic theory and the teaching
of linguistics inform the teaching of other sciences?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to serve the national interest by building capacity for scholarly
teaching in the undergraduate linguistics curriculum. The two-day conference
will advance the understanding of the state of teaching in linguistics and will
support the creation and dissemination of new SoTL scholarship. Pivotal to this
goal is the inclusion of instructors from different subdisciplines and different
institutional contexts. The conference has the potential to advance linguistic
pedagogy and the discipline of linguistics by allowing scholars to create and
disseminate new SoTL scholarship and gain a better understanding of the state of
undergraduate teaching in linguistics. With JEDI-centered conversations and
working sessions, this conference intends to explore gatekeeping and barriers
that may currently exist in linguistics instruction and the ways that different
contexts shape the linguistics curriculum. The project's impact will be
evaluated through a series of participant surveys prior to, during, and
following the conference. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.