* 2228995
* AF: Small: New Directions in Network Design
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Michael Dinitz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 10/31/2025
* USD 567,981.00

Network design, where one attempts to build graphs that optimize some objective
function subject to some constraints, is a central task in computer science.
Algorithmic problems involving network design arise in many different settings,
ranging from designing computer networks to sparsifying big data. Given its
importance, network design has been the subject of extensive study, and an
enormous amount is already known. However, as technology and society evolve, new
network design problems become important. These are often variants of previous
well-studied problems but require new models, techniques, and ideas. This
project involves studying some of these new problems. In particular, this
project includes problems about designing large-scale computer networks that
utilize new reconfigurable technologies; problems about taking classical objects
that are not network-design problems and looking at them through a network
design lens, increasing their practical utility; and problems that focus on
taking old network design problems and studying more flexible variants to make
them useful in more modern settings. This project also incorporates mentoring
and including underrepresented undergraduates and high school students in the
more applied aspects of this work and outreach to middle schools in Baltimore
through existing mathematics-based programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, this project involves three new directions for network design that have
not previously been seriously studied but are theoretically and practically
important. First: problems that previously had no application but, due to the
advent of new technologies, are now extremely important in actual applications
while also being theoretically natural. This project focuses on demand-aware
network topology design, which involves intriguing new theoretical problems
motivated by advances in networking technology. Second: optimizing graph-
theoretic objects and data structures that are usually thought of as extremal.
In particular, this project includes studying optimization versions of geometric
spanners, emulators, distance oracles, and spectral sparsifiers. Third: new
objective functions for classical problems. The main example of this is
classical network design problems (spanning tree, Steiner tree, etc.) where the
new objective is the p-norm of the degree vector, generalizing and interpolating
between the classical objectives of the total number of edges (the 1-norm) and
the maximum degree (the infinity-norm). The p-norm is a standard objective in
other parts of algorithms but has not previously been considered in network
design. Studying intermediate norms will allow the algorithm user to use a
single knob to interpolate between global density (the 1-norm) and local density
(the infinity-norm).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.