* 2228743
* SAI-P: Designing Just Futures for Public Engagement in Petrochemical Pipeline Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Kirk Jalbert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,349.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petrochemical pipelines are at the center of
debates about the importance of public participation in the planning,
construction, and operation of large-scale energy infrastructure. For diverse
stakeholders, effective participation can result in safer and more resilient
projects, while minimizing negative impacts. However, participation can also be
hindered by informational gaps and other procedural inequities. This planning
project investigates how public interest groups use mapping, mobile apps,
environmental monitoring, and data transparency resources to engage with
pipeline infrastructure. A series of workshops explore how these groups imagine
their projects leading to more robust forms of participation. Interviews with
pipeline operators and regulators examine the industry’s plans to adopt new
standards for how pipeline operators engage with the public. Findings provide
guidance for more effective public use of technological resources for proactive
engagements with energy infrastructure. Findings also inform industry and
regulatory processes in the adoption of new standards for maximizing equitable
participation. This SAI planning project positions the research team to develop
larger-scale future research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speculative design
methods from the field of Human-Computer Interactions are used to advance
research in the field of Science, Technology, and Society on public uses of
“civic technoscience”. The supported planning activities focus on the ways in
which pipeline-related stakeholders differently imagine the usefulness of new
standards for expanding public participation. The project also considers how
civic technoscience can capitalize on these new opportunities through
collaborative platforms and toolkits. A justice-based lens to sustainability
studies of socio-ecological-technical systems aims to produce a model for
analyzing the systems that shape the present use of civic technoscience in
public engagements with pipelines, and how these may change as a result of new
industry standards. These intellectual convergences produce new knowledge
identifying the conditions necessary for achieving equitable and sustainable
infrastructure while laying the groundwork for future implementations of civic
technoscience projects designed by project
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.