* 2228490
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Human-centric, Data-driven Coastal Flood Resilience Strategies for Economically Disadvantaged Communities on Long Island
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Francesc Ortega, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) research has a focus of developing a
community-centric, hybrid modeling approach for coastal flooding mitigation
planning. Combining state-of-the-art, high-resolution flood modeling with
community engagement, the development of optimal mitigation strategies that are
informed by the needs of the community, as they define them, will be enabled. By
expanding the scope of the factors considered in the modeling process, its
realism will be improved, enhancing the planning capacity of, and the buy-in
from, the local community. In close collaboration with a Long Island, New York
coastal community and the Suffolk County planning department, community
stakeholders will be engaged in collecting and generating data on key socio-
economic characteristics and behavioral propensities of the community. Employing
a suite of social scientific techniques, these data will be used to predict the
social and behavioral responses to extreme flooding events and potential policy
interventions. The predicted responses will be fed back into the model to enable
a more holistic assessment of the mitigation strategies. The project will
provide residents, policymakers, and other stakeholders with powerful new tools
to both better assess the impact of future extreme events and determine the
optimal adaptation and mitigation strategies. This inclusive modeling approach
can be applied to other communities, tailoring optimal engineering solutions to
their needs and as a result, enhancing the equity and effectiveness of
engineering solutions and municipal planning for flood mitigation and
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of this project is its community-
centric simulation-based approach for assessing risks to infrastructure,
properties, and local businesses on coastal flood plains due to extreme weather
events. Specifically, this project will develop a physics-informed community-
scale high-fidelity computer model for quantitative assessment of these risks
and will implement mitigation strategies informed by the model that have been
co-produced with the local community, considering the implications for local
businesses. In addition to traditional inundation-depth information, the project
will enhance the current flood prediction capabilities by including other flood-
related factors such as erosion and damage to infrastructure. The robust process
of engaging with the local community and decision makers, used to refine and
parameterize the model to better address the needs of the community and consider
their behavioral responses, will help further the goals of environmental justice
and socioeconomic equity. Such an approach is unique and innovative. It has the
potential to save substantial costs while improving the quality of life for the
~40 percent of the nation’s total population who live in coastal
counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program—Track A. Living in a changing climate: pre-disaster
action around adaptation, resilience, and mitigation—and is a collaboration
between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.