* 2228211
* Changing Department Culture to Achieve Inclusive Excellence in 2-year STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Ann Riedl, Front Range Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2027
* USD 474,398.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a model to
transform science department culture at a two-year college to reflect values of
inclusion and to embrace the expectation that all students are capable of
succeeding. This project investigates the effectiveness of a department-wide
faculty professional development program to improve student learning and the
student experience. Inclusive transformation is a community effort: fostering
robust faculty collaboration ensures better utilization of inclusive teaching
practices and more intentional and supportive classroom cultures, resulting in
fundamental changes in the way students learn science. During the training
program, faculty will be supported as they redesign their teaching to
incorporate proven inclusive learning practices with a focus on equity.
Collaborative, systematic improvement in science education creates educational
spaces that welcome students into the scientific community. These changes have
the potential to improve student confidence, support diverse backgrounds and
perspectives, and encourage students to pursue science careers. This project
plans to study the effectiveness of engaging faculty department-wide for
sustainable improvement of science education at an emerging two-year Hispanic-
Serving Institution. Significantly, two-year colleges support diverse student
populations, and up to half of eventual STEM college graduates take classes at a
two-year college. Therefore, incorporating inclusive teaching strategies into
foundational courses is essential to building a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to support systemic culture
change in the interdisciplinary science department of Front Range Community
College, with a scope of 11 science disciplines and approximately 50 full- and
part-time faculty. The goals of this project are to improve student learning and
success in science courses, decrease opportunity gaps among Persons Excluded
because of their Ethnicity or Race (PEERs), and increase student retention and
persistence in STEM. Department transformation will occur through collaborative
professional development programs at three levels: (1) training faculty through
a 2-year program focused on active learning and inclusive pedagogy, (2)
departmental retreats and reflective practice groups to define and discuss
common equity goals, and (3) welcoming and mentoring new faculty. This project
plans to study the effectiveness of this culture change using classroom
observation tools, disaggregated student success metrics, and measures of
faculty engagement and student science identity. This framework can be used to
support innovation and research-based inclusive practices and to inform
institutional transformation efforts in other science departments. The findings
from this project will contribute to understanding the efficacy of pedagogical
practices in two-year colleges. The NSF program description on Advancing
Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions
of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at
two-year colleges. The program description promotes innovative and evidence-
based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.