* 2228177
* Collaborative Research: Implementation Grant: Navigating Home
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Pedro Maldonado-Rivera, University of The Virgin Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,135,707.00

Navigating Home will support recent on- and off-island graduates who identify as
Black, Hispanic, Pacific Islanders or other underrepresented groups in the
geosciences and who originally hail from one of three U.S. territory Hubs (Guam,
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) by placing them in new, marine and
environmental science job opportunities. Navigating Home is designed to
contribute to the creation of an inclusive marine and environmental science
research community that reflects the diversity of these islands. The goals of
Navigating Home are to: (1) bring back, train, and retain islanders who have
Bachelor’s or Master’s degrees in the marine and environmental sciences, and who
are interested in being part of their home island’s workforce; (2) strengthen
partnerships between island-based universities and their local partners through
joint decision-making and co-design; (3) provide transdisciplinary training
related to public engagement with science and community engagement; and (4)
transform geoscience culture through these innovative strategies and
partnerships, that will serve as model examples within and beyond the island
communities in which they are based. Over five years, the project will support
68 Fellows and 68 professionals from university and community partnering
organizations in transdisciplinary geoscience enrichment opportunities. This
project will benefit from the early successes of the NSF INCLUDES SEAS Islands
Alliance, NSF EPSCoR investments, and integrating the NSF-funded STEMAP program
into island-based community engagement. It will broaden participation in STEM by
supporting individuals from historically marginalized and underrepresented
groups who are also from the island regions and increase diversity in local and
national STEM workforces, resulting in greater creativity and innovation in
problem solving. Navigating Home will transform local geoscience learning
ecosystems and serve as a model program in transforming geoscience culture,
stabilizing STEM career pathways, and combating “brain drain” that affects many
rural communities and especially, U.S. territories. Project results will be
shared broadly with local communities, and through national conferences and
academic publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navigating Home will nurture
sustainable and long-term STEM learning and research ecosystems that build on
the idea of learning ecosystems as a braided river, to foster “inclusive,
responsive, and modern career development” (Bachelor et al., 2021). The project
will leverage the NSF INCLUDES SEAS Islands Alliance to foster workforce
opportunities in the islands through partnerships between universities and local
partner organizations. Inter-institutional partnerships may help mitigate
traditional barriers and training silos while also addressing curricular
misalignment between the undergraduate and graduate stages, especially for those
students at Minority Serving Institutions that may lack access to graduate
programs and faculty (Allen-Ramdial &amp; Campbell 2014). Brokering is an
important part of any learning ecosystem (Ching, Santo, Hoadley, &amp; Peppler,
2016; Akiva, Kehoe, &amp; Schunn, 2017; Penuel, Clark &amp; Bevan, 2016; Allen
et al., 2019), and will be a key feature of the work conducted by Hub teams
(U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam) as they collaborate to begin to
transform the culture of geoscience workforce in these island communities to
reflect the diversity of these island communities. Transdisciplinary training
will be provided in mental health first aid (John and Kahn, 2018), and to
strengthen the impact identities of fellows, faculty and partners (Risien &amp;
Storksdieck, 2018) and their ability to engage with local communities deeply and
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.