* 2228940
* RAPID: Mass Mortality of the Keystone Herbivore Diadema antillarum Underway around the Caribbean Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Joshua Patterson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,928.00

The long-spined sea urchin (Diadema antillarum) is an important organism on
coral reefs throughout the Caribbean. These urchins feed on algae, thereby
helping to keep it from overgrowing the hard corals that form coral reefs. From
1983-1984, a mortality event killed on average 97% of the long-spined urchins
and led to a shift in dominance to algae on many coral reefs. That event
proceeded rapidly, spreading across the Caribbean in just 13 months and the
cause was never identified. A similar event is currently unfolding. This project
addresses three interconnected science questions to optimize what can quickly be
learned from this temporary event: 1) What urchin population characteristics or
environmental conditions may have led to this event and are they like past
urchin mortality events around the globe? 2) If a pathogen is responsible for
the current mortality event, what is it and can it be transmitted through
seawater? 3) Whether the agent responsible for this mortality event is a
pathogen, toxin, or something else, how long does it remain viable in seawater,
and can oceanographic models be used to explain its distribution and predict its
future spread? This event provides a rare opportunity to study a temporary
situation in ways not possible after the event is over. Answers to these key
questions have broader societal impacts by advancing our knowledge of long-
spined urchins, the disease- causing agent; informing local management practices
and population monitoring programs; and improving the chance of survival of
hatchery-reared animals that will play a critical role in coral reef restoration
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three project goals that
will optimize what we can learn from this event quickly. First, the
investigators are collecting demographic and environmental data from sites that
are experiencing mortality and those not yet affected. Second, to optimize
diagnostic evaluations and progress toward determination of etiology, histologic
assessment of both normal and diseased urchins are being performed. Third, to
identify any etiological agent, the investigators are assessing the microbiome
and virome of healthy and diseased urchins. Similarly, host transcriptome
analyses leading up to gross abnormalities may reveal animal responses to
infectious or non-infectious agents. Although a pathogen is suspected,
comparative analysis of chemical levels among impacted and non-impacted sites
can provide valuable information on contamination levels potentially
contributing to stress and immunosuppression in Diadema. The investigators are
using tangential flow filtration of mesocosm water to investigate the potential
mode(s) of transmission and link to any putative pathogens. They are leveraging
existing biophysical models to describe the spread of the disease and
contaminants in the wider Caribbean Sea. The models will predict the likely
routes and speed that an emergent pathogen and/or contaminant would travel if it
remained viable within the water column or travels via shipping
lanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.