* 2228377
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Enhancing the Capacity for Environmental and Social Resiliency in Overburdened Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* David Hendry, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Taylor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Communities of color are often at the frontlines of environmental hazards.
Research shows that people of all ages in such communities are disproportionally
impacted by environmental hazards, including poor air and water quality. As
worsening climate-related disasters, such as extreme heat, drought, floods, and
wildfires, threaten communities across the United States, these frontline
communities often experience the first and the worst of the impacts. In urban
and rural communities alike, climate change and interrelated environmental
hazards negatively affect local economies and people’s physical and mental
health. To address these threats to prosperity and human well-being, new
approaches are needed that enable communities to envision and build a resilient
future. This project will develop tools to address this, specifically methods
that empower communities to engage in resilience planning. The approach is
place-based, focused on community values and aspirations, and emphasizes methods
for envisioning a resilient future for themselves – more healthy places to live,
work, and enjoy recreation. The approach will position communities to identify
their own challenges and solutions, thereby improving dialogue with technical
experts and policymakers. The approach is multi-lifespan and intersectional, so
that transformations can be sustained across generations. If successful, this
research will build capacity in local communities for envisioning resilience and
will lead to effective methods that can be employed in many other places.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2021, the Washington State Legislature passed the
Healthy Environment for All (HEAL) Act, which seeks to address environmental
injustice. It does so in part by putting into law that State agencies must
create the conditions for “meaningful involvement” with overburdened
communities, that is, with people who are disproportionately impacted by the
climate crisis. However, the HEAL Act does not say how meaningful public
involvement is to take place. To address this gap, the project proposes to
develop an Envisioning Resilience Toolkit and test it in community-driven
workshops where community members learn how to create the conditions for
meaningful involvement. This will be done by envisioning place-based resilience
and defining place-based solutions in terms of social, technological, and
ecological features. The Envisioning Resilience Toolkit will be piloted across
the state of Washington with the goal of successfully achieving four research
and practice outcomes: 1) improved capacity to plan for social and environmental
resilience; 2) place-based, multi-lifespan conceptual models of resilience; 3)
methods for mutual learning and dialog between community members and
stakeholders; and 4) a versatile toolkit, which empowers overburdened
communities in their interactions with State agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services &amp; community
needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security,
and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.