* 2228581
* RII Track-4:NSF:  ExoPRIME Technology and Mass Spectroscopy Proteomic Analysis of Immunocaptured Exosomes for Liquid Biopsy
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Gergana Nestorova, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 140,314.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanosized particles secreted by the cells that
contain protein and nucleic acid and are a promising tool for liquid biopsy.
Proteomics analysis of circulating EVs is an emerging method for precise and
non-invasive early diagnosis of pathological conditions. Selective isolation of
EV subpopulations that express the same surface antibody is critical for the
precise identification of disease-specific proteomics biomarkers. This proposed
research will enable the specificity assessment of technology for direct
purification and proteomic analysis of subpopulations of EVs that express the
same surface marker, and therefore originate from diseased tissue. The results
from this work will also improve our understanding of biomarkers-specific
signatures of cancer-originating EVs for early diagnostics via a liquid biopsy
approach. The fellowship program will train the PI and a graduate student from
Louisiana Tech University in both technical aspects of sample processing for
mass spectrometry as well as computational approaches for high throughput
proteomics data analysis. This will enable the PI to modernize and increase the
rigor of the proteomics courses at Louisiana Tech University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant Professor and a graduate student at Louisiana Tech University. This
work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at the University of
Houston. Selective immunopurification of EVs from complex biological fluids
using disease-specific surface markers provides a non-invasive method for early
disease diagnosis. In this project, the PI and one graduate student will visit
the Mass Spectrometry Facility at the University of Houston to perform bottom-up
mass spectrometry proteomic analysis of astrocytes and tumor marker specific
(EpCAM, EGFRvIII, and HSP-27) glioblastoma-secreted EVs utilizing Bruker's
timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system. The PI has demonstrated the feasibility of
a tool for immunocapture of EVs. At the core of the ExoPRIME approach is an
antibody-functionalized stainless steel microscopic pin (3mm×130µm) for the
purification of EVs expressing a specific surface marker. The main objectives of
this research study are to identify glioblastoma-specific proteomics biomarkers
and assess the feasibility of the ExoPRIME tool for clinical diagnostics at the
point of care. This project will achieve the following objectives:1) assess the
proteomics profile of glioblastoma and healthy astrocytes-derived EVs purified
using a commercial immunocapture approach; and 2) perform proteomics analysis of
glioblastoma-derived EpCAM, EGFRvIII, and HSP-27 specific EVs purified using the
ExoPRIME technology. Expertise gained during this fellowship will also enable
the PI to train and educate students at Louisiana Tech University in cutting-
edge proteomics analysis techniques. This research has potential to lead to a
comprehensive understanding of the proteomics profile of tumor-specific EVs
which opens the door to technology development for biomarker discovery and early
disease diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.