* 2228588
* CIVIC-PG Track B: Bridging the Rural Justice Gap: Innovating &amp; Scaling Up Civil Access to Justice in Alaska
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Michele Statz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Under-resourced rural infrastructure, including health care, employment, and
education, put individuals at a high risk for civil legal problems in the United
States. Yet many rural communities have few if any attorneys, and access to
justice supports often neglect entrenched barriers for people living in rural
areas like distance or inconsistent broadband. Research shows that these "rural
legal deserts" leave individuals with unmet civil legal needs like debt
collection, domestic violence, and eviction with little chance of achieving a
just resolution. The consequences of this are enormous—particularly in Alaska,
where only 3.52 legal aid attorneys are available for every 10,000 Alaskans in
poverty. A new program in Alaska may offer a model that will address rural
justice gaps in a more sustainable and culturally responsive way. In 2020, a
community-based justice worker (CJW) program was developed to train community
health workers already embedded in Alaska’s rural communities to provide formal
legal advocacy, informal assistance, and monitoring across agencies and court
systems. The program holds dual promise: it is a replicable delivery model and
will provide innovations in technologies and regulation that enable other civil
legal services to meet widespread unmet need. The project team seeks the full
participation and knowledge of underrepresented groups in STEM fields as well as
healthcare and law. The broader impacts of the Stage 1 activities and the vision
for the Stage 2 pilot include: 1) scaling up a regional model of rural access to
justice; 2) transforming national efforts to address the access to justice
crisis; 3) contributing to legal and economic empowerment; and 4) enhancing
rural infrastructure via partnerships across civic agencies, tribal and state
governments, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team includes the
Executive Director of Alaska Legal Services, an expert on evidence-based access
to justice policy, and a leading researcher in rural access to justice. The
researchers will partner with an Advisory Committee comprised of members with
regional tribal, state, and institutional perspectives. Stage 1 activities will
focus on building relationships and regional knowledge, eliciting additional
civic priorities, and ensuring a comprehensive, fast-paced, and actionable plan
for the Stage 2 pilot. This will occur via in-person and remote convenings in
Anchorage and in three "hub" communities that are access points for hundreds of
distinct tribal villages. This project will draw on and contribute to diverse
theoretical perspectives on legal empowerment and legal capability, access to
justice, and rural places. It will address the persistent "rural neglect" of
relevant scholarship and underscore diverse rural individuals’ own expertise in
understanding the effects of rural legal deserts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services &amp; community
needs—and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security,
and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.