* 2228047
* ORE-CZ: Integrating Vegetation Phenology to Understand the Sensitivity of Dynamic Water Storage to Drought Using Remote Sensing Data and Hydrology Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Lauren Lowman, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Plants rely on water storage in the soils to continue developing leaves and
undergoing photosynthesis during drought periods. This water source is called
dynamic water storage. During drought periods, some plants alter their growth
strategies to conserve dynamic water storage. This process by which plants adapt
to drought conditions is complex, but critical to document as it impacts carbon,
energy, and water cycles. This project will explore whether incorporating plant
interaction with dynamic water can provide an accurate estimate of plant
resilience to drought. This study will develop a modeling framework that
incorporates feedbacks between dynamic water storage and vegetation growth and
water-use. The framework will be tested for forested mountain sites in Colorado.
This project will help evaluate how vegetation will adapt to the possibility of
more frequent and extreme drought events in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe drought events seem to be occurring with
greater frequency. When rainfall is infrequent, natural vegetation relies on
subsurface water stores, referred to as dynamic water storage, to sustain new
leaf growth and photosynthesis. Prior work has documented changes in vegetation
productivity and water-use efficiency as a result of reduced dynamic water
storage during drought. Previous studies have also observed how vegetation can
adopt different water-use strategies during drought periods. However, a
knowledge gap persists around feedbacks between dynamic water storage and
vegetation phenology and water-use. These feedbacks dynamically alter exchanges
of water and energy between the land-surface and the atmosphere that are
difficult to capture. In order to address this gap, this project will develop a
modeling framework that accounts for interactions between phenologic changes in
response to environmental conditions, vegetation water-use strategies, and
dynamic water storage. The approach couples a land-surface hydrology model with
a prognostic phenology model to capture these interactions. To reduce
uncertainty in forecasting plant states, satellite remote sensing observations
of plant greenness (i.e., fraction of photosynthetically active radiation) and
plant density (i.e., leaf area index) are assimilated using a dual state-
parameter Ensemble Kalman Filter. This approach will permit quantification of
uncertainty in environmental conditions and the propagation of this uncertainty
through estimates of dynamic water storage and land surface fluxes of water,
energy, and carbon. The model will be validated against data collected from
forested mountain basins in Colorado that are being studied by the Dynamic Water
Cluster of the Critical Zone Network. This research will improve the
predictability of land-atmosphere interactions that characterize drought events
in western mountain basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.