* 2228891
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: QuAPB, Expanding Quantum Research and Education at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Hugh Churchill, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

Non-Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;QuAPB is an integrated research and
education activity led by the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) in the
area of quantum materials and devices for integrated quantum photonics. This
first-of-its-kind quantum center in Central Arkansas is propelled by close
collaboration with the University of Arkansas at Little Rock (UALR) and the
University of Arkansas at Fayetteville (UAF). This new project establishes the
first graduate program in the physical sciences at UAPB, adds Quantum
Information Science and Engineering faculty at UAPB, reorients several
nanomaterials experts at UALR and UAPB toward quantum applications, creates a
hands-on quantum laboratory course for BS/MS students, and powers a diverse
pipeline of quantum trainees from the high school to master's levels. Research
priorities of QuAPB include the synthesis and integration of twisted stacks of
quantum materials that enjoy built-in advantages for quantum light sources.
Education and outreach activities include the new degree program, new laboratory
and classroom-based courses, and public engagement focused on exciting K-12
students about quantum careers to create the pipeline of students that ensures
the long-term sustainability of QuAPB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Research within QuAPB focuses on the synthesis,
characterization, and application of moiré quantum materials, supplemented by
participants at UALR who synthesize quantum dots for a novel, non-avalanche
single-photon detection scheme. Participants at UAF fabricate quantum photonic
chips that integrate the emitters from UAPB, the detectors from UALR, and two-
dimensional nonlinear optical elements fabricated at the MonArk NSF Quantum
Foundry. The result is the creation, characterization, and optimization of two-
dimensional integrated quantum photonic devices with superior performance in
terms of strong light-matter interaction, ease of integration into quantum
photonic circuits, and capability to interface with other quantum degrees of
freedom such as spin and valley present in some two-dimensional materials. The
expanded quantum workforce produced by UAPB, an HBCU, helps to diversify
academic and industrial institutions contributing to the development of quantum
technologies. These efforts also engage untapped human resources for quantum
science and engineering in an underserved region of the United States, Central
Arkansas. A new five-year BS/MS program transforms the research-related
educational capabilities at UAPB, allows trainees to make full use of UAPB's
integrated quantum photonics facility, and establishes a new hands-on quantum
education laboratory providing essential training needed by graduates entering
the quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by The
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), and Estab­lished Program to
Stim­u­late Com­pet­i­tive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.