* 2229724
* RII Track-4: NSF: Understanding the Nanoscale Incommensurate Modulated Structure in the Titanium Alloys
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Yufeng Zheng, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 234,032.00

This grant supports the fundamental research focusing a novel metal designing
strategy and promotes the progress of materials science and technology. Metals
are widely used structural materials because of their excellent performance
under different loading conditions. However, to achieve synergetic combination
of high strength and ductility in metals is essential but difficult. This
project aims to investigate a new strategy to overcome the strength-ductility
tradeoff in titanium (Ti) alloys by forming precipitates with a well-controlled
length scale of spatial heterogeneities (i.e., heterogeneous precipitate
structure). The project will identify the critical roles of nanostructures in
forming the heterogeneous precipitate structure in Ti alloys using the cutting-
edge transmission electron microscopy. The fellowship will allow the PI and a
graduate student to visit the nation’s premier electron microscopy center, the
MIT.nano research facilities at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The
project will enable the PI to establish a long-term collaboration with MIT.nano
and new expertise in materials characterization, that will lead to a long-
lasting impact on the research capability at University of Nevada, Reno (UNR).
The PI will design new electron microscopy and materials science education
modules for students at UNR and outreach activities for K-12 students in the
Reno community to impact a young generation of learners, especially those from
groups traditionally underrepresented in. STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and
training for graduate student at the University of Nevada Reno (UNR). Utilizing
nanostructures is an effective method to tune the size of precipitates in Ti
alloys. In this project, the PI will use nanoscale incommensurate modulated
structure (NIMS) as an example to identify the correlations between the local
structure, composition and heterogeneous precipitate structure related to NIMS
in Ti alloys. The goal of this research is to fundamentally understand the NIMS
and its influence on the microstructure evolution during thermal treatment in
the Ti alloys. Two specific research aims will be pursued: (i) Identifying the
relationship between the alloy composition, processing parameter and the
formation mechanism of the NIMS in Ti alloys; and (ii) Demonstrating the role of
NIMS in ω and α phase precipitation during heat treatment in Ti alloys. The
proposed research is built on the collaboration with the world-leading
nanostructured materials scientist and the nation’s premier electron microscopy
center at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. We will identify the atomic-
level structure and composition characterization of NIMS using the aberration-
corrected Themis Z G3 S/TEM and demonstrate the influence of NIMS on
microstructure evolution pathways in Ti alloys using the DENS Solution Lightning
in-situ TEM heating holder. The integration of highly advanced ex- and in-situ
characterization tools is essential for an accurate description of these complex
phase transformations in Ti alloys. The successful completion of the proposed
project will advance the fundamental understanding of the microstructure
evolution related to the nanostructures in Ti alloys, that is critical for
accelerating the discovery and development of Ti alloys with a new composition
and microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.