* 2229469
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Dynamic Spectrum Sharing via Stochastic Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ali Pezeshki, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 285,990.00

The next generation of communication networks must support extremely complex
systems and challenging applications such as smart city/home, smart
manufacturing, autonomous vehicles, and virtual and augmented reality. These new
applications should be more accessible worldwide and lead to wider
harmonization, lower broadband costs, and reduce the digital divide. At the same
time, radar sensing is becoming more pervasive in areas with increasing demands
for the 5G spectrum. These ever-increasing demands on spectral resources require
the use of intelligent spectrum scheduling techniques. Meanwhile, several new
technologies like reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) and dual-function
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) provide additional design degrees of freedom.
This project develops the general mathematical framework that is needed to
integrate and optimize these new technologies for resilient coexistence over a
shared spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current spectrum allocation between
communication and radar users, designed by regulatory bodies, aims to avoid
interference between users at all times. This conservative approach is not
suited in the wake of increasing demand for throughput and dual communication
and sensing functionality and results in a reduced capacity. This inefficiency
is exacerbated by the introduction of additional design degrees of freedom and
the corresponding constraints related to the characteristics and dynamics of new
technologies like RIS modules and UAVs. This project develops a new paradigm in
which spectrum sharing moves from hard deterministic constraints to stochastic
schemes with a desired low probability of harmful interference. This enables
leveraging recent advances in stochastic programming to derive resilient
solutions. In this approach, the constraints of optimization are random
variables that have to satisfy the bounds given by interference limits with a
desired high probability. These stochastic constraints may be time-varying to
account for uncertainty in the dynamic environment. A key component to enable
this development is an accurate characterization of the mutual interference and
performance tradeoffs among coexisting radar and communication nodes. his
project develops the general mathematical framework that is needed to integrate
and optimize these new technologies for resilient coexistence over a shared
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.