* 2229659
* Electromagnetic Physically-Unclonable Functions Generated by Graphene Radio-Frequency Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Ahmet Cetin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Rapid advances in wireless technologies have led to a myriad of internet-
connected devices, which sense the surroundings and share sensor data along with
the identifications of these devices, the so-called Internet-of-Things (IoTs).
However, these smart wireless devices with currently affordable authentication
techniques based on digital memories are vulnerable to various cyber-attacks and
device cloning. The security challenge posed by counterfeit or malicious
hardware has attracted worldwide attention due to the potential significant
economic loss to society and cyber threats to individuals. This research aims to
develop innovative electromagnetic physical unclonable functions (EMPUFs) that
can be used as an ultra-lightweight, attack-resilient authentication module for
wireless communication and wireless access control. Inspired by speech
recognition using artificial intelligence to track acoustic signatures of
billions of different human voices, the EMPUF exploits imperfections or sample-
specific noises in the radio-frequency (RF) circuitry of a wireless device to
generate encryption keys. In this scenario, wireless devices can be identified
using the device-specific uniqueness derived from the arbitrary waveform and
polarization of the radio waves they produce. In this project, new types of RF
devices and circuits will be built using nanomaterials, such as graphene with
highly random and somewhat reconfigurable electronic properties, to maximize the
uniqueness of RF fingerprints. This interdisciplinary research interfacing
hardware security, electromagnetics, RF circuits, nanoelectronics, and
artificial intelligence will provide graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students
with a multidisciplinary research experience. The project will combine research,
education, and community outreach activities through a series of programs at the
University of Illinois, such as Women in Engineering Program, Early Outreach
Program, and Early Research Scholars Program, to increase the representation of
women and underrepresented minorities in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop a new class of strong
physical unclonable functions (PUFs) for cryptographic key generation and
authentication, as the first barrier fending off cyber-attacks in a network
consisting of abundant resource-scarce wireless devices. Manufacturing process
variations of the complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology have
been widely used to implement PUFs and true random number generators based on
arbiters, ring oscillators, flip-flops, and static random-access memories
(SRAM). However, it remains challenging to apply this concept to low-cost,
small-footprint IoTs and smart devices that have limited available power and
memory capacity. This project proposes an ultra-lightweight, energy-efficient
EMPUF that identifies signal variations in the RF front-end components such as
modulators, synthesizers, mixers, and oscillators built using graphene-based
devices. Specifically, the high entropy inherent in graphene field-effect
transistors (GFETs) originating from random strains, defects, and dopant
fluctuations will be harnessed to realize high-performance EMPUF instances.
Moreover, the reconfigurable and resettable electronic properties of GFETs will
be exploited to generate a redundantly large challenge-response pairs (CRPs),
enabling the practical realization of strong PUFs and beyond-silicon security
primitives. A computationally efficient machine learning algorithm will also be
developed to retrieve important RF footprints from background noises. The
outcomes of this research are expected to help establish highly versatile anti-
counterfeiting solutions, which are urgently needed in many fields, such as
wireless access control, safety in telematics infrastructure, RF identification,
encrypted wireless communications, and authentication of merchandise, to name a
few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.