* 2229224
* Collaborative Research: Climatic Control of Erosion Rates and Landscape Morphology - Quantifying the Influence of Fluvial Thresholds
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 108,935.00

This project seeks to advance understanding of land surface response to climate
change through study of evolving landforms on the Hawaiian islands. This
research will improve scientists’ ability to decipher the record of past
climates from landforms and to anticipate land surface response to future
climate change. Planned research activities focus on the role of extreme events
in canyon cutting – a topic that is central to landscape response to climate
change but has received insufficient attention. The team will recruit two
undergraduates from underrepresented communities in Hawaii to participate in the
research effort and to attend an international professional conference to learn
about opportunities and establish network connections. Outreach and hands-on
public educational activities will be developed at both Arizona State University
and the University of Indiana, including through participation of undergraduates
in research efforts. All resulting research data will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend prior studies of the
Hawaiian islands by examining landscapes across a span of islands, and thus
landscape ages, and across the dramatic differences in rainfall between windward
and leeward slopes, emphasizing the role of geomorphic thresholds and the
extreme events that can exceed them. Preliminary investigation indicates that
the kilometer-deep canyons common to all of the islands were cut rapidly to
depths similar to the present day, after which incision stagnated because
channel gradient decreased below a climate-dependent threshold for moving large
boulders in channels. This study will systematically test the hypothesis that
canyon cutting on the Hawaiian islands has been limited by boulder transport
thresholds. A combination of methods will be deployed, including detailed field
measurements, digital elevation model analyses, 40Ar/39Ar dating of inset lava
flows, and estimates of catchment-mean erosion rates from cosmogenic 36Cl in
magnetite in river sediment – a novel method only recently developed. This
research represents an opportunity to advance understanding of climatic control
on landscape evolution in general, and to quantify how fluvial incision
thresholds critically modulate connections among climate, topography, and
erosion rate. The Hawaiian islands provide unique conditions to directly measure
fluvial thresholds and to quantitatively assess their role modulating climatic
control of landscape evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.