* 2229605
* RAISE: IHBEM: Human Behavior Driven Mathematical Modeling and Forecasting of Respiratory Disease Transmission in Urban Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2026
* Jeffrey Shaman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 10/31/2026
* USD 766,391.00

Human behavior plays a central role in the transmission of respiratory pathogens
such as SARS-CoV-2 and influenza; however, realistic representation of many
behavioral processes is lacking in existing epidemiological models, which
impedes accurate simulation and forecasting of disease spread. This project will
use behavior theories and detailed data to develop behavior-driven epidemic
models, study the transmission dynamics of COVID-19, and generate improved
forecasting systems in urban settings. Studies will focus on New York City
(NYC), a densely populated metropolitan area with large socioeconomic
disparities that often experiences outbreaks earlier than surrounding regions.
The proposed model will incorporate contact patterns indoors, where most
transmission occurs, the adoption of protective measures such as mask-wearing,
and reactive behavior change in response to infection risk. Research results
will deepen understanding of behavior-disease interaction and produce next-
generation predictive models for emerging respiratory diseases with validated
forecasting accuracy. These efforts will fundamentally improve disease model
realism by accurately incorporating behavior into mathematical models and
improve the accuracy of respiratory disease forecasts. The developed forecasting
systems can be deployed in real time to support epidemic control in the event of
public health emergency. Research findings will be disseminated promptly to
federal and local public health authorities leveraging ongoing collaborations to
translate research into strategies for disease prevention and mitigation. The
project will have long-term benefits for capacity building in pandemic
preparedness and response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be supported
by rich and diverse datasets including neighborhood level COVID-19 data,
detailed foot traffic records, mask-wearing survey data, socio-economic
indicators, and behavioral characteristics collected from surveys in NYC
neighborhoods. Proposed studies are organized around three synergistic research
objectives: 1) use of core behavioral science theories – namely temporal
discounting, loss aversion, agency, and norms and deviation – to quantify risk-
driven behavior change; 2) incorporation of dwell time and crowdedness in
different indoor settings and population-level masking into a metapopulation
epidemic model at the neighborhood scale; 3) development of a predictive model
for COVID-19 with behavior-disease feedbacks and systematic evaluation of its
predictive skill through retrospective forecasts. The project will employ a
breadth of interdisciplinary skills in mathematical modeling, statistical
inference, behavior science, data science, and infectious disease epidemiology.
These efforts will produce novel mathematical models incorporating human
behaviors that enable improved operational forecasting of respiratory
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Mathematical Science (DMS) in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the
Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE). This project was
also co-funded in collaboration with the CDC’s Center for Forecasting and
Outbreak Analytics to support research projects to further advance federal
infectious disease modeling, prevention and response
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.