* 2229056
* ORE-CZ: Soil Microbial Characteristics of a Salinizing Forest Ecosystem within the Chesapeake Bay watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Stephanie Stotts, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,984.00

Soil is one of the earth’s most important natural resources and is largely non-
renewable on human timescales. Without the water, nutrients and physical support
provided by soil and its microbes, most plants, and the animals that depend on
them, including humans, could not exist. Soils in coastal forests, particularly
in low-lying and shallow zones, are vulnerable to sea-level rise and saltwater
intrusion, resulting in soil salinization. This change in environmental
conditions will affect the soil microbial population that performs fundamental
functions, such as nutrient cycling, breaking down residues, and stimulating
plant growth. Predicting the overall response of soil microbial communities to
climate change is an ongoing challenge in coastal ecosystems. This project will
survey the diversity of soil and root-associated microbial communities across
soil salinity gradients in coastal forests in the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Climatic and soil properties will also be collected for comparison with the
microbial communities’ composition and distribution. The results of this project
will provide more robust knowledge of the microbial response to salinizing
conditions in coastal forests. The successful completion of this project will
outline the opportunities for a more sustainable management and protection of
coastal areas that are important for enhancing resilience to climate change.
This project will also engage minority students in intensive experiential
learning with interdisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to investigate soil health and the coastal soil ecosystem
integrity in response to saltwater intrusion driven by sea-level rise. To assess
these linkages, the project will 1) characterize soil and root-associated
microbial communities across soil salinity gradients in coastal forested
ecosystems in the Chesapeake Bay to link soil salinization and the structure of
plant-associated microbiota, 2) study plant-microbe interactions at the soil-
root interface to understand whether plant stress resistance in salinizing
forest ecosystems aligns with plant strategies or microbial consortia, and 3)
elucidate the influence of environmental factors (soil properties and seasonal
variation) on microbial communities’ composition. The research site will be at
Monie Bay in eastern Maryland, which is in the Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine
Research Reserve and is also one of the current NSF-supported Critical Zone
Network (CZN) research sites. The findings of this research will deepen
knowledge of the functional role of microbial communities in maintaining and
improving soil health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Critical Zone program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) in the Human
Resources Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.