* 2229170
* FMSG: Cyber: Distributed Surface Patterning Through a Cohort of Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ping Guo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 496,301.00

The understanding of designing structured surfaces for advanced functionality,
such as friction reduction, antifouling, and hydrophobicity, has significantly
progressed over the years; however, the critical technical barrier to the
application of these structured surfaces is the scalability in manufacturing
capability. The biggest challenge in surface patterning is the process
scalability, which needs to reconcile the significant scale difference between
the individual feature size down to the nano- or micro-level and the large
surface-to-be-textured up to the meter level. The project will investigate one
vision for future manufacturing -- distributed robotic manufacturing -- to
achieve scalable patterning of micro-structured functional surfaces using a
cohort of mini-robots. The project will not only push the knowledge boundaries
in the scientific understanding of distributed physical intelligence, machine-
material interactions, and swarm control, but may open up a new and
interdisciplinary research field at the intersection of manufacturing, robotics,
control, and cyberphysical systems. Additionally, the project includes outreach
at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, open-source software, and
curricular innovations, including online classes and training modules. The
research will build an educational and outreach platform to enable education and
workforce development for STEM educators, next generation workforce, and
technical engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to explore
and answer three fundamental scientific questions that will enable the vision
for future manufacturing in distributed robotic manufacturing. (1) Distributed
physical intelligence: a new design framework will be established to distribute
the intelligence among mechanical structures, analog circuits, and digital
logics, as well as to design unconventional communication channels through both
active and passive manners. (2) Unconventional machine-material interaction: new
theoretical underpinnings will be established to investigate the machine-
material interaction and the possible removal, deformation, and addition of
material in this new paradigm, where the tools are extremely flexible and with
significantly constrained power. (3) Swarm control: new fundamental knowledge
will be generated from novel task decomposition and distribution paradigms to
synthesis techniques capable of minimizing control effort, communication, and
computation. Instead of top-down control of every individual mini-robot, novel
methods will be established through which local rule specifications lead to
global distributed pattern completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future
Manufacturing award is supported by the Division of Computer and Network Systems
(CNS) of the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), and by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.