* 2229829
* Integrating Data Science into Undergraduate Psychology Education: A Capacity-Building Workshop for Undergraduate Psychology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Darshon Reed, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,950.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing training in data
science to undergraduate attendees at the Southwestern Psychological Association
(SWPA) Conference. Attendees will come from two- and four-year institutions of
higher education, and up to twenty five students will receive funding to take
part. The purpose of the project is twofold: 1) to provide a data science
education undergraduate-level workshop at the SWPA annual meeting, and 2) to
increase diversity in data science by equipping diverse psychology students with
data science skills. The primary focus of the undergraduate educational workshop
will be to build participantsâ€™ knowledge of data science and increase their
ability to employ data science methods in research. Skills that will be reviewed
in the training include acquiring, visualizing, and managing data and performing
specialized analyses. Using readily accessible, social media data (e.g., Twitter
or Facebook) with broad applicability across interests, textual nature, and
amenability to network analysis, workshop instructors will guide attendees
through a high-level look at the process of developing a research proposal that
utilizes big data. Additionally, attendees will learn how the study of
psychology and data science can be mutually beneficial, and also gain exposure
to career paths and options from a panel discussion involving data scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing psychology undergraduate training via data
science education would provide an opportunity to examine and address validity
and fairness issues in coding of natural language and algorithm
training/validation. Natural language processing (NLP) is one of the fastest
growing areas of machine learning research. Current linguistic machine learning
models do an adequate job on language-understanding tasks, but the patterns
learned in the data have been shown to produce algorithms that often express
stereotypes and social biases. Stereotypes, prejudice, and implicit bias are a
major focus of social psychological curriculum and training. If psychology
education not only included theories and concepts surrounding these topics but
also data science methodology, psychology students could conduct research that
would assist in the optimization of machine learning models to reduce implicit
biases. Thus, the proposed conference workshop will demonstrate the relationship
between STEM learning in formal and informal settings by providing a unique
informal setting (conference workshop) where student learning takes place but
has not been assessed or compared to learning that happens in a typical
classroom setting. Through the informal learning environment of the conference
this workshop will (a) provide context and purpose to formal learning, (b)
provide students opportunity and access to data science professionals, and (c)
extend STEM content learning environments and student engagement. Participants
knowledge development and attitude formation will be evaluated through direct
measures of knowledge as well as qualitative methods. The findings from the
assessment of this workshop will be developed into a mini-workbook and external-
facing resource portal that will be shared broadly through the SWPA website and
the American Psychological Association's educational directorates. The mini-
workbook will also be shared with other psychological regional organizations and
APA leadership to develop similar workshops and training for annual meetings and
national conferences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.