* 2229523
* Tuning intercellular cues to regulate paracrine secretion for enhanced neovascularization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 565,222.00

A major challenge to creating functional tissue and organ grafts is generating
functional blood vessels. This is a process called vascularization. Mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) direct the repair of skeletal tissue in the body and secrete
many growth factors that might promote vascularization. The overall goal of this
project is to engineer MSC cultures to secrete these factors. The project team
has preliminary data indicating that cell-to-cell adhesion increases that
secretion. The mechanism of that enhancement will be investigated to develop
design rules for vascularizing engineered or damaged tissues. The project will
also deliver hands-on opportunities to K-12 women and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore intercellular adhesion as
a design parameter for promoting blood vessel formation in engineered or damaged
tissues. Intercellular adhesion, and the adhesion protein, neural cadherin
(N-cadherin), appear to regulate the secretion of factors that promote such
formation. Studies will quantify links between MSC secretion profiles,
N-cadherin inputs, and the underlying N-cadherin-mediated, mechano-transduction
and biochemical signaling. The objective is to establish quantitative links
between intercellular adhesion, force transduction, biochemical signaling, and
paracrine secretion profiles. If successful, the results would address a major
roadblock towards the engineered assembly of functional, three-dimensional
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.