* 2229703
* POSE: Phase I:  Scoping An Open-Source Ecosystem Around Proactive Software Supply Chain Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Santiago Torres-Arias, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Industry,
government, and academia rely on a supply chain of open-source software
components. Recently, hackers have identified that, in order to hack their
targets, they can "poison the water stream" to effectively affect all consumers
of software at once. Problems with these sorts of attacks have caused site- and
Internet-wide disruption at an estimated cost of billions of dollars. From major
attacks like XCodeGhost to Solarwinds, software supply chain attacks have seen
increasing trends in damage, sophistication, and frequency. Existing approaches
to open-source development face challenges in achieving widespread adoption,
mostly due to the complicated nature of securing the open source supply chain
--- a highly interconnected network of actors with different socio-technical
motivations. This project tackles the challenge of developing and sustaining a
community to provide usable security. The project's novelties are in recognizing
and building a broader solution that can secure not only cloud systems, but
emerging applications such as as Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things
(IoT) as well as mission critical applications such as the powergrid. If
successful, the project's impacts will protect millions of software
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an open source
ecosystem that sustainably grows to include further users and achieves
meaningful protection against software supply chain attacks, protecting against
as many vectors as possible. This project is divided in two tasks. First, it
engages with stakeholders and end-users of emerging applications. Second, it
builds a sustainability plan to attract and maintain new members in the
community. This ecosystem has the potential to transform the robustness and
security of software built in the United States and
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.