* 2229418
* POSE: Phase I: Advancement of an open-source hardware and software ecosystem for the Open Source Bionic Leg
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Elliott Rouse, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by the Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE)
Program which seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the
creation of new technology solutions to problems of national and societal
importance. The objective of this project is to develop an ecosystem for the
Open-Source Bionic Leg system, which gives researchers access to a fully capable
and standardized hardware platform. The intent of the Open-Source Leg is to
lower the barrier to studying the challenges of controlling robotic prosthetic
legs. The Open-Source Leg system enables researchers to more easily study and
compare different control strategies without the prohibitive cost of developing
a robotic leg from scratch. The overarching goal of this work is to accelerate
the impact of the Open-Source Leg through the development of open-access
materials and community interaction. The project's novelties are the purpose-
built development of robotic leg hardware, software, and open-source tools
designed for broad, open access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further the ecosystem
for the Open-Source Leg, the aims of this project are threefold: 1) discover the
appropriate ecosystem and deployment mechanisms through interaction with
existing and future users; 2) build and refine the open-source infrastructure
and governance tools through discussions with other open-source ecosystems,
especially organizations that manage open-source hardware; and 3) disseminate
information about the Open-Source Leg project and its use through conferences
and web-based media. The work may impact the lives of those with disabilities
through the advancement of next-generation robotic leg
prostheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.