* 2229983
* Microelectronics and Nanomanufacturing Partnership for Veterans
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Richard Vaughn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,279,495.00

The United States (U.S.) has been experiencing a semiconductor chip shortage due
in part to the pandemic. This shortage has impacted businesses and industry,
including automotive, consumer electronics, data science, and cybersecurity to
name a few. Efforts are underway to support semiconductor and microelectronics
technologies in the U.S., which will require a prepared and diverse skilled
technical workforce to support these critical economic engines. A strong
nanomanufacturing workforce will enable the U.S. to be competitive in the global
economy and will support the U.S. leadership in microelectronics and
semiconductor technologies. This project led by the Center for Nanotechnology
Education and Utilization at Pennsylvania State University will support members
of the U.S. military, veterans, and family members to gain the knowledge,
skills, and abilities (KSAs) to move into the semiconductor and microelectronics
workforce. Many of these individuals have relevant experience with military
technology as members of teams responsible for building mechanical, electrical
and communication systems. Veterans without direct military technology
experiences also have skills such as teamwork and project management skills that
industry recognizes as needed skills within their workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide educational opportunities for
military personnel, veterans, and family members to gain the KSAs needed to
enter the nanomanufacturing workforce. Members of the collaborative include 2-yr
and 4-yr institutions, microelectronics companies, and the Global SEMI Trade
Association. The project will leverage a successful pilot that involved the U.S.
Navy, Tidewater Community College and Norfolk State University, which will be
adapted and scaled to involve additional academic institutions and branches of
the military. The project will: (1) adapt and implement the content of the pilot
and offer a Microelectronics and Nanomanufacturing Certificate Program (MNP)
supported by community and technical colleges and universities, (2) continually
assess and adjust the content in consultation with industry for skillset needs,
(3) work to secure the endorsement of the MNP by departments of veteran services
for different military branches, and (4) elevate the role of community and
technical college faculty in the delivery of the MNP minimizing the dependence
on the research universities. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.