* 2229759
* RII Track-4: NSF: Source fingerprinting of mercury isotopes in thermokarst lake systems
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Benjamin Barst, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 137,135.00

Permafrost soils, which are present across a large portion of the Northern
Hemisphere, are a vast reservoir for mercury. It remains unclear to what extent
permafrost-derived mercury is available for uptake into organisms and food webs.
Accordingly, this research will provide funding for a two-year fellowship to
increase the research capacity of a non-tenure track Research Assistant
Professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) through visits, training,
and collaboration at the United States Geological Survey Mercury Research
Laboratory (USGS MRL). This research will investigate the fate of mercury in
lake systems along a permafrost gradient through the measurement of natural
abundance isotope ratios of mercury in environmental samples. The USGS MRLâ€™s
research group is internationally recognized and maintains a state-of-the-
science laboratory equipped with dedicated instrumentation for high accuracy and
precision measurements of mercury isotope ratios. The lead researcher will
participate in extended visits to learn appropriate sampling techniques and
collaborate with USGS scientists to analyze environmental samples collected from
the northern lake systems. The skills gained during the collaborative visits
will benefit UAF and the State of Alaska as they tackle the complex problems
associated with climate change. Additionally, the research will fill knowledge
gaps related to the fate of mercury released from
permafrost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship
to a Research Assistant Professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. This
work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at the United States
Geological Survey Mercury Research Laboratory (USGS MRL) in Madison, Wisconsin.
Recent estimates indicate that permafrost soils are a significant reservoir of
mercury, which is vulnerable to release due to climate change. Thermokarst lakes
degrade permafrost rapidly and thus, thermokarst lakes may be particularly
important in mobilizing mercury from permafrost stores. The environmental fate
of mercury in these systems remains a major knowledge gap. The measurement of
natural abundance mercury isotope ratios, which is at the forefront of current
mercury research, is a powerful tool for mercury source identification and can
provide additional understanding of mercury biogeochemical cycling. To date,
most mercury isotope studies have been carried out in lower latitude systems.
Thus, there is limited information characterizing the isotopic endmember of
permafrost mercury, which would be of great benefit to researchers as they
attempt to determine the fate of this potentially important source of mercury to
Arctic food webs. The lead researcher will make extended visits to the USGS MRL,
where he will make use of state-of-the science instrumentation and learn the
appropriate environmental sampling, analytical, and interpretation skills
related to mercury isotope analyses. While at the USGS MRL, the lead researcher
will also work collaboratively with USGS experts to analyze natural abundance
isotope ratios of mercury in samples of air, water, sediment, permafrost soil,
and emergent insects collected from thermokarst lakes spanning a latitudinal and
thaw gradient. By means of these analyses, the research team will identify to
what extent permafrost mercury is entering contemporary thermokarst lake food
webs. Results of this research will be communicated broadly. The lead researcher
will make visits to an Alaska Native community to discuss environmental mercury
research and will disseminate project results in conference presentations and
peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.