* 2229631
* POSE: Phase I:  An open-source ecosystem for massive online experiments and citizen science
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,162.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Behavioral
research has historically and almost exclusively taken place in small
laboratories with small numbers of participants. In the era of "big data,"
scientists have realized that huge numbers of volunteer "citizen scientists" can
conduct studies anywhere around the world using their own smartphones,
wearables, and computers. Data collected from one such large study can answer
questions that would normally need hundreds or thousands of small laboratory
experiments. This project's impact will be to facilitate and democratize large-
scale behavioral research by planning a community of professional and amateur
researchers who use and build upon an open-source software platform used for
designing and running such studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has three
components. First, the project seek to conduct ecosystem discovery to identify
the needs of potential users, scope potential partnerships with other open-
source projects, and find potential collaborators at non-profits and in
industry. Second, the organization and governance activities will be established
a formal governing structure and implemented using Open Source Security
Foundation (OpenSSF) Best Practices, including enhanced automated testing,
continuous integration, and robust security measures. Finally, community
building activities will support existing users and contributors and onboard new
collaborators through a series of workshops, hackathons, online tutorials, and
targeted lab exchanges. The project develops a long-term plan for growing and
sustaining the open-source ecosystem within a well-governed and well-managed
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.