* 2229869
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Biogeochemical Flushing of Uranium in Groundwater
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Charles Paradis, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2025
* USD 349,999.00

Approximately 115 million people in the United States use groundwater as source
of drinking water. Many groundwater aquifers are contaminated with uranium from
both natural and anthropogenic sources. Prior to its usage as source of drinking
water, uranium contaminated groundwater needs to be treated to achieve a target
concentration below the EPA MCL (Maximum Concentration Limit) of 30 micrograms
per liter (Âµg/L). In-situ immobilization is currently the leading remediation
technology for uranium-contaminated aquifers. This approach relies on the
manipulation of the redox biogeochemistry of uranium to reduce and convert
mobile uranyl [U(VI)] ions to the mineral uraninite (UO2) which is generally
considered immobile in uranium-contaminated aquifers. However, uraninite is
highly susceptible to re-oxidation and re-mobilization by oxidants such as
oxygen, thus limiting the efficacy of in-situ immobilization as a remediation
technology. The goal of this project is to investigate the enhanced
biogeochemical mobilization and flushing of uranium from contaminated aquifers
as an alternative remediation technology. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) propose to carry out an integrated research program with
field, laboratory, and modeling studies to characterize and unravel the
biogeochemical reactions and microbial processes that control uranium
mobilization in contaminated aquifers. The successful completion of this
research will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental
knowledge, data and validated models to advance the design and implementation of
more efficient and cost-effective remediation technologies for uranium
contaminated aquifers. Additional benefits to society will be accomplished
through education and outreach including the mentoring of one graduate student
and one post-doctoral scholar at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and one
graduate student at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remediation of uranium-contaminated aquifers
has been largely focused on immobilizing uranium by stimulating the abiotic and
biotic processes and reactions that control the reduction and conversion of
soluble and mobile uranyl [U(VI)] ions to stable and immobile uraninite
minerals. However, in situ immobilization has limited effectiveness and the
estimated times to naturally flush uranium to below the EPA MCL often exceed
hundreds of years. The overarching goal of this research is to understand how to
better tune and manipulate the biogeochemical processes and reactions that
control the mobility of uranium in contaminated aquifers with the aim of
enhancing uranium mobilization and flushing from these aquifers through the
injection of oxygen and bicarbonate enriched surface water. The specific
objectives of the research are to: 1) Characterize and unravel the
biogeochemical mechanisms of uranium mobilization using geochemical modeling and
available thermodynamic and kinetic reaction data, 2) Conduct laboratory
experiments to investigate the effect of microbial activity on the mobility of
uranium under oxygen- and carbonate-rich conditions, and 3) Determine flow and
reactive transport parameters to support the implementation and validation of a
uranium transport/mobilization model using finite difference numerical modeling
and available uranium mobilization data from single-well tracer experiments. The
successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of fundamental knowledge and modeling tools to
advance the design and implementation of in-situ enhanced mobilization and
flushing as an alternative remediation technology for uranium contaminated
aquifers. To implement the educational and outreach goals of this project, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to integrate the findings from this
research into an existing course at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In
addition, the PIs plan to leverage existing programs at their respective
institutions to design and build an exhibition panel on metal contamination in
groundwater and aquifers in Wisconsin that will be displayed at the Northern
Great Lakes Visitor Center for viewing by Summer 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.