* 2229452
* NSF I-Corps Hub (Track 2): Great Plains Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Alan Kallmeyer, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps Hubs: Great Plains
Region project is the development of a regional network of university-based
inventors and entrepreneurs within the framework of rural America to accelerate
the translation of federally funded research into technology solutions that
benefit society, enhance commercialization, and create economic growth. The
Great Plains Region presents an opportunity to utilize I-Corps best practices to
jumpstart the regionâ€™s entrepreneurial ecosystem by implementing structured and
formal systems among the geographically dispersed Hub institutions to increase
the flow of information and opportunities. Deep technology researchers from
across Hub member institutions will be recruited to explore commercial
opportunities based on their scientific discoveries and identify potential
pathways to market. The Hub will initially go through a readiness phase to
acquire the knowledge to succeed operationally in providing regional I-Corps
training to Hub members and others in the Great Plains community. In addition, a
foundation will be laid to connect teams and projects to the people,
organizations, and resources needed to complete the development and scale the
impact of the discoveries. The Hub also will prioritize broadening participation
including partnering with Tribal Colleges and Universities. Underrepresented
groups and underserved minorities, including Native Americans, will be recruited
and offered enriching programming for professional development and community
building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is based on the
development of a curriculum that integrates scientific inquiry and industrial
discovery in an inclusive, data-driven culture powered by rigor, relevance, and
evidence. This Hub project will prepare and build a culture and infrastructure
for this curriculum that has most often been implemented in urban tech
ecosystems. Implementation of I-Corps in the Great Plains will seek to identify
specific factors that make I-Corps training in the region unique, which may lead
to beneficial and generalizable insights that could benefit the almost 20% of US
citizens that live in rural settings, most of which are agriculturally based.
Fostering innovation in the agricultural and agriculture technology sectors
within the Great Plains Region may become even more important as global events
threaten the food supply. Anticipated outcomes of I-Corps training include the
development of an entrepreneurial mindset in the scientists and engineers who
participate, leading them to better focus their research directions using
economic drivers. The initial eight partner universities who together form this
I-Corps Hub, will increase regional connections and the sharing of challenges
and success stories, as well as regional development and economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.