* 2229342
* REU Site: SURFing the Interface between Chemistry and Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Katrin Karbstein, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 279,927.00

This REU Site award to The Scripps Research Institute is supported by the
Department of Defense ASSURE program thru a partnership with the NSF REU
program. The REU is located in Jupiter, Florida, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is designed, conducted, and presented, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences, and/or through
community outreach and social media. Assessment of the program will be done
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mirroring the
highly interdisciplinary nature of Scripps’ faculty research, the program at the
Scripps Research Institute Florida is an experience at the interface between
chemistry and biology. Projects include aging studies in Drosophila, the study
of ribosome assembly in yeast, the molecular basis for memory formation, and
many others. A strong chemistry program allows for tool development to probe key
biological processes such as glycan-mediated protein quality control, RNA
transport to the dendrite, or the molecular basis for human diseases. Students
will carry out their own research projects under the mentorship of experienced
lab personnel and the supervision of world experts in their field. In addition
to this hands-on experience of cutting-edge research, students participate in a
weekly seminar series to broaden their perspectives on diverse scientific
fields, as well as a workshop series to prepare them for graduate school
(applications). Student satisfaction and learning outcomes will be assessed
using online questionnaires, individual meetings with the PI and coordinator,
and via mentor surveys. Applications are accepted online at
https://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/summer-research/reu-programs/ and
due by 2/15 of each year. Student selection is based on transcripts, statements
of purpose and letters of recommendation, and takes into consideration a
student’s future potential for scientific research, as well as her/his interest
in our program. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/summer-research/reu-programs/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Katrin Karbstein at kkarbst@scripps.edu) or the program
coordinator (Dr. Rosie Albarran-Zeckler at
rzeckler@scripps.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.