* 2229784
* RII Track-4:NSF: Programmed Material Transport Properties via Scalable Assembly Processes
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Tyler Ray, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 237,916.00

A tremendous need exists for battery technology with enhanced storage capacity.
Addressing this need requires new advances in battery fabrication strategies,
such as scalable methods for creating silicon nanoparticle electrodes. The
consequence would result in a broad, transformative impact across all aspects of
modern life such as increasing the range of electric cars, providing more
effective storage for distributed power systems, and yielding compact medical
devices. Toward this vision, the aim of this fellowship project is to elucidate
an advanced fabrication pathway capable of programmatic control of material
microstructures across multiple length scales. The goals of this fellowship are
to (1) strengthen the PI’s additive manufacturing research program with
intensive training on the synthesis and multi-scale characterization of
inorganic functional materials at the University of California, Santa Barbara;
(2) bring long-term sustained improvements to the research and education
capacity of the University of Hawaiʻi in materials science and advanced
manufacturing; and (3) establish long-term collaborations and training
opportunities between University of Hawaiʻi and University of California, Santa
Barbara, including with the NSF-supported Materials Research Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant Professor and training for graduate student at the University of
Hawaii (UH). This project advances the additive manufacture of composite
materials with programmed material properties by seeking to establish the
scientific foundation needed to balance time scales and length scales in
hierarchical methods that combine self-assembly and field-assisted aggregation.
The proposed research contributes to the state of knowledge regarding: (1)
control of microstructure properties across length scales, (2) top-down design
of material transport properties, (3) resultant hypothesized improvement in
material performance, and (4) methodology to implement this programmatic control
in a scalable manner. As many of the underlying scaling relationships will
translate to other types of external fields, the outcome of this project will
enable the assembly of composite materials with programmed transport properties.
The research objectives are to (1) establish a framework for the hierarchical
assembly of battery materials using acoustic fields and (2) elucidate the
structure-property relationships of nanoparticle networks in materials
fabricated by field-assisted colloidal assembly. The training and synergistic
objectives are to establish a sustainable, long-term research collaboration,
develop a new undergraduate course on additive manufacturing for University of
Hawaiʻi, initiate new collaborations with University of California, Santa
Barbara, and establish a mutual student exchange program with the MRL. The
project impact will be sustained through joint publications, collaborative
proposals, student co-advising, and collaborations between institutes at
University of California, Santa Barbara and University of
Hawaiʻi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.