* 2229873
* AI Institute for Transforming Education for Children with Speech and Language Processing Challenges
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Venugopal Govindaraju, SUNY at Buffalo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Fengfeng Ke
* 12/31/2027
* USD 10,000,000.00

It is estimated that more than 3.4 million children need speech and language
related services in the US school system, yet there are less than sixty-one
thousand speech-language pathologists (SLPs) to serve them. The COVID-19
pandemic has further exacerbated this gap, making it almost impossible for SLPs
to provide individualized services for children. The AI Institute for
Transforming Education for Children with Speech and Language Processing
Challenges aims to close this gap by developing advanced AI technologies to
scale SLPs' availability and services such that no child in need of speech and
language services is left behind. Towards this end, the Institute proposes to
develop two novel AI solutions: (1) the AI Screener to enable universal early
screening for all children, and (2) the AI Orchestrator to work with SLPs to
provide individualized interventions for children with their formal
Individualized Educational Plan (IEP). In developing these solutions, the
Institute will advance foundational AI technologies, enhance understanding of
children's speech and language development, serve as a nexus point for special
education stakeholders, and represent a fundamental paradigm shift in how SLPs
serve children in need of ability based speech and language
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AI Screener will be initially deployed in
early childhood classrooms and will analyze video and audio streams of
children's classroom interactions, derive conventional speech and language
measures used by SLPs, and assess novel and hard to obtain automaticity
measures. The AI Orchestrator is a superset of the AI Screener with its main
application in the public school classrooms. It will help SLPs to administer a
wide range of evidence-based interventions and assess their effects on meeting
children's individual IEP learning targets. At the core of the Orchestrator is a
robust multi-agent reinforcement learning framework that can evaluate the
potential benefits of different intervention practices and recommend those most
appropriate for each child. Both solutions will push significant advances in
self-supervised learning to address sparse and noisy data issues, multimodality
perception, learning material rewriting and enrichment, and edge AI for real
time processing. The Institute will develop human centered AI design
methodologies to embody the solutions in a form appropriate for children’s
learning. Education research and the learning sciences will inform the initial
prototyping and validation, and will derive valuable insights from the field
deployed solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Center for Special
Education Research at the Institute of Education Sciences of the US Department
of Education is partnering with NSF to provide funding for the
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.