* 2229666
* RII Track-4: NSF: Enabling Aberration-free Transcranial Photoacoustic Computed Tomography for Human Brain Imaging
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Jiaze He, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 231,682.00

Photoacoustic computed tomography (PACT) is an emerging computational imaging
modality that exploits optical contrast and acoustic detection principles to
form high-accuracy images of human/animal tissue. However, transcranial brain
imaging (TBI) is still challenging for PACT because of a strong skull-induced
ultrasonic wave distortion (i.e., aberration), which leads to significant
reconstruction artifacts. In this project, the PI and a graduate student will
work with experts at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign to develop a
computational mathematical framework based on a highly accurate modeling tool
and high-performance computing (HPC) that enables an aberration-free PACT for
TBI. Both the scientific knowledge of the framework’s stability and the
fundamental PACT theory will be advanced. These advancements will result in
improved medical outcomes, reduced risks, higher patient satisfaction, and
reduced healthcare costs. To improve the research infrastructures in Alabama,
the PI will actively recruit and mentor undergraduate and graduate students with
diverse backgrounds (e.g., women, African Americans, and other minorities) to
participate in this research, reach out to K-12 educators and students to create
student interest in STEM fields, incorporate the findings into class modules,
and disseminate the technology and findings to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4
EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a Fellowship to an
Assistant Professor and training for a graduate student at University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa. This project will advance the state-of-the-art in transcranial PACT.
By deriving the mathematical expressions using the adjoint state method, the
team will create a novel joint reconstruction framework that simultaneously
inverts the initial pressure distribution and the parameterized, coupled
fluid/solid sound of speed images for TBI. The project will also create a
computational JR framework based on a spectral element method (SEM) and the
associated HPC-enabled software to enable aberration-free transcranial PACT. The
high-order shape functions of SEM accurately represent the complex topology of
human body parts (e.g, skull bones) and are expected to significantly reduce the
aberration effects. Scientific knowledge will be generated on the aberration-
reduction effects that SEM can bring. The mathematical analysis will be
performed for the JR instability problem, and improved mitigation strategies
will be created as well. The project outcomes will address barriers to applying
PACT for TBI, fill the void of lacking PACT research in Alabama, and improve
Alabama's competitiveness in Biosciences/Biotechnology, which is one of the Key
Alabama EPSCoR research priority areas. Alabama will gain the capabilities and
competitive advantages for a variety of PACT-related fields such as brain
imaging, musculoskeletal imaging, and nondestructive evaluation. The resulting
cyberinfrastructure will enable Alabama to be ready for a wide range of
computational and data-enabled research topics. The clinical translation
potential and significant patient outcome improvements will allow the team to
cultivate industrial relationships through other external grants to stimulate
Alabama’s entrepreneurship, research infrastructure, and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.