* 2229308
* Transcriptomics Profiling of Vertebral Fusion in Evolution and Development
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Dana Rashid, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 107,567.00

During normal maturation of the spine, vertebrae fuse together to form the
sacrum in the pelvic girdle. In birds, spine fusion is more extensive, with
approximately half of the vertebrae are fused into compound bony structures.
Increased fusion in birds arose during evolution as an adaptation for flight.
The biological mechanisms responsible for normal vertebral fusion are largely
unknown. However, using the chicken as a model organism, the PI made the
surprising discovery that sterile inflammation drives fusion in the tail.
Inflammation is generally a response to disease or trauma, but here the PI
uncovered a novel role for sterile inflammation in normal bone development. The
PI inhibited inflammation with corticosteroids, and found that this treatment
inhibits tail fusion, demonstrating a previously unknown effect of
corticosteroids on spine maturation. The implications for these findings are
vast, not just for avian evolution but for axial development across vertebrates,
and for the possible side effects of corticosteroid treatment in humans. For
this project, the PI will determine whether inflammation is a common driver of
normal vertebral fusion, or whether multiple mechanisms have evolved for this
process. Additionally, as part of a long-standing collaboration, the PI will
link the genomics capabilities of Montana State University and Clemson
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4:NSF) project would provide a
fellowship to an Assistant Research Professor at Montana State University (MSU).
This work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at Clemson
University. The goals of this proposal are to receive transcriptomics training,
to test the hypothesis that sterile inflammation is a universal driver of
vertebral fusion, and to promote Clemson University’s genomics facility to
Montana State University researchers. The PI will compare the transcriptional
profiles of fusing chicken synsacrum intervertebral disc tissues to caudal non-
fusing tissue by whole transcriptome RNAseq. Specifically, the PI will
investigate the potential contributions of nucleus pulposus disc structures and
inflammatory response to fusion in different axial regions of the chicken. These
data will assess if ankylosis occurs via common or independent mechanisms, and
will lend insight into avian axial evolution. Clemson University is ideal for
these studies not only for its genomics facility, but also for its poultry farm,
one of the few research poultry centers in academia. Training will include RNA
extraction methods and bioinformatics analysis, including GO and KEGG profiling.
The expertise gleaned from this collaboration will be applied to an RNAseq
instructional module that will be built for MSU researchers to utilize Clemson’s
genomics facility. MSU currently offers microarray, but not RNAseq services.
These proposed studies will allow the PI to resolve vertebral fusion
mechanism(s) in birds and ultimately expand the PI’s investigations to normal
and pathological fusion in a variety of vertebrates, including mammalian disease
models. Undergraduate mentorship and public education of science are deeply
rooted in this project. The PI will continue to train existing students, recruit
additional undergraduates, and pursue multiple and varied outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.