* 2229651
* RII Track-4:NSF: Unravelling Gating Mechanisms of Ion Channels Using  Computational  and Experimental Ultrafast  Vibrational Spectroscopy
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Alexei Kananenka, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 193,620.00

K+ channels are membrane proteins that facilitate the transport of K+ ions
across the cell membranes. They play key roles in nerve and muscle relaxation,
cognition, and regulation of blood pressure. While K+ channels have been
extensively studied over many years, the mechanism of activation of ion channels
remains a topic of ongoing debate that has not been possible to solve with
established experimental methods. Two-dimensional infrared (2D IR) spectroscopy
is an emerging analytical technique that probes structural changes of proteins
with chemical bond specific spatial and high temporal resolution. Recent
technological advances permit applications of 2D IR spectroscopy to ion channels
under physiologically realistic conditions. This project combines molecular
dynamics simulations with computational spectroscopy to study activation
mechanisms of K+ channels. Simulations will be validated by 2D IR experiments
and, in turn, will be used to design new experiments that can provide most clear
insight into activation mechanisms of K+ channels. The proposed work will derive
the atomistic-level description of function of K+ channels. Understanding the
mechanisms underlying K+ channels functioning is a key factor in determining the
cause of severe diseases such as cardiac arrhythmias and epilepsies. It offers
the prospect of designing therapies for ion channel pharmacology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant Professor at the University of Delaware (UD). Voltage-gated K+
channels (Kv) are integral membrane proteins that selectively conduct K+ ions
across cell membranes according to the electrochemical gradient. The voltage-
sensing domain (VSD) of Kv senses changes in the membrane electrical potential
and triggers a conformational change resulting in the opening and closing of the
channel. Despite a wealth of NMR and X-ray crystallography data, many
fundamental questions regarding the function of the VSD remain open. It has been
hypothesized that the S4 helical segment of the VSD undergoes a conformational
and/or hydrational change during voltage-gating, but this hypothesis has never
been tested by a direct structural measurement because most biophysical
structural techniques cannot be performed under applied voltage. 2D IR
spectroscopy can probe protein structures with site-specific resolution and
under physiological conditions including applied voltage. It can also probe the
gating dynamics of the VSD occurring on the millisecond timescale. Recently the
sensitivity of 2D IR spectroscopy has been significantly increased, making it
uniquely suitable to study ion channels. The proposed work will combine
molecular dynamics simulations with computational 2D IR spectroscopy to
elucidate the conformational and hydrational changes of the VSD during voltage
activation. The existing structural models of the VSD will be simulated and
tested against 2D IR experiments. Based on the comparison with experiments, the
models will be refined, or new models will be developed. Simulations will also
be utilized to design new 2D IR experiments. We aim to determine the relevant
conformations of the VSD and the order they occur during voltage
activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.