* 2229306
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: New Methods for Learning on Hypergraphs for Single-Cell Chromatin Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Albert Cheng, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 261,201.00

In higher-order organisms, long DNA strands are tightly packed in the cell
nucleus to accommodate spatial constraints. As different parts of the DNA
structure are continuously accessed and operated on by a machinery of functional
molecules, the packing is highly dynamic and carefully controlled. During the
process of coiling and uncoiling of the DNA and supporting protein structures,
important physical interactions between different genomic regions take place.
These so-called chromatin interactions regulate cellular functions and aid in
responding to external biological signals. Capturing evolving multiway chromatin
interaction patterns is therefore of crucial importance for understanding
genetic regulatory mechanisms and genomic network modules. This project aims to
advance platforms for measuring single-cell chromatin interactions and develop
accompanying machine learning algorithms that enable efficient information
extraction from the acquired data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
machine learning questions to be addressed include denoising and imputing
multiway chromatin measurements, extracting dynamic chromatin community
signatures via new hypergraph clustering methods and determining local and long-
range interactions patterns through appropriate generalizations of PageRank
methods. Furthermore, special attention will be placed on interpreting the
findings within different biological contexts. To maximize the utility of the
new algorithmic schemes, all relevant implementations supporting single-cell
chromatin interaction data mining and analysis will be made readily available to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.