* 2229070
* FMRG: Bio: CAS: Distributed methane conversion into value chemicals via synthetic microbial consortia
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Hans Riedel-Kruse, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2026
* USD 3,170,876.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that is 25 times more damaging per molecule
than carbon dioxide (CO2). Around the globe there are many methane sources of
human and natural origin. Thus, there is a significant opportunity for
technologies that capture and convert methane on-site into ‘higher-value’
chemicals. The goal of this project is to engineer new bioreactors that can
efficiently convert methane into value chemicals. The project team will engineer
enzymes inside microbes than can execute complex chemical reactions. The
engineered microbes will be used to create structured biofilms inside of
reactors to run chemical reactions at a large scale. These bioreactors will then
be tested at relevant field sites, such as a wastewater treatment facility. The
interdisciplinary team working on this project combines experts from synthetic
biology, chemical engineering bioreactor design, social sciences, and potential
future users to implement the new technology. The team will also study how this
technology can be disseminated in a socially and environmentally responsible
manner. This project includes a significant outreach component, with a
particular focus on engaging underrepresented groups in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics). The team will work with science
teachers and their students to develop and disseminate novel educational
activities that enable students to learn about
microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging anaerobic, methane-oxidizing,
microbiological systems hold promise for achieving on-site methane conversion
more efficiently and more economically than existing chemical plants or aerobic
bioreactors. The main project goal is to lay the foundation for modular, easily
scalable, and distributable, anaerobic, and anaerobic/aerobic bioreactor systems
that convert methane into higher-value chemicals utilizing synthetic microbial
consortia. This project will have a significant impact on the future of
biomanufacturing by: (1) capturing and converting methane into valuable
chemicals in a more sustainable manner, (2) reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
(3) developing novel, spatially-structured synthetic microbial consortia to
execute these complex biosynthesis pathways, (4) designing bioreactors that
holistically integrate all aspects from the basic sciences to the socio-economic
benefits, and (5) developing biophysical models that enable rational reactor
design and optimization. Moreover, the team takes an integrated and wholistic
approach to systematically optimizing this technology at multiple levels,
ranging from protein engineering to field-site integration. Collaboration with
experts from bioreactor design to social scientists, and with potential future
users (e.g., wastewater treatment plants, indigenous communities), will ensure
project success and responsible dissemination of the results and technology. The
team integrates education and interdisciplinary training of teachers, high-
school and graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers at the interface of
molecular biology, microbiology, and chemical engineering, and our teacher
training will have multiplier effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems and the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation in the Directorate for Engineering, the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Office of
Multidisciplinary Affairs in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences, and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.