* 2229770
* RII Track-4: NSF: Gouge Mineral Strain Mapping under Shearing and Implications for EGS-Induced Seismicity
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Long Fan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 220,031.00

The frequency of induced earthquakes has increased dramatically over the past
few years globally due to massive fluid injection in enhanced geothermal systems
(EGS), where small perturbations may prematurely trigger earthquakes. Recent
observations associated with EGS and a purposely reactivated fault in a field
pilot experiment exhibit significantly larger magnitudes than predicted. The
increased likelihood of inducing large seismic events has jeopardized several
geothermal projects. However, there is not a clear understanding of these events
and the prevention and mitigation of EGS-induced seismic events are still a
concern. With the transmission of Alaska EGS from shallow hot springs to deep
borehole drilling, there is a pressing need to develop a better understanding of
the mechanism of triggering the seismicity with the influence of heat exchange
and fluids intrusion. This fellowship project will experimentally investigate
the property evolution of the fault gouge with thermal treatment to reveal the
triggering mechanism of ESG-related seismicity from a microscale perspective.
The project will build on the capacity of geohazards evaluation and EGS-related
geo-risk evaluation in Alaska through extended collaborations with institutions
in the lower forty-eight (48) states. These research resources acquired through
the fellowship project will be leveraged to develop new course and workshop
materials to provide women, minorities, and Alaska remote community students
with research experience and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4:NSF)
project would provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a
graduate student at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). The PI proposes to
develop a novel fault sliding test system in collaboration with experts from the
Center for Geomechanics, Geofluids, and Geohazards at the Pennsylvania State
University. It has been proved that the mineral lattice strain in the gouge
layer is critical for predicting the residual stress on the surface and its
failure status. Mineral strain variation with thermal treatment and fluid
intrusion within the fault gouge layer is critical for predicting localized
stability that initializes seismic events. However, direct evidence has not been
reported in the lab to identify and quantify the mineral strains due to the
hurdle and difficulties of direct measurement of mineral strains under in situ
conditions with a dynamic sliding process. The proposed test system enables the
unique capacity of using neutron diffraction to conduct mineral strain mapping
of the gouge layer with shear sliding. The stick-slip faulting test will be
conducted using the proposed test system with thermal treatment and fluid
intrusion. Combining neutron diffraction and nanoindentation techniques, the
properties of minerals in the gouge layer will be investigated from a microscale
perspective to reveal the triggering mechanism of ESG-related seismicity. The
proposed test system enables the investigation of the evolution of mineral
properties under shearing and its implications on seismic events with thermal
treatment and fluids intrusion. The outcome will provide a unique perspective
for evaluating the EGS-related geohazards and their prediction and
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.