* 2229430
* NSF I-Corps Hub (Track 1): Interior Northeast Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this NSF I-Corps Hub project is the
development of a regional network that offers a repeatable, inclusive model of
education and workforce training designed for and by innovators in rural areas
and small cities. The Interior Northeast Region is representative of large
portions of the US that are rural, economically underserved, and struggling to
reduce out-migration and restore economic vitality after the decline of
manufacturing and extractive industries. The region also is rich in natural
resources, open space, and strong research universities. The Interior Northeast
Region I-Corps Hub seeks to deploy inclusive teaching and program development
practices to support innovators outside major metro areas in a way that broadens
participation and represents a rising tide of opportunity from innovation across
all regions, rather than one that is concentrated in a few large cities. A
particular emphasis is placed on I-Corps programs for the deaf and hard of
hearing. The I-Corps Interior Northeast Hub institutions will create a “Hub of
Hubs” infrastructure to connect regional research laboratories and institutions
with a smaller science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research
footprint to I-Corps. The Hub proposes to recruit diverse instructors, mentors,
and staff so underrepresented minorities find opportunities at all levels of
I-Corps. Learnings from the deployment of programs to the deaf and hard of
hearing, recruitment of diverse instructors and teams, and support for the
growth of rural innovation communities will be disseminated throughout the
National Innovation Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hub project
provides inclusive I-Corps training, mentoring and support to STEM researchers
across the Interior Northeast Region, to accelerate the translation of basic
research discoveries to products and services that benefit society and to reduce
the risk of pursing commercialization without insights into industry needs and
challenges. In addition, the Hub proposes to provide a program infrastructure
that allows innovators outside major metro areas to receive the benefits of
learning the I-Corps method of customer discovery and applying it to
opportunities while remaining connected to their home institutions. Participants
will glean the benefits of being part of a diverse cohort of innovators in a
vibrant rural region. To achieve these goals, the Hub proposes to focus on: 1)
maximizing the reach and reputation of I-Corps with deep tech researchers by
engaging esteemed STEM faculty who value I-Corps as program ambassadors, thought
leaders and Hub advisors; 2) providing numerous learning opportunities that
support geographically-dispersed participants and are led by experienced
instructors who utilize inclusive teaching practices; and 3) supporting the
professional development of STEM researchers who are underrepresented minorities
(URMs) including women, veterans, people of color, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.