* 2229839
* The Role of Large Wood in Promoting Channel-Floodplain Connectivity for River Restoration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2026
* USD 402,876.00

River restoration has initially focused on channel morphology and subsequently
gradually expanded to include reconnection of channels and floodplains. Although
stream ecologists have recognized the critical ecological role of floodplains
for decades, and hydrological, geomorphic, and biogeochemical research now
increasingly emphasizes the importance of floodplains, floodplains do not
receive the legal protection of navigable water and have been extensively
altered throughout the US. Consequently, one of the issues now at the forefront
of river management and restoration is how to effectively re-connect altered
channels and floodplains. Reconnection requires multiple changes of differing
importance in specific settings. Large wood (LW) reintroduction or retention
falls within this scope, but guidelines have not been developed regarding how
much LW to reintroduce, in what configuration, and where. This research will
address an important gap in knowledge regarding the quantitative impacts of LW
jams on channel-floodplain hydrologic connectivity and how these impacts can
inform river restoration design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large wood can be a
dominant driver of channel and floodplain complexity. LW can alter the local
distribution of hydraulic forces, sediment dynamics, hyporheic exchange flows,
channel cross-sectional and planform geometry, and channel-floodplain
connectivity. These effects operate in a nonlinear fashion as accumulations of
LW in a logjam and in progressively larger and more closely spaced logjams
create emergent patterns in these response variables. However, thresholds can
not yet be predicted for the magnitude of change in response variables with
respect to LW quantity or spatial distribution. This is important in the context
of river restoration, which reintroduces LW in channels despite inability to
predict hydraulic, geomorphic, or ecological responses. This knowledge gap of
quantitatively predicting the physical effects of LW on channel-floodplain
hydrologic connectivity will be addressed by by (i) measuring LW and associated
connectivity in diverse field settings; (ii) assessing threshold responses in
connectivity due to river morphologic and LW characteristics; and (iii)
developing guidelines for representing LW characteristics and associated
hydraulic responses in numerical models. In this context, the project defines
channel-floodplain hydrologic connectivity as being present when flow overtops
the morphological channel banks and spreads onto the adjacent floodplain. The
project objectives are to: (1) collect data from natural channels on LW jam
characteristics and associated influences on channel-floodplain connectivity;
(2) use these data to develop guidelines for calibrating LW characteristics and
hydraulic responses in numerical hydraulic models; and (3) co-generate knowledge
and best practices with river restoration practitioners for long-term monitoring
of LW jam benefits. The project will integrate new knowledge of how LW jams
influence channel-floodplain interactions with ongoing and future investments in
river restoration projects, and planned activities are aimed to advance the
sustainability of river restoration design, promote restoration monitoring and
citizen-science learning to diverse stakeholders and restoration practitioners,
and improve STEM education focused on sustainable and resilient natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Environmental
Sustainability program in CBET/ENG and the Hydologic Sciences program in
EAR/GEO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.