* 2229755
* RII Track-4: NSF: Data-driven Computational and Machine Learning Assessment of Structure-Toxicity Relationship of Micro/NanoPlastics
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Bakhtiyor Rasulev, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 191,801.00

In this project, funded by the NSF EPSCoR Program, Professor B. Rasulev of the
Department of Coatings and Polymeric Materials at North Dakota State University
is investigating properties and toxicity of environmental contaminants, such as
microplastics and nanoplastics, by combination of experimental and computational
methods. The developed new methodology within this project will offer an
efficient and cost-effective prediction of microplastics and nanoplastics
properties to assess a possible environmental impact of these contaminants. An
interdisciplinary collaboration between the PI and host institution at Rutgers
University will put together state-of-the-art methods to reveal the main factors
responsible for the biodegradation and toxicity of microplastics and
nanoplastics in environment. The project aims to close the gap in understanding
mechanisms of the micro-nanoplastics degradation and toxicity mechanism. Based
on results of this research the scientific community will develop an
understanding in potential environmental impact of microplastics and various
cost-effective ways for their toxicity assessment. The project lies at the
interface of organic, materials chemistry, theoretical quantum chemistry,
cheminformatics and data mining approaches, and is therefore well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels. The involved PIs in this project are also
well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for STEM
students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving tribal
college students and K-12 students will also be part of the funded project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant Professor and training for a graduate student at North Dakota State
University (NDSU). The project is intended to investigate properties and
toxicity of microplastics and nanoplastics by combination of experimental and
computational methods that cover a complete integrated mechanistic study and
development cycle of these environmental contaminants. The research project will
result in (1) experimental characterization of a set of microplastic/nanoplastic
materials; (2) characterization of micro/nanoplastics by experimental and
computational data; (3) structure-property/toxicity analysis; and (4)
predictions and validation of structure-property models as a potential method
for property and toxicity assessment of various microplastic/nanoplastic
materials. A strong interdisciplinary collaboration between PI and host
institution at Rutgers University will put together state-of-the-art methods to
reveal the main factors responsible for the biodegradation and toxicity of
microplastics and nanoplastics in environment. All results from this multi-
disciplinary investigation which focuses on the fundamental molecular
mechanistic studies will be used as a foundation for the long-term collaboration
with host institution and the PI. The project aims to close the gap in
understanding mechanisms of the micro-nanoplastics degradation and toxicity
mechanism, reveal the factors facilitating microplastics degradation and develop
predictive models to assess the properties of various microplastic/nanoplastic
materials. The innovations of the project are two-fold: (1) Development of
machine learning structure-property/toxicity relationship models to understand
the physico-chemical properties, degradation and toxicity of investigated
polymeric systems; (2) The developed methodology will allow a preliminary
assessment of degradation and toxicity properties of new polymeric materials
before their mass production. The methodology will be transformative to be
applicable for structure-property relationship modeling of other important
properties of polymeric materials, for further rational
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.