* 2229881
* AI Institute for Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jeff Schneider, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2028
* USD 4,000,000.00

Decision making in domains such as a public health crisis or disaster response
has a significant societal and economic impact. These domains present critical
challenges for decision-making as they require complex, potentially life-saving,
decisions to be made under dynamic, uncertain and resource-constrained
scenarios, while accounting for factors that are key to acceptance of the
decisions, such as stakeholders' biases and perception of risk, trust, and
equity. AI advancements and data availability can complement human limitations
in navigating this complex decision space, however, current systems fail to
account for the stakeholders' mental states and behavior. The AI institute for
Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM) will target this opportunity at the confluence
of social decision sciences and AI by developing human-centric AI for decision-
making and inter-disciplinary training, to enable transformative solutions to
societal decision challenges. By bringing AI and social science researchers, AI-
SDM will enable emergency managers, public health officials, first responders,
community workers, and the public to make quick, data-driven, and resource-
efficient decisions, while also improving outcomes by accounting for human
factors governing acceptance. The vision of AI-SDM will be realized via
development of novel AI theory and methods, translational research, training,
and outreach, enabled by partnerships among diverse universities, government
organizations, corporate partners, community colleges, public libraries, and
high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute will establish the role of AI
in advancing and bridging human and autonomous decision-making, under the use-
inspired challenges of working in environments that are dynamic, uncertain,
resource constrained, and require societal acceptance arising in public health
crisis and disaster response. Specifically, the foundational research will
develop (1) computational representations of human decision processes, (2)
robust aggregation methods for collective decision-making, (3) multi-objective
autonomous decision support tools, and corresponding innovations in (4) causal
and counterfactual reasoning. These foundational foci are inspired by, and will
be applied to, equitable resource allocation to improve public health and
disaster outcomes, timely targeted interventions informed by human decision-
making to encourage adherence to policy recommendations, and adoption of AI
decision support by understanding how adoption can be modulated by different use
patterns. The research will be guided by theoretical advances in computational
cognitive science, social-choice theory, distribution-free statistics, game
theory, casual and counterfactual reasoning, and interactive and autonomous
machine learning. In addition to impacting use-case domains via a wide network
of partners, AI-SDM will develop the next generation of workforce trained on
human-centric AI and an AI-aware public via broader impact efforts including
professional development workshops for high school educators, enrichment and
leadership activities for under-represented students, inter-disciplinary degrees
and courses, curriculum co-design with community college and educational
partners, workforce training, and public engagement
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.