* 2229857
* 17th International Water Association World Conference on Anaerobic Digestion: Biogas and Beyond: Expanding Applications of Anaerobic Biotechnologies in a Circular Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Adam Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,975.00

The 17th International Water Association World Conference on Anaerobic Digestion
(AD17) will bring together a total of 500 researchers, water utility personnel,
and practitioners to share cutting-edge research and best practices from around
the world. The conference will be held at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
on June 17-22, 2022. Anaerobic digestion has emerged as a versatile
process/technology for converting many waste streams to useful byproducts
including nutrient-rich soil amendments and energy-rich biogas that can be
upgraded to renewable natural gas. Anaerobic digestion has also great potential
to contribute to the decarbonization of the chemical industry via the conversion
of agricultural and food wastes to high-value chemicals which can serve as
building blocks for the manufacturing of industrially relevant products. This
conference will highlight recent advances in the field of anaerobic
biotechnology with a focus on the production of useful products and resource
recovery to advance climate resilience and a circular economy. The conference
will also include a panel discussion on entrepreneurship and a plenary talk on
environmental advocacy. Information sharing during the conference will be
facilitated through oral and poster presentations as well as several networking
events. This NSF award will enable the conference organizers to cover the costs
of 200 student participants to attend the AD17 conference events. The AD17
conference will benefit society by providing many opportunities for the
participants to exchange ideas and build new partnerships to advance the
development and implementation of next-generation anaerobic biotechnologies for
climate resilience and resource recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AD17
conference will be organized around 11 discussion topics and sessions that span
subjects ranging from the microbial ecology of anaerobic biotechnologies to the
role that anaerobic digestion can play in advancing climate resilience and the
circular economy. An overarching goal of the AD17 conference is to create a
platform for knowledge sharing on these diverse topics. The conference will
feature three keynote presentations and sessions: “Role of Methane Emissions in
Global Warming and Contributions of Environmental Biotechnology to
Decarbonization,” “Advancing the Bioeconomy with Anaerobic Biotechnologies,” and
“Inspiring Anaerobic Biotechnologies through Microbiology Research”. The
conference will also feature seven workshops organized by research leaders and
practitioners including workshops on mainstream anaerobic treatment, modeling of
anaerobic processes, and Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WaSH). The opening
plenary and keynote sessions will be broadly advertised and open to the public.
Participation by consulting engineers and industry professionals will be
promoted by integrating their work in the program and by providing exhibitor
booths aimed at bridging the gap between fundamental research, knowledge
translation, and industrial applications. Through the sharing of ideas and best
practices and the creation of new partnerships, this conference will contribute
to the real-world advancement and implementation of anaerobic biotechnologies.
As a key deliverable for this NSF award, the Principal Investigators will
leverage the AD17 session discussions to lead the crafting of a perspective
article to highlight the conference outcomes and the important role of the
anaerobic biotechnology field in the bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.