* 2229772
* RII Track-4: NSF:  Advancing Resilient Microgrid Configurations Targeted to Rural and Island Communities
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Mohammad Heidari Kapourchali, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 100,876.00

Off-grid remote power systems, also known as microgrids, provide electricity to
rural Alaskans. Known as the microgrid frontier of the United States, Alaska has
over 200 remote-powered isolated villages spread across large areas with diverse
energy resources. Remote Alaskan communities are frequently subject to extreme
climate stress and require flexibility in how they generate and use energy. As a
result, microgrids need to be flexible and adaptable so they can dynamically
respond to changes. This project will provide an opportunity to advance
knowledge by (1) implementing realistic models of microgrid operation and
control under extreme conditions, and (2) enabling microgrid architectures that
can adapt to frequent changes in system operating conditions. A small
improvement in energy infrastructure could result in substantial financial
savings and increase social welfare in rural and island communities, where
electricity is vital to their health and well-being and susceptibility to power
outages due to natural disasters like wildfires and storms persists. Through
this project, University of Alaska’s (UAA's) institutional capacity for
microgrid operation and control will be enhanced, opportunities for
underrepresented and American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students will be
created, and research and training opportunities will be provided to the
electric industry workforce in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF EPSCoR
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project provides a fellowship to an Assistant professor and training
for a graduate student at the University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA). The primary
goal of this NSF EPSCoR RII Track 4 project is to advance microgrid modularity,
mobility, and reconfigurability features, evaluate their applicability to the
rural Alaska’s energy landscape, as well as develop strategies to improve the
reliability and flexibility of microgrids operating in harsh climates like the
Arctic. The project will provide Dr. Heidari Kapourchali at UAA with an
opportunity to incorporate advanced Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) techniques into
his research efforts related to microgrid operation and control in Alaska. This
fellowship will be accomplished through two collaborative visits in 2023 and
2024 to the Resilient Renewable Energy Grid Adaptation Laboratory (REGAL), at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech), where Dr.
Heidari Kapourchali will be provided access to microgrid testbeds, will be
exposed to primary and secondary controller models and necessary hardware to
perform hands-on Controller-Hardware-in-the-Loop (C-HIL) experiments, and will
gain knowledge on fast-response controls in microgrid operations. The envisioned
fellowship activities will remove significant obstacles in the path of deploying
flexible and resilient microgrids in the Arctic, thereby creating the potential
for Alaska communities to increase their reliance on renewable energy resources
at minimum costs. The project will expand UAA's research infrastructure by
acquiring new analytical and modeling skills and will push the boundaries of
flexible and adaptive microgrids in rural and island communities by providing
hands-on laboratory experience and content for a HIL-integrated Power
Electronics course at UAA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.