* 2229654
* POSE: Phase I:  OPERA: An Open-Source Ecosystem for Broadband Prairie
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ahmed Kamal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Rural broadband is important for the rural economy and quality of life, yet 39%
of the rural US lacks broadband access, and most agriculture farms are not
connected at all. To address the challenge, this project proposes to develop the
OPen-source Ecosystem for bRoadband prAirie (OPERA). OPERA will enable
researchers to transform their rural broadband research experiments into open-
source software, data, and hardware designs that can be integrated with open-
source platforms to generate rural-focused broadband solutions. The project is
expected to not only enable rural-focused broadband technology innovation today
but also empower rural regions to become active participants in continuous
broadband innovation in the long term. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the
Agriculture and Rural Communities (ARA) wireless living lab
(https://arawireless.org/), which is a part of the NSF Platforms for Advanced
Wireless Research (PAWR) program, OPERA will provide the organization and
governance structure as well as community building leadership in fostering the
open-source ecosystem (OSE) for broadband prairie. In particular, to generate
high-quality open-source software, data, and hardware-designs beyond typical
research experiment results, OPERA will complement ARA-enabled scientific
experimentation with open-source coaching as well as the OSE process,
infrastructure, and partnership support. To facilitate the integration of
research products into open-source platforms and their real-world adoption in
specific rural applications. OPERA will facilitate cross-sector collaborations
among researchers, open-source communities, and rural region stakeholders. These
collaborations will build upon the existing 62+ ARA partners from academia,
industry, government, and rural communities. Leveraging the complementary
strengths of broadband researchers, open-source developers, and rural
application communities, OPERA is poised to help unleash the full capacity of
the research and open-source communities in addressing the rural broadband
challenge. It provides the ecosystem support for individual researchers to make
direct real-world impact, and it empowers rural regions in co-shaping the
continuous broadband innovation. OPERA-enabled open-source coaching infuses
real-world open-source practice into research experimentation, and it
strengthens experiential learning by focusing on production-quality prototyping.
OPERA-enabled open-source innovation and cross-sector collaboration will help
attract underrepresented students in research, while providing unique learning
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
additional information about the project and its latest results, go to the
project website at https://wici.iastate.edu/opera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.