* 2229439
* SCC-PG: Trust Formation and Risk Communication in Underserved Communities during Compound Hazard Events through Online and Offline Social Networks (TRUCHE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Golnaz Habibi, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Responding to risk events involves interactions among diverse stakeholders (e.g.
government agencies, non-profit organizations, community residents). Such
interactions are typically unbalanced and inefficiently organized, which leads
to coordination failures and inefficient response. Community-based social
networks offer a critical resource during crisis response, whose capacity has
been significantly enhanced with the ubiquitous usage of social media and smart
devices. The challenge is to enable innovative, community-based coordination
mechanisms that allow sharing risk and information without undermining each
other. The project offers a community-wide risk assessment and protective action
decision-making framework that takes into account the risk sharing and trust
building tradeoffs in online (i.e. internet, social media) and offline (i.e.
face-to-face) social networks. The proposed project considers underserved tribal
communities in Oklahoma as a testbed for building conceptual and operational
frameworks to demonstrate how such networks can facilitate more effective and
scalable risk sharing to provide complementary pathways to resilience. This SCC-
PG will help public authorities and non-profit organizations communicate with
their target audience in a more effective and efficient way during one or more
hazard events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and actionable messages about
hazardous events are key to saving lives, minimizing adverse impacts in at-risk
communities, and creating more proactive and resilient communities. Community-
based social networks offer a critical resource during crisis response, however
the challenge is to enable innovative, community-based coordination mechanisms
that would allow more proactive sharing of risk information through online (i.e.
internet, social media) and offline (i.e. face-to-face) social networks. The
primary goal of this Smart and Connected Communities (SCC) Panning Grant (SCC-
PG) is to lay a foundation for a risk sharing network that will fundamentally
advance the understanding of how a system of diverse actors at different levels
of social system, embedded with smart and social media tools, collectively
generate community resilience. The project’s interdisciplinary team will
organize a series of activities to develop the foundation for a risk sharing
network for the underserved tribal communities in Oklahoma that will produce a
set of actionable insights and operations for promoting resilience. Specific
tasks include: (1) Building a comprehensive understanding of the interactive
features of community-based risk and information sharing processes with key
stakeholders’ engagement; and (2) Advancing coherent theoretical and
computational insights from several strands of scientific literature to develop
effective coordination mechanisms among diverse actors in a social system. The
project will generate transformative knowledge that will be instrumental in
responding to future crisis events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.