* 2229566
* SHINE: Structures in the Solar Corona and Solar Wind and Their Interaction With Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Chen Shi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 11/30/2025
* USD 598,184.00

The solar wind carries particles and magnetic fields throughout the heliosphere
and towards the Earth. It is important to understand structures and turbulence
in the solar corona, which produces the solar wind, in order to predict and
understand space weather. This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and
Interplanetary Environment (SHINE) goal of understanding the solar wind, through
research that combines remote-sensing observations, in-situ satellite
observations, and numerical simulations. The project supports an early-career
researcher and broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM and
includes public outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the inner heliosphere, especially the Sun-Earth interaction system, requires
analysis of the sources of the solar wind in the solar corona, emergent large-
scale solar wind structures like corotating interaction regions (CIRs) and the
heliospheric current sheet (HCS), and the small-scale solar wind fluctuations or
turbulence including the structure called magnetic switchbacks (SBs), treated as
an integrated system. The science focus of this project is to study the
interaction between large and meso-scale structures and turbulence in the solar
wind and understand the solar coronal origins of the structures and turbulence.
To this aim, the research will combine numerical simulations with long-term
multi-satellite observations and remote-sensing observations to address the
following two questions: 1. How do the properties of the corona such as the
distribution of coronal holes, streamers, and pseudostreamers lead to different
properties of the solar wind observed in-situ? 2. How do solar wind structures
like HCS, CIRs, and SBs modify the turbulence properties, such as the power
spectrum, Alfvenicity, energy transfer rate etc., during their radial
propagation? The 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulations combined with analysis of
conjugated in-situ satellite data collected at different locations in the
heliosphere will shed light on the physical mechanisms that determine how the
turbulence properties are modified by the solar wind structures. The work
utilizes a large volume of remote-sensing data to understand how the magnetic
and plasma structures on the Sun determines the properties of the structures and
turbulence in the solar wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.