* 2229111
* FMSG: Bio: Advancing Extracellular Vesicle Biomanufacturing of CRISPR-Edited Human iPSC-derived MSCs with Next-Generation Purification
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Thomas Gaborski, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) produced by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been
highlighted for their multifaceted therapeutic potentials. However, a great
challenge of practical applications of EV therapy is the low production of EVs
from therapeutic stem cells. To develop an advanced EV biomanufacturing process
to meet the clinical need, this project aims to enable scale-up production of
MSC-derived EVs by integrating human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) for
scalability in donor cell source, genome engineering for scalability in EV
biogenesis, and advanced nano-membrane technology for scalability in EV
purification. Furthermore, this project is designed to integrate research,
education, industry, and diversity with an emphasis on strengthening research
exposure to the students at multiple levels. It will be achieved by developing
new collaborative classes across two campuses, providing research opportunities
to graduate and undergraduate students, and leveraging existing programs at both
institutes for outreach activities. The close industrial collaboration will also
present industry internship opportunities to the graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project not only addresses the
scalable issues in donor stem cell sources for therapeutic EV biomanufacturing,
but also provides new insights to the field of EV biology and new solutions to
the bottleneck of EV purification. Herein, this research brings together an
interdisciplinary research team to (1) generate a stable hiPSC line with
synthetic boosters of EV biogenesis and bioactivity, (2) establish a serum-free
differentiation of perinatal tissue-like iMSCs as a potent EV factory, (3)
optimize chemical priming conditions to enhance cell metabolic activities for
boosting the EV production, and (4) introduce the nanopocket membrane technique
for scalable EV purification with improved throughput and yield, comparing to
the other standard techniques. Integration of hiPSC technology, genome
engineering and membrane nanofabrication offers great potential to produce
therapeutic EVs with high scalability, desired functions, and clinical relevance
for future advancement of EV biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.