* 2229613
* POSE: Phase I:  Open Source Ecosystem of Inclusive Interactive Media with PhET's MVC (Physics Education Technology's Model-View-Controller) Framework
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Emily Moore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,626.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Over the
past 10 years, the PhET (Physics Education Technology) Interactive Simulations
group at the University of Colorado Boulder has developed an open-source
codebase, the PhET Model-View-Controller (MVC) Framework. This codebase has been
used to create a suite of interactive simulations used around the world for
teaching and learning science and math topics. This project will examine the
potential for building an open-source ecosystem around the PhET MVC Framework.
The project’s novelties include an emphasis on the technical infrastructure and
design patterns supporting visual, auditory, and haptic displays with diverse
input modalities including traditional mouse and touch, alternative input, and
through computer vision, object tracking and naturalistic gesture. These
features can support users of interactive media created from the PhET MVC
Framework across a broad span of human diversity in sensory, mobility, and
cognitive abilities. This project will also serve as a critical catalyst,
enabling the discovery of specific user, contributor, and governance needs for
growth. The project’s impacts will include an amplification of the awareness and
use of accessibility features for educational media, potentially leading to
greater inclusion of people with disabilities in educational contexts and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators with expertise in
open-source licensing, PhET’s codebase, and qualitative research methods will
advance multiple avenues of investigation to inform the transition of the PhET
MVC Framework to an open source ecosystem. These include: 1) identifying
existing community characteristics, community needs, and potential growth of new
communities through surveys, focus groups, and market research; 2) exploring
existing and potential member processes, structure, and governance models
through workshops, discussions with the board of advisors, and participation in
NSF training on open source ecosystems; and 3) developing community building
mechanisms across existing and new communities through surveys and focus groups;
and 4) exploration of utility and feedback on exemplar documentation, onboarding
materials, and structures for regional community
supports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.