* 2229495
* AMPS: Scalable Methods for Real-time Estimation of Power Systems under Uncertainty
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Roummel Marcia, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 280,000.00

The United States power grid, which is arguably the most complex civil
engineering system, is facing unprecedented challenges stemming from the advent
of new sensing technologies, adoption of large amounts of renewable energy, and
emergence of smart grids. Power system operators rely on estimating parameters
for monitoring power systems in real-time, detecting risks, verifying technical
compliance, and decision-making. However, this estimation problem is
particularly challenging due to the large size and complexity of the power grid,
as well as the need to perform such tasks in real-time. Decisions about the best
and safe power grid operations depend critically on knowing the current
parameters and states of the grid. This research will address these challenges
by developing computational methods that are scalable, exploit problem
structures, and are robust with respect to uncertainties in the power system
models. In particular, the project will address identifying the most influential
parameters in the power system models and developing mathematical tools to
efficiently estimate power system model parameters from data with quantified
uncertainties. The project will provide training opportunities for students from
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian inversion
facilitates the integration of data with complex physics-based models, such as
power systems, to quantify the uncertainties in model predictions. The
algorithmic developments for Bayesian inversion in the context of power grid,
face a number of fundamental challenges. Among those are high-dimensionality of
the inversion parameters (stemming from the size of the power grid), expensive
and real-time evaluations of the parameter-to-observable maps, and model
uncertainty additional to the uncertainty in inversion parameters. The project
will develop mathematically rigorous, computationally efficient, and robust
methods that overcome mathematical and computational barriers in solving large-
scale estimation problems governed by uncertain power system models. In
particular, the investigators will build on the existing state-of-the-art for
Bayesian inversion algorithms and extend these by using (i) sensitivity analysis
to classify the uncertain parameters based on their importance, (ii) the
Bayesian approximation error approach to incorporate additional uncertainty into
the Bayesian inverse problem governed by power grid models, (iii) surrogate
modeling for power systems (via machine learning and dimension reduction
techniques) and (iv) second-order methods and approximations of second
derivative information to reduce the computational cost when solving the
Bayesian inverse problem. The algorithms, mathematical findings, and open-source
codes will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal papers and
presentations at conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.