* 2229409
* Collaborative Research: AMPS: Robust Failure Probability Minimization for Grid Operational Planning with Non-Gaussian Uncertainties
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Daniel Maldonado, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 11/30/2025
* USD 110,155.00

The electric power industry accounted for the second-largest portion of all
carbon emissions across economic sectors in 2020. Renewable energy resources,
particularly wind and solar, are critical to decarbonizing the grid and ensuring
the nation's future prosperity and welfare. However, because of their inherent
and unavoidable intermittency and variability, successful integration of
renewable energy resources in the nation's energy mix poses fundamental
challenges for day-to-day grid operations. Failure to account for this
uncertainty during planning can result in loss of service and grid de-
stabilization, thus jeopardizing not only the achievement of decarbonization
targets but also system reliability. This project develops the next generation
of mathematical methods, computer models, and algorithms for grid operational
planning, which accurately and systematically take into account the non-normal
and multi-modal nature of renewable uncertainty, as well as the nonlinear and
often counter-intuitive physical laws that govern electric power networks. The
project's methods and computer implementations shall benefit and inform diverse
planning tools, both within the electric power sector as well as the broader
energy sector, including those of private companies and vendors who specialize
in power systems software. The project further impacts education and the broader
society by training undergraduate and graduate STEM students in energy systems
optimization and the foundations of electric power grid operations, thereby
enabling them to apply their analytical skills to design more environmentally-
and economically-efficient future energy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project contributes a general methodology, including new mathematical models,
theory, and algorithms, to systematically account for non-Gaussian error
distributions of renewable energy forecasts, in one of the most fundamental
power system planning problems called AC Optimal Power Flow. A general treatment
of non-Gaussian errors in electric load and renewable energy forecasts has not
been considered before in grid planning, despite being exhibited in data. The
project rigorously integrates risk and uncertainty in this context by developing
a novel methodology for optimization under non-Gaussian probabilistic
constraints. This is achieved by exploiting the representability and analyticity
of Gaussian mixture models and by designing algorithms that are modular enough
to allow current methods which are proven to work well for Gaussian errors to be
reusable with only minor modifications. The generality of the approach is
expected to spur new algorithms in the broader field of chance-constrained
optimization, including nonlinear nonconvex problems whose constraints are
affected by Gaussian mixture uncertainties. The project also rigorously accounts
for misspecification of the mixture model parameters by designing novel non-
Gaussian ambiguity sets, which have not been studied before but have the
potential to enable the discovery of robust network operating points with
improved out-of-sample performance and reliability. The project uses real
utility data to guide model validation and experimentation and also provides a
set of practical recommendations for system operators to facilitate the adoption
of the developed methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.