* 2229305
* RII Track-4:NSF: Rational Design and Engineering of Composite Electrolytes for All-solid-state Li-S Batteries
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Shuya Wei, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 202,433.00

High-energy and cost-effective electrical energy storage technologies are in
great demand in sectors ranging from portable devices to transportation.
Rechargeable lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries offers great promise for reversibly
storing large amounts of electrical energy at moderate cost. However, Li-S
batteries belie multiple challenges stemming from the complicated solution phase
reaction of sulfur and poor transport of electrons and ions across the
interfaces of the battery, resulting in a low capacity and poor cycle life. The
main objective of this project is to develop composite solid electrolytes to
realize all-solid-state Li-S batteries with high capacity and long lifetime. The
project will study the science that governs the stability of electrode-
electrolyte interfaces in all-solid-state Li-S batteries. By patterning with
researchers from Idaho National Laboratory (INL), the PI will develop the
capability to study ion transport across multiple interfaces in the solid-state
Li-S battery in a more realistic pouch cell configuration by using the state-of-
art operando spectroscopies. It is expected that the collaboration resulting
from this fellowship will foster engagement of students at the University of New
Mexico (UNM) with those at INL and expand and strength the research capability
in electrochemical energy storage and conversion in the
jurisdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship
to an Assistant Professor and training for a graduate student at the University
of New Mexico (UNM). Li-S batteries provide an attractive high theoretical
energy density that is ten times higher than that of Li-ion batteries. However,
polysulfide dissolution and resulting shuttling reaction of sulfur species in
liquid electrolytes hinder the practical application of this cell chemistry.
Solid-state electrolytes are needed to control the sluggish reactions in Li-S
batteries, but they tend to create high interfacial resistance at the electrode-
electrolyte interfaces, limiting the capacity and cycle life of the batteries.
This project will systematically investigate the interfacial stability of both
cathode and anode electrolyte interfaces in all-solid-state Li-S batteries with
the composite electrolytes. Composite electrolyte based on ceramics fillers and
ion-conducting polymers will be fabricated with tunable stiffness and elasticity
in order to stabilize the interfaces and reduce the interfacial resistance in
the Li-S battery. Advanced material and electrochemical characterizations will
be employed to study composition-structural-property relationships of the
interfaces of the composite electrolyte before and after battery cycling. The
project will provide fundamental knowledge of ion-conduction mechanism across
different solid-solid interfaces, electrochemical reaction and mechanical
properties at electrode-electrolyte interfaces in both all-solid-state Li-S coin
cells and pouch cells. The obtained knowledge will provide guidance on interface
design to reduce interfacial resistance and realize high performance all-solid-
state Li-S batteries. This fellowship will strengthen the PI’s research profile,
by expanding pouch cell fabrication and advanced in-situ characterization
facilities at UNM and continuing to collaborate with INL via student internship
and joint journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.