* 2229751
* POSE: Phase I:  Constellation: A Pathway to Establish the STE||AR Open-Source Organization
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Golden Richard, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

To further advance research in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and combatting
climate change, society requires the efficient use of high-performance computing
(HPC) resources. This project will lay out a plan to establish the STEllAR open-
source organization that aims at making the use of HPC as accessible and
efficient as possible. With the help of the community, STEllAR will develop a
software ecosystem of users and developers by coordinating the development of
tools and technologies targeting multiple science domains, delivering
educational services and technical support for faster adoption of such
technologies, and providing consultancy services to the community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The CONSTEllATION project will develop a roadmap to establish the
STEllAR non-profit open-source organization. The STEllAR organization will
strategize and oversee the development of a secure, standardized, and industrial
strength HPX (High Performance ParalleX, a standard C++ library for concurrency
and parallelism) runtime to overcome the challenges that arise in the ExaScale
era and beyond. STEllAR will also help the community to build the application
program interface (API), infrastructure, tools, and ecosystem around HPX. In
addition, the organization will provide (1) application assurance through
building developer tools and documentation, technical support, continuous
testing and integration, and standardization; (2) professional support including
training, custom packaging, and technology architecture; and (3) community
services such as education, workforce development, and outreach. Rapid adoption
of Asynchronous Many-Task runtime systems (AMTs) will help to increase the
parallel efficiency and portability of modern high-performance applications and
improve the energy efficiency of computing resources as society enters the
ExaScale era. These capabilities will enable the scientific community to
overcome the shortcomings of the commonly practiced Bulk Synchronization model
and make way for developing a next generation of applications in AI, climate
change, bio-informatics, and many other application domains of high societal
impact. In addition, STEllAR will be a hub for outreach and education in the
field of high-performance computing and related application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;See:&lt;br/&gt;https://github.com/STEllAR-
GROUP/hpx&lt;br/&gt;https://hpx-docs.stellar-
group.org/latest/html/index.html&lt;br/&gt;https://stellar-
group.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.