* 2229267
* FMSG: Eco: Off-Grid Construction via Sustainable Compression Curing of Vegetable Oil-Impregnated Sediments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Rafael Quirino, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 494,685.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) has effectively revolutionized how engineers and
architects design and fabricate products due to its layer-by-layer building
approach. New levels of product complexity/customization not offered by
traditional manufacturing processes are now achievable, resulting in weight
reduction, enhanced conformability, joint consolidation, and higher efficiencies
through design. This project combines faculty in engineering, chemistry,
architecture, and geology to innovate a solar-powered compression/curing
technique that additively fabricates building materials made of tung oil and
local sands for sustainable, raw-earth construction. This manufacturing method
can leverage available natural resources within the U.S., therefore reducing any
reliance on international raw materials. It also responds to a growing need to
innovate and overcome remote construction constraints exacerbated by urban-to-
rural migration driven by the COVID pandemic and climate change. The remote AM
of raw earth materials will help reduce the large carbon footprint associated
with concrete-based AM construction which relies on heavy gantry-based material
extrusion systems that must be transported to worksites. Architecture students
will be trained on a commercial binder-jet AM system for integrating new
knowledge in sustainable AM processes into their designs. Guest lectures will be
provided to engineering and architecture undergraduate students to broaden their
perspectives and creativity to ensure future innovation in the U.S. advanced
manufacturing industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this fundamental
manufacturing research project is to design and test a new binder/powder-based
AM process for the fabrication of earth-sourced composites for structural
applications. Through modeling and experimentation, the AM process will be
designed for off-grid use while remaining completely sustainable. Tung oil will
be employed for binding sands of highly variable sizes, shapes, and chemistry.
Employed sands will be characterized using microscopy and flowability
measurements. These measurements will be correlated with the sediment’s ability
to spread into a thin layer with minimal voids when acted upon by a custom-
designed roller. Binder rheological properties will be varied until effective
jetting and sediment infiltration are realized. The binder will be cured via
free radical polymerization triggered by a combination of heat and ultraviolet
(UV) radiation. The latent heat required for uniform binder curing in the
presence of unrefined sediments will be related with concentrated solar
energy/spectra for aiding the design of a solar power/heating unit. First order
energy balances and entropy minimization will guide power/heating unit design. A
proof-of-concept manufacturing system will be constructed and instrumented for
conducting “brick” building experiments. Thermomechanical tests will be
performed to determine the strength of these manufactured composite
bricks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.