* 2229993
* Participant Support for Symposium of Additive Manufacturing Modeling, Simulation, and Machine Learning (MS&amp;T22); Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 9-13 October 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jing Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2023
* USD 9,793.00

This award provides participant support for selected students and post-doctoral
scholars to attend the Symposium of Additive Manufacturing Modeling, Simulation,
and Machine Learning at the Materials Science &amp; Technology 2022 (MS&amp;T22)
conference in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 9-13 October 2022. The Symposium of
Additive Manufacturing Modeling, Simulation, and Machine Learning is one of the
key symposia at the MS&amp;T22 conference. Additive manufacturing technologies
continue to expand manufacturing capabilities in the U.S industry with
competitive advantages. Although there have been multiple advances in the AM
field, challenges in predictive theoretical and computational approaches still
hinder the widespread adoption of additive manufacturing technologies in the
industry. This symposium will present and discuss the latest studies in additive
manufacturing modeling, simulation, and machine learning research. Through
participating in this symposium, selected students and post-doctoral scholars
are expected to be immersed in a unique intellectual environment, including
technical presentations by renowned international experts in the additive
manufacturing field, and interactions with leading additive manufacturing
researchers around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award
is to provide the selected students and post-doctoral scholars with a unique
opportunity to become involved in and familiar with the additive manufacturing
research community through symposium participations. In addition to acquiring
knowledge and an appreciation of the breadth of additive manufacturing,
involvements with professional conferences and societies will motivate their
intellectual curiosity, through developing a network of professional contacts
and resources. Such networking will continue to support students and post-
doctoral scholars in the long term, throughout their professional careers. The
project will particularly reach out to students and post-doctoral scholars from
underrepresented groups when broadcasting this participation opportunity,
targeting their involvement and ultimate retention in careers related to
additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.