* 2229496
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SCISRS: Signal Cancellation using Intelligent Surfaces for Radio Astronomy Services
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Aveek Dutta, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 634,799.00

This project investigates use of a reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS)
installed near a radio telescope to help mitigate radio frequency interference
(RFI) from other users of the electromagnetic spectrum. The RIS reflects
incoming RFI signals towards the telescope in such a way that the reflected RFI
cancels out the direct RFI when the two signals combine in the telescope
receiver. Better capability to observe in commercial wireless bands and in other
bands with active usage, not just in bands reserved for science, will enhance
the fidelity of astronomical measurements. Also, the formerly remote locations
where radio telescopes were built are experiencing ongoing increases in
population density, increased numbers of low earth orbiting satellites, and
other effects that increase RFI over time. Improving the ability to remove RFI
from astronomical observations helps preserve the value of the investment in
these expensive instruments and helps ensure their continued scientific
capability. The platform and tools developed in this project will be
incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses at UAlbany as well as a
summer school at OVRO. Wireless signals and other datasets captured from the
testbed will be made available to the larger community to foster practical
research in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical objectives of
this project are to accurately estimate the RFI incident at the telescope and to
configure the RIS so the reflected signal arriving at the telescope receiver
precisely cancels the incident RFI. Cancellation requires control over both
amplitude and phase of the reflected signal, which is achieved by tuning the
reflecting elements of the intelligent surface. A key challenge tackled in the
research is to cancel mobile RFI sources such as airplanes and satellites.
Mobile sources stress the ability of the RIS controller to keep up with changes
in the direction of RFI and the controllerâ€™s ability to keep the surface tuned
precisely enough to cancel the RFI. The project combines three areas of
innovation to overcome this challenge. At the system level, the RIS controller
uses feedback from the telescope, which continually reports the residual RFI it
sees, to compensate for estimation errors. At the algorithm level, a novel, low-
complexity multi-stage direction of arrival estimation method is combined with
an adaptive beamforming algorithm that shapes and steers the reflected RFI. At
the hardware level, a 16-channel high-speed processing platform built from Field
Programmable Gate Arrays is coupled with a custom fabricated RIS to enable real
time RFI estimation and adaptive beamforming. The project will construct an
experimental radio telescope at University at Albany, SUNY (UAlbany) based on
the Small Radio Telescope (SRT) design from MIT Haystack Observatory. The
cancellation approach will be tested on the UAlbany SRT and on one antenna of
the large DSA-110 telescope array at the Owens Valley Radio Observatory
(OVRO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.