* 2229092
* FMRG: Cyber: Scalable Precision Manufacturing of Programmable Polymer Nanoparticles Using Low-temperature Initiated Chemical Vapor Deposition Guided by Artificial Intelligence
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Jan Genzer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Polymer nanoparticles have a broad range of significant applications, including
drug delivery, soft robotics and nanomedicine, etc. However, existing
manufacturing of such materials are limited by batch production, quality
variability and a narrow range of particle functionality, resulting in a slow
development cycle, often decade long, for new materials, recipes, and use at
scale. To enable a future technology in manufacturing versatile polymer
nanoparticles, it is necessary to radically change such a paradigm into one that
enables data-driven decision-making for processing conditions. This unique
future manufacturing research grant (FMRG) will advance fundamental research in
the principles for continuous and highly reproducible manufacturing of polymer
nanoparticles with an expanded palette of sizes, shapes and chemical
functionalities for wide-ranging applications in various industries. The new
paradigm for the studied cyber-manufacturing of polymer nanoparticles will be
achieved through critical breakthroughs in chemical-vapor-deposition based
continuous synthesis and in-line characterization of polymeric nanostructures,
integrated using artificial intelligence (AI)-guided selections of complex
processing conditions. This research, if successful, will unlock vast design
space for future nanomedicine, with a potential to substantially impact the
healthcare industry and improve the quality of life of the society by and large.
Moreover, to prepare a diverse workforce for future manufacturing advancements,
rigorous education research across an academic lifespan, from K-12 outreach to
undergraduate and graduate education, as well as industry engagements, the team
will establish a framework to understand identity-based motivation, which may in
turn lead to broadened participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this future manufacturing research is to develop and investigate a novel
paradigm to revolutionize manufacturing of polymer nanomaterials by integrating
continuous processing, in-line characterization and AI-enabled accelerated data
analysis to guide the production of programmed polymer nanoparticles. The core
of this future manufacturing technology, also the key innovation, is a low-
temperature initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD) polymerization with the
use of gradient-surface-templated liquid crystals, which will leave optical
fingerprints of fabricated features (spatial and temporal) that can be utilized
for precision computer-vision image and data acquisitions. The high-throughput
experimental data will be employed to train a convolutional neural network to
identify the size, shape and chemistry of polymer particles. The neural network
will be further tested with separate data sets for validations to achieve AI-
accelerated analytics and processing decision making. The outcome of the
interdisciplinary research will generate new knowledge in iCVD, processing
monitoring and mechanism using cyber-driven approaches. The findings are
expected to enable the novel manufacturing technology, scalable and modular, for
unprecedented polymer structures, unachievable by traditional manufacturing
means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This FMRG is supported by the Divisions of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (ENG/CMMI), Mathematical Sciences
(MPS/DMS), Chemistry (MPS/CHE), Engineering Education and Centers (ENG/EEC), and
the Division of Undergraduate Education (EHR/DUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.