* 2229743
* I-Corps: Automated Pavement Evaluation Using Advanced Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* William Buttlar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software suite that allows highway owner-agencies such as
cities and state Departments of Transportation (DOTs) to manage their pavement
networks in a more rigorous and cost-effective manner, enabling more strategic
use of maintenance and rehabilitation funds. The software suite can be readily
expanded to include other civil infrastructure, such as airfield pavements,
bridges, and rail and transit track systems. In addition, other assets
associated with or in the vicinity of transportation facilities can be located,
identified, and assessed. This mapping includes road signs, guard rails, paint
markings, utilities, garbage bins, etc., which can be viewed as additional
layers on the data visualization platform of the software suite. Finally,
measures of transportation sustainability, resilience, and environmental impact
may be assessed and visualized as yet another layer on the visualization
software. This visualization provides owner-agencies an unbiased,
straightforward platform to assist them in systematically moving towards more
sustainable and resilient infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of an automated pavement evaluation software
suite. The suite will incorporate several coded and integrated machine learning
and deep learning techniques used for the detection and classification of the
extent and severity of critical pavement obstacles. The algorithms seek to
provide highly accurate, unbiased pavement condition assessments. The machine
learning-based models use a comprehensive pavement image dataset, which
considers twenty different pavement distresses for both flexible and rigid
pavements as verified by pavement experts. Another capability of the software is
its ability to pre-screen projects using internet street view images. This
capability may allow agencies to crowd-source data for their own road networks
using municipal vehicle fleets equipped with the supplied video capture and road
roughness sensor system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.