* 2229091
* FMSG ECO: Melt Mastication for Upcycling of Polyolefins
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The need for highly functional flexible packaging for food, medical products,
and consumer goods is growing worldwide, but single-use plastics are also
contributing to environmental pollution. Current materials are not recyclable
because of their heterogeneity and related challenges in collection, separation,
cleaning, and reprocessing. While chemical recycling methods are rapidly
evolving, these approaches require high energy input, and the intrinsic material
value is lost. This project will enable increased recycling of flexible films
through creation of a manufacturing process for high performance barrier films
from a single polymer type. Industrial, economic, and societal benefits
respectively include: (1) enhanced functional properties in films for high
volume applications, (2) cost competitiveness driven by technologies that are
compatible with current processing systems, and (3) greatly enhanced plastics
recycling enabled by simplified material systems. The research plan includes
industry workshops for advancing the novel plastics processing technologies as
well as educational webinars to impact plastics sustainability more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate new materials
processing strategies designed to replace traditional multilayer packaging
systems with polyethylenes of varying molecular weight, branching structures,
and crystallinity to achieve properties superior to known best-in-class barrier
films. These strategies require improved understanding and control of polymer
morphology, specifically: (1) characterization of the melt-mastication dynamics,
(2) scale-up with layer multiplying sonication, and (3) developing structure-
process-property correlations to reproducibly induce high crystallinity and
tortuous hierarchical structures starting from a range of polymer chain
architectures. The research on future processing strategies will inform the use
of single polymer types serving multiple purposes in a product design, reducing
the number of polymers employed across the industry as well as other materials
such as metallized foils, paper layers, and additives that adversely impact the
recyclability of flexible packaging. By the end of the project, we aim to: (1)
demonstrate technical feasibility of all-polyolefin barrier films using layer
multiplying melt-mastication, (2) deliver a predictive model relating polymer
and film structure to process conditions and performance in melt-masticated
polymer multilayers, and (3) produce a model of the energy and life cycle
characteristics of the process. The research plan includes educational workshops
for advancing plastics sustainability knowledge, and community webinars to
impact plastics sustainability more broadly. Recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups, targeted manufacturing education activities, and
outreach to local communities for workforce development training will enrich the
research, increase its relevance, and result in tangible diversity, equity, and
inclusion outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award was
supported by co-funding from the Chemical, Biological, Environmental Engineering
and Transport Systems Division, and the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation Division in the Directorate for Engineering, and the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.