* 2229505
* I-Corps:  Cell-free Biosensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Susan Daniel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a platform to isolate and measure activity of transmembrane
proteins (TMPs). Transmembrane proteins are one of biologyâ€™s most powerful
sensing elements as they can detect nearly any chemical or biological compound.
For this reason, they are highly sought after for both detection and development
of new therapeutics. Roughly 60% of all drug candidates are targeted against
transmembrane proteins, including targets such as viral, pain, and immune
receptor proteins. Unfortunately, TMPs are challenging to study and use.
Currently, scientists and engineers working with transmembrane proteins rely on
labor-intensive procedures that require highly specialized equipment and
reagents. These requirement result in costly and lengthy research and
development that limits the full-scale application of these important
biomolecules. The proposed technology may provide a way to expedite this
research and allow scientists to bring therapies to market more
rapidly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a rapidly assembled, biosensing platform that uses cell-free technologies to
integrate transmembrane proteins into a biomimetic sensing device. Transmembrane
proteins are a notoriously difficult class of proteins to study but are
catalysts of many biological functions in cells and, therefore, also
pharmaceutical targets for disease mitigation. The proposed platform takes a
specific gene sequence and directly synthesizes transmembrane proteins into a
lipid membrane. This proposed process both provides a native-like environment to
mimic the cell and circumvents traditionally difficult synthesis. This proposed
cell-free synthesis method allows for an open-box reaction that may be
engineered and controlled to produce customized proteins rapidly in a wide range
of environments. In addition, this makes it ideal to develop sensing platforms
that are highly scalable and tunable, such as integration with microfluidic
technologies. Currently, this technology has been demonstrated by synthesizing
an ion channel into a biomembrane sensor and using this sensor to detect a
small-molecule chemical based on electronic changes. The proposed technology
uses advancements in biotechnology and bioelectronics and has the potential to
provide the next step in membrane protein biosensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.