* 2229765
* EAGER: Mercury and methylmercury isotope tracing in high-dissolved organic matter high-salinity environments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,748.00

Mercury accumulation in wildlife is a major concern for both ecosystem health
and the health of humans who hunt and consume mercury-impacted prey (e.g., fish,
ducks, and other animals). Tracing the pathways by which mercury enters the food
chain and propagates to animals is successfully done by measuring mercury
isotopes in the ecosystem (e.g., water, soil, fish, birds) and in different
potential mercury sources (e.g., wastewaters). This project seeks to develop new
methods to allow measurement of mercury isotopes in saline waters that also have
high organic carbon (e.g., estuaries, marine systems, and inland salt lakes)
since the co-occurrence of salinity and high organic carbon interfere with
current measurement methods for mercury isotopes. Mercury accumulation is often
a major concern in saline waters with high organic carbon, and so development of
methods to allow mercury isotope measurements in these waters will allow mercury
tracking in these settings across the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research between University of Utah and the US Geological Survey
concerns the current inability of mercury researchers globally to utilize
isotopic methods to elucidate pathways to biota for: a) total mercury in saline
high dissolved organic matter (DOM) waters; and b) methyl mercury in natural
waters where low ambient methyl mercury concentrations inhibit application and
method development for isotope measurements. Saline high-DOM systems are
important locations globally for mercury contaminant burdens in biota, including
marine systems such as the Black Sea, inland waters such as Great Salt Lake
(GSL), and estuarine systems such as the Florida Everglades, San Francisco Bay,
Chesapeake Bay, and many other urbanized estuaries worldwide. Developing a
method to overcome the interfering effects of DOM in saline waters will allow
elucidation of mercury pathways to biota in these systems. Application of the
newly-developed methodology to elucidate mercury pathways to the simple food web
in Great Salt Lake (Utah) will serve as a proof of concept to spur application
in other locales. The elevated total mercury and methyl mercury concentrations
at GSL, the simple ecosystem at GSL, and the tractable size and depth of GSL,
make it an ideal incubator for the proposed methodology.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts include training of a Ph.D. assistant, as well as teachers-in-training
as candidates in the Masters of Science in Secondary School Science Teaching
(MSSST) graduate program at the University of Utah, who will be mentored during
summer-fall internships. The program engages middle and high school biology,
chemistry, and earth science teachers in six-week long summer internships that
culminate at the end of the fall semester in a teacher-developed series of
grade-appropriate lesson plans through which teachers will impact over 600
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.