* 2229535
* SWIFT: Opportunistic mm-Wave Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Hossein Hashemi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Traditional wireless systems operate in the radiofrequency (RF) frequency range,
which are typically below 10 GHz. The increased available bandwidth at higher
frequencies has incentivized the use of millimeter-wave (mm-wave) frequency
range that are above 10 GHz for wireless communications (e.g., 5G standard,
satellite communications), radar (e.g., automotive radar), and imaging (e.g.,
airport scanners) applications. The coexistence of these emerging applications
with traditional applications including radio astronomy at the same frequency
bands creates challenges in terms of interference management. The coexistence
issue is particularly challenging as many of the mm-wave spectrum users are
based on legacy technologies that lack proper interference mitigation and
filtering. On the other hand, the cost of developing, testing, and deploying
dedicated mm-wave solutions for each application and frequency band is high.
This proposal focuses on development of mm-wave systems that can
opportunistically operate any-where within the important frequency spectrum of
around 18 - 54 GHz. The first key step in it is the development of transceiver
hardware that can adapt operation. Furthermore, these receivers are array based,
which allows them to identify and operate at the optimum spatial dimension as
well. Tightly related to this is the development of sensing and adaptation
algorithms that can determine available frequency bands and directions in which
transmission may occur. These algorithms are based on novel machine learning
approaches and consider the special propagation conditions of millimeter-wave
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary proposal offers a holistic
study of millimeter-wave systems, emphasizing coexistence, with elements that
include system architecture, channel propagation, algorithms, and integrated
circuit design. The innovative integrated circuits can operate across a broad
frequency spectrum while providing selectivity (interference mitigation) that is
currently only achieved at lower radio frequencies. Furthermore, the proposed
receiver architecture allows concurrent multi-band frequency selectivity to
enable for intra- and inter-band carrier aggregation. The machine-learning based
algorithms start from a formulation that takes real-world constraints, such as
directional dispersion and partial sparsity of the propagation channels, as well
as imperfect hardware into account, and develops new machine learning approaches
to tackle them. Extensive data of directional interference characteristics will
be made available to all US researchers. The outcomes of the proposed study
benefit current and future millimeter-wave systems and applications spanning
licensed and unlicensed commercial wireless communications, satellite
communications, radio astronomy, and wireless power delivery. Research results
will impact undergraduate and graduate curriculum. The PIs will build on their
extensive track record of involving Undergraduate students in the proposed
research, and of broadening participation by actively recruiting women and
underrepresented minorities for research positions related to this project.
Research results be transitioned to industry via the USC Steven's Center for
Innovation and spin-off startup companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.