* 2229004
* RII Track-4: NSF: Understanding Microstructure Evolution in Stimuli-Responsive Yield-Stress Fluid-Assisted 3D Printing: Linking Microstructures to Macroscale Rheological Properties
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Yifei Jin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 03/31/2025
* USD 231,806.00

Recently, an innovative three-dimensional (3D) printing method has been proposed
and developed to fabricate parts with arbitrary architectures. In this method, a
3D structure is freeform printed within a unique liquid support bath with
desired properties that are controllable by either printing conditions or
working environments. Although this method presents a better printing capability
than many current 3D printing approaches, the working mechanisms of unique
support bath materials are still elusive, which has hampered the further
development of this 3D printing method. The project aims to investigate the
microstructure changes of a representative thermosensitive support bath material
at different temperatures and printing conditions. The achievements of this
project can guide the design of more support baths as well as fundamentally
explain the working mechanisms of printing within a support bath. The proposed
research will have a profound societal impact by accelerating the development of
3D printing technology to enhance the manufacturing capability in the United
States. In addition, the project will promote the education of students from
K-12 to graduate in the State of Nevada through diverse activities, including
hands-on K-12 lab activities, research module-involved curricula, and mentorship
of students from underrepresented backgrounds at the University of Nevada, Reno.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant professor and training for a graduate student at the University of
Nevada Reno (UNR). Stimuli-responsive yield-stress fluids, developed on the
basis of regular yield-stress materials, can change rheological
properties/behaviors by responding to both applied shear stress and external
stimuli. This dual-responsiveness makes stimuli-responsive yield-stress fluids
promising for support bath-assisted 3D printing because a support bath material
can be easily added during printing and removed after printing by applying
external stimuli to achieve desired rheological properties, making it
technically feasible to print 3D structures with arbitrary architectures.
However, the interrelationships between microstructure evolution and macroscale
rheology change of stimuli-responsive yield-stress fluids have so far remained
elusive. Thus, the overarching goal of this project is to fundamentally
understand the microstructure evolution of a representative stimuli-responsive
yield-stress fluid—Pluronic F127-nanoclay nanocomposite—under different stress
and temperature conditions through nanoscale material characterization,
mathematical modeling, molecular dynamics simulation, and rheological testing.
To achieve this goal, two integrated research objectives will be pursued: (1)
characterize/establish static microstructure models in Pluronic F127-nanoclay
nanocomposite via nanoscale material characterization techniques and
mathematical modeling; and (2) explore temperature- and stress-induced
microstructure evolutions via molecular dynamics simulation and rheological
property testing. Completing the objectives will establish a paradigm for
linking microstructures to macroscale rheological properties of support bath
materials, promoting the development of more advanced stimuli-responsive yield-
stress fluids for 3D printing applications in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.