* 2229351
* Collaborative Research: GP-IN: GLOBE Weather Pathways for Students with Disabilities
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* John Ristvey, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 251,073.00

This project will support educators in learning effective practices for adapting
STEM learning materials for students with disabilities (i.e., Deaf/hard of
hearing, blind/low vision, mobility) through workshops and by adapting lessons
from a weather curriculum. A cohort of local geoscience learning professionals,
science teachers and teachers of special education in three locations will work
in concert to assure quality and effective curricular adaptations. The research
team will work together with evaluators to develop and study the approach based
on the three interrelated project elements listed below. The weather unit that
will be used has shown promising results with general education teachers but
there has been little or no research on how to develop adaptations for students
with disabilities using a standards-driven storyline unit of instruction. This
project will help to address this gap by fully understanding how this approach
can be used by educators over the course of three years. The project provides
the opportunity for science teachers to work directly with STEM professionals in
adaptations of a unit including career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
students deserve high quality science instruction including opportunities to
understand possible career opportunities. In light of that, science teachers
should be equipped with all of the necessary resources and techniques to meet
the unique needs of their students with disabilities. However, many science
teachers need further learning opportunities from experts who have experience
with students with disabilities. This project will develop and test an approach
to provide educators with the experiences, tools and abilities to adapt
geoscience curricular resources to meet the needs of students with disabilities
and articulate career pathways and opportunities in Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) for them. By increasing access to STEM fields
for scholars with disabilities and by improving the quality of resources
available in STEM disciplines, more persons with disabilities may consider
pursuing STEM careers. A challenge for many science educators is how to help
students with disabilities envision geoscience concepts and a broader range of
STEM career opportunities. This project will address this challenge by working
directly with science educators to: 1) establish and support a team consisting
of local STEM educators, content specialists (atmospheric sciences), special
educators and person(s) with a disability working in STEM fields to support
student career pathways; 2) provide workshops on a weather curriculum, a
standards based unit in which students engage with weather concepts through
studying interesting phenomena, and; 3) facilitate time for educators to work
together to adapt materials for middle school students with physical
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.