* 2229530
* SWIFT: Synergy and Coexistence of Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications, Imaging, and Localization
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ahmed Alkhateeb, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Initiating a communication link between wireless users and devices is a
complicated and resource-demanding process due to the chaotic propagation of
wireless signals in most environments and the unknown location of the users
themselves. Establishing and maintaining a reliable wireless connection would be
simpler if the communication system had a map of the surroundings (e.g.,
buildings, trees) and the location of the wireless devices. This project
investigates future communication systems operating at millimeter-wave (mm-wave)
frequencies that could have the necessary resources to create 3D maps of the
surroundings. However, mm-wave signals (30 GHz to 300 GHz) travel much shorter
distances than lower frequency radio waves. Thus, to ensure sufficient received
signal power, a large number of antennas are usually needed at both the
transmitter and the receiver. Such a wealth of spectrum and number of antennas
(e.g., antenna arrays, meta-surfaces) can be leveraged for applications beyond
regular data communications and extended to imaging, sensing, and precision
localization. More interestingly, the synergy between communications, imaging,
and localization can be leveraged to potentially overcome the challenges that
each of the three systems faces. The project will also emphasize educating a
broader audience of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. With the
use of augmented reality (AR) headsets, the students will implement software
that allows the visualization of mm-wave imaging capabilities in the real world.
Furthermore, the data collected from the measurement campaigns of this project
will be appropriately formatted and published on a public database (DeepSense
dataset) for other researchers in the scientific and engineering community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploiting the mm-wave frequency band for wireless
communications, imaging, and localization has attracted significant research
interest in the last few years. Although the 5th generation (5G) of wireless
communications is becoming a reality, future wireless communication systems are
expected to do more than just communications. The large absolute bandwidth,
electrically large apertures, and extremely narrow pencil beams of future
wireless systems provide temporal and spatially rich information to extend the
applications beyond wireless communications into imaging/sensing and precision
localization. Motivated by this potential, the project seeks to develop a
fundamental understanding of the synergy between mm-wave wireless
communications, imaging, and localization methods to improve 1) spectrum usage
efficiency by enabling more than one application in a given communication band
and 2) the performance of individual applications through cooperative
techniques. The project will also develop approaches where communication signals
and systems are utilized for imaging and localization. This involves developing
new image reconstruction methods that allow mm-wave imaging systems to create 3D
maps of both line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-sight (NLoS) areas from a single
viewpoint (one base station) or multiple viewpoints. Additionally, the project
will develop NLoS localization algorithms and low-overhead channel acquisition
and beam tracking approaches utilizing mm-wave imaging tools and leveraging the
imaging information about the surrounding environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.