* 2229702
* POSE: Phase I:  Tuitus - A sustainable, inclusive, open ecosystem for Natural Hazards Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Krishna Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,611.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Natural
hazards, such as floods, landslides, earthquakes, tornadoes, and wildfires,
threaten more than 57% of the US national infrastructure. Modeling these complex
natural hazards pushes the frontiers of high-performance computing, multi-scale
modeling, in-situ visualization, big-data analysis, and machine learning.
Scientific software codes are often developed in an ad hoc manner by university
researchers and graduate students with very little exposure to software
development principles and practices. The robustness and open-source nature of
these scientific codes are essential for the safety and security of the nation,
its people, and the environment. The project establishes the Tuitus Foundation
(Latin for “to protect or care for”), a sustainable, inclusive, open ecosystem
of scientific codes for Natural Hazard Engineering (NHE). The project’s
novelties are creating a unified interface that supports integration testing,
research reproducibility, and workflow provenance in distributed computing
environments. The project supports building scalable, automated testing and
workflow management for high-performance computing (HPC) environments. The
project tackles the social issues around building and sustaining a community by
establishing a Governing Board of Directors and supporting community-driven
software development in NHE. The project creates an inclusive community by
offering guidelines and training for onboarding and supporting new developers
through hackathons and Google Summer of Code. By auto-deploying thoroughly
tested HPC software to the NSF-funded DesignSafe Cyberinfrastructure, the
project impacts the broader community of 6,000 NHE researchers by making robust
NHE codes immediately accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open-source codes in NHE
will significantly impact the decision-making process and regional-scale risk
assessment. The integration of Tuitus Foundation’s HPC Continuous
Integration/Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) service with DesignSafe creates a
paradigm shift in open-source code delivery in NHE, improving real-world policy
decisions during critical natural hazard events. The Tuitus Foundation adopts a
holistic approach to address the critical technical challenges in the Open-
Source Ecosystem (OSE) by offering a standard Application Programming Interface
(API) for HPC and heterogenous hardware architectures and supporting a wide
range of applications from HPC, machine learning, database schemas, Jupyter
notebooks, and visualizations. This project is the first attempt to integrate
HPC-scale CI testing with natural hazard engineering codes for multi-job
pipelines. The Tapis framework provides programmable interfaces that enable
developers to automate data management and job execution on HPC and cloud
resources. Tapis OAuth2 provides a separate security layer for managing user
credentials, allowing Tapis to access many different storage and computing
resources on behalf of the user. HPC-scale CI/CD with theTapis API enables
testing for extreme-scale problems on distributed computing environments and
future exascale systems. The project offers workflow provenance in Jupyter
notebooks by tracking workflows and packaging runtime environment, thus
enhancing research reproducibility. The novel CI developments bring together
literate programming and HPC testing to provide the much-needed robustness to
improve trustworthiness in engineering decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.