* 2229160
* FMSG:ECO: CAS:From Carbon Dioxide to Future Bioplastic Manufacturing for Environmental Sustainability
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Joshua Yuan, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 499,982.00

Replacing petroleum-based products with inexpensive, renewable, natural
materials is essential for sustainable development and will significantly impact
the polymer industry and the environment. Petroleum-based plastic materials have
exceeded most other man-made materials and are present as must-have materials in
modern life. It is estimated that the total amount of plastic resins and fibers
manufactured from 1950 through 2015 is 7800 million tons, half of which was
produced in the past decades. Biodegradable plastics have been long sought-after
as alternatives to petrochemical plastics to promote environmental
sustainability. Even though bioplastics provide substantive environmental
benefits, the current manufacturing cost is relatively high. In this Future
Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project, the project team will develop a new
manufacturing process to convert CO2 to bioplastics (polyhydroxyalkanoates, PHA)
and design bioplastics composite to enable future manufacturing. CO2 will be
converted to edible microbial nutrients via a process known as electrocatalysis,
and the nutrients will further be used by bacteria to produce PHA. Microbe-
derived PHA will be used to make bioplastic composites. The project will engage
undergraduate and graduate students, utilize a university training center to
educate broad audiences, and build global impacts in
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a new
manufacturing process to convert CO2 to bioplastics (polyhydroxyalkanoates, PHA)
and design bioplastics composite for broader applications. Traditional
industrial fermentation has an inherent carbon efficiency limitation using
sugar-based feedstock. The limited reducing equivalent supply during carbon
conversion inevitably leads to carbon emission and lowers carbon efficiency in
heterotrophic microorganisms. The proposed research will create a cost-effective
manufacturing of industrial quality bioplastics. The research will establish an
electrochemistry-bioconversion hybrid system for efficient and cost-effective
PHA production. Electrolysis-supported catalytic pathways for CO2 conversion to
acetate, ethanol, and propionate will be created and optimized. The team will
integrate a two-step tandem process with a state-of-the-art Cu catalyst to
achieve a highly selective acetate/ethanol production at high reaction rates.
Pseudomonas strains will be engineered to convert C2 and C3 intermediates to PHA
with a high efficiency. Techno-economic analysis (TEA) and life cycle analysis
(LCA) will be measured to evaluate the economic and environmental impacts of new
created PHA composites. The fundamental knowledge gained from this process will
bring transformative changes to the current manufacturing and climate
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems in the Directorate for Engineering, and the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.