* 2229394
* RII Track-4: NSF: Massively Parallel Graph Processing on Next-Generation Multi-GPU Supercomputers
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Da Yan, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 275,573.00

Graph processing is essential in real-world applications such as bioinformatics
and social network analysis. Many fundamental graph operations are compute-
intensive, for which the PI has successfully developed a series of CPU-scalable
graph processing systems following a novel task-based parallel paradigm called
T-thinker. However, it is non-trivial to extend this success to a GPU-rich
environment due to a much larger gap between IO bandwidth and computing power of
GPUs, and due to the unique programming requirements for GPU programs to be
scalable. This project will develop a new task-based distributed GPU framework,
T-thinkerGPU, and implement three applications on top, including subgraph
matching, dense subgraph mining, and frequent subgraph pattern mining.
T-thinkerGPU will be tested on the Aurora supercomputer at Argonne National
Laboratory (ANL) as well as UAB’s Cheaha supercomputer, and the implementation
will exploit modern GPU features including atomic operations, unified shared
memory, and dynamic parallelism. This work will establish a solid foundation for
long-term collaboration with ANL towards the development of GPU-scalable HPC
solutions for various scientific applications. The project will also train a
GPU-programming workforce (including a PhD student who will also visit ANL) that
is in urgent need in Alabama, and all the proposed tools will be open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4
EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) proposal would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant professor and training for a graduate student at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). GPU supercomputers are increasingly being deployed
in place of CPU supercomputers in the hope to benefit from not only significant
performance improvement but also energy efficiency. Built on the success of
task-based parallel paradigm, T-thinker, for scaling graph processing in a
multi-CPU environment, this project aims to investigate novel task-based
techniques to scale fundamental compute-intensive graph operations in a multi-
GPU environment, especially the exascale Aurora supercomputer at ANL that is
based on Intel GPUs. Specifically, the project will first investigate efficient
representation schemes that encode and compress the input graph and intermediate
subgraph results compactly to reduce memory footprint and enable coalesced
memory access and data reuse in shared memory, such as hashed neighborhood
signature and lossless pattern-based contraction. Secondly, the project will
design GPU-friendly task-based algorithms for fundamental graph operations
including subgraph matching, dense subgraph mining, and frequent subgraph
pattern mining, to unleash the massive parallelism enabled by a multi-GPU
environment like the Aurora supercomputer. Novel techniques will be investigated
such as kernel-as-a-task execution model, a truly hybrid BFS-DFS task scheduling
strategy, and several other GPU optimization approaches, which will be combined
into a unified programming framework, T-thinkerGPU, with extendibility in mind
to facilitate the development of GPU-scalable task-based algorithms for other
graph operations in the future. Finally, the developed GPU programs will be
extensively evaluated on Aurora (with Intel GPUs) and UAB’s Cheaha supercomputer
(with Nvidia GPUs), using public benchmarks and scientific applications at ANL
and UAB, and the code will be released on GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.