* 2229577
* POSE: Phase I:  Collaborative Open-source Manipulation and Perception Assets for Robotics Ecosystem (COMPARE)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,923.00

Manipulation is an essential function for robots. Nearly all visions of advanced
robot systems involve a human-like ability to grasp and manipulate objects in
industrial or home settings. While great progress is being made, this domain has
long suffered from a lack of systematic development and benchmarking
methodologies, causing inefficiencies and even stagnation. This project strives
to remove the longstanding roadblocks to the development and assessment of robot
manipulation hardware and software by establishing an open-source ecosystem
(OSE). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This scoping project represents the first
systematic, community-driven study to determine the needs and wants of robot
manipulation researchers regarding open-source asset (OSA) development,
utilization, and dissemination. This project will provide the a comprehensive
OSE effort in robot manipulation covering physical, digital, instructional, and
functional OSAs, leading to the establishment of an effective and sustainable
OSE. The project team and collaborators represent five diverse OSAs (the YCB
Object and Model Set, NIST Assembly Task Boards, Household Cloth Object Set,
Yale OpenHands, and the Robot Operating System (ROS)), along with several
industry partners and consortia. Removing the roadblocks that cause stagnation
in robot manipulation research may trigger rapid progress towards enabling the
robotics technology for a large array of applications in assistive robotics,
manufacturing, and logistics industries. Having easy access to open-source
assets is expected to expand the number of trained roboticists and stimulate the
robotics market. The OSE is also expected to lower the barriers to affordable
robotics education by significantly reducing both financial and effort burden.
Project website: https://robot-manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.