* 2229731
* POSE: Phase I:  Towards a WebAssembly Research Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Titzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,357.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance.
WebAssembly (Wasm for short), is a new, portable compilation target for the Web
that has sparked a revolution in how web applications are built. Since its
appearance in major browsers in 2017, Wasm has brought a new, powerful
capability to the Web platform and begun expanding rapidly in Edge computing,
Internet of Things (IoT) contexts, and embedded systems. Despite this momentum,
the Wasm research community lacks shared infrastructure. This project identifies
key missing pieces of research infrastructure related tools and artifacts, such
as good benchmarks, that need an open source ecosystem to flourish. The
project’s impacts are an open source ecosystem centered around Wasm research
with broader impacts of accelerating Wasm development and standardization and
increasing the platform's usefulness to researchers. The project’s novelties lie
in the planning and development of a Wasm Research Center, including determining
of the governance structure, developing partnerships and funding agreements,
establishing a collaborative model for groups of researchers, and scoping the
infrastructure and tools that the ecosystem maintains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key
to the success of this effort to establish a WebAssembly open-source ecosystem
is outreach to researchers and industry partners to determine the scope and
capabilities of needed tools and benchmarks to advance the state of Wasm
research. An important aspect of this outreach is regular contact with the Wasm
Worldwide Web Consortium Community Group (CG), a functioning industrial
standards body that has successfully developed the standard and test suite. This
project supplements the CG with an additional set of ecosystems supporting
research around Wasm. Specific broader impacts of this work include: improving
the security and performance of applications, advancing software assurance
through mechanized proofs, supporting a solid Edge Computing landscape,
advancing the Web platform through additional features, increasing the range and
diversity of supported languages, and filling the pipeline of talent and
expertise in virtual machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.