* 2229563
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT:  Decentralized Intelligent Spectrum Sharing in UAV Networks (DISH-uNET) via Hardware-software Co-design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhangyu Guan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 189,477.00

Intelligent unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, or “drones”) are attracting the
interest of the networking community as a “tool” to provide new capabilities, to
extend the infrastructure of wireless networks and to make it more flexible and
resilient. UAV-aided wireless networks will enable present and future Internet
of Things (IoT) and 5G applications and be a driver for new military and
civilian applications spanning battlefield inspection, border control and aerial
surveillance, precision agriculture, environmental monitoring, transportation
and delivery of goods. Currently, despite the great potential of UAV networks,
the design of such networks faces great challenges due to the high mobility of
UAVs, the limited power constraint of UAVs, and the non-stationary environment.
In this project, we will develop novel approaches for decentralized intelligent
spectrum sharing in mmWave UAV networks (DISH-uNET). This project will have a
significant engineering and societal impact and substantially advance the state-
of-the-art in the design of intelligent UAV networks with strong resiliency
attributes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DISH-uNET achieves high
efficiency and resilience based on hardware-software co-design through (1)
domain-specific energy-efficient systolic accelerators, (2) novel learning-based
transceiver design for high mobility UAVs, (3) new decentralized spectrum
sharing multiple access control (MAC) for efficient spectrum management and
utility optimization, (4) fast adaptation of mobility resilient mmWave beam
learning for UAV networks. This project has four main thrusts. (1) Energy-
efficient systolic accelerator for simultaneous real-time signal processing and
machine learning. (2) Transceiver design for high mobility UAV Communication.
(3) Bridging Lyapunov optimization framework, game theory, and reinforcement
learning in decentralized spectrum sharing. (4) Mobility-resilient mmWave beam
learning. The research team has the unique access to a large-scale UAV testbed,
equipped with the state-of-the-art mmWave transceivers. This testbed will be
used for extensive evaluations of the proposed DISH-uNET
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.