* 2229555
* RII Track-4: NSF: An Integrated Multiphysics Machine Learning Modeling and Experimental Framework for Optimizing Micro-Needle Patches
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Serveh Kamrava, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 04/30/2025
* USD 214,494.00

Microneedle patches (MNPs) have provided a solution for different problems
associated with needle injection in children and adults such as needle phobia,
pain, infection, and even the requirement for a specialist. MNPs deliver a
local, pain-free, safe, high-efficiency, and cost-effective way for drug and
vaccine delivery. The small needles on MNPs are barely visible to the naked eye.
Therefore, manufacturing such products with such details requires state-of-the-
art techniques. Among different methods, one of the most efficient techniques is
additive manufacturing (3D printing), which itself is a complex process and is
controlled by various environmental and physical parameters. Controlling and
optimizing all factors at different stages of production is vital for achieving
a target design of MNPs. The design of the final product, consequently, controls
its mechanical properties. Since the process of optimizing all the parameters
involved is computationally very expensive, a machine learning technique will be
applied in this project. To test the hypothesis, the 3D printing equipment,
which is uniquely available at Stanford University, will be advanced. The
proposed research and the associated partnerships will pave the way for
developing more efficient MNPs by shedding light on the underlying phenomena and
integration of theory and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project
would provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and a graduate student
University of Wyoming (UW). In the field of 3D printing, one of the popular
printing techniques used in fabricating MNPs is continuous liquid interface
production (CLIP), which is a category of vat polymerization technique. Aside
from the variables involved in the manufacturing device, processes, and
materials, the whole process occurs in a multiphysics environment, which has
made the development of computational modeling complicated and time-demanding.
All these variabilities can lead to insufficient repeatability, uncertainty, and
inconsistency between the produced MNPs, and what is considered the target
model, and often the targeted structure is not produced. Reducing uncertainty is
one of the prominent problems in MNPs fabrication which we aim to study by
integrating both theoretical and experimental tests within the machine-learning
framework. We hypothesize that more accurate and effective MNPs, in terms of
mechanical stability, can be produced when a large number of scenarios are
tested in a closed-loop framework, and it also can help reduce the cost and
required time significantly. The proposed research involves a real-time and
supervised process that can potentially transform our understanding of the
underlying parameters of efficiency and how such effects control the
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.