* 2229833
* EAGER: Pathways to Sustainable Success in Smart and Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Glenn Ricart, US Ignite, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,636.00

The National Science Foundation supports a wide variety of valuable technical
and social civic innovation through its Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) and
Smart &amp; Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) programs. While many of the
projects funded through these efforts have significant and long-lasting impact
in multiple communities, others fail to make the translation into being
sustainable and scalable. This EAGER will employ a multi-stage process to
identify the combinations of factors which underlie successful translation as
well as those factors which can be barriers. This EAGER will also explore
specific steps, interventions, and resources which can propel more projects to
sustainable, scalable, and long-term success. An important part of this research
is connecting individual projects with what may be appropriate ideas,
approaches, and resources, as well as documenting the process and
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US Ignite will work with NSF's CIVIC and S&amp;CC
project teams to pilot pathways to deploy their technology and policy outcomes
into larger-scale deployments. US Ignite will analyze existing NSF-funded
research projects in S&amp;CC and CIVIC to determine suitability for sustainable
and successful deployment in multiple communities. Deployment may be
accomplished through a number of pathways such as spinning out the technology to
a startup, making the technology and/or data available as open source for others
to use, protecting the intellectual property so that it retains value for a
committed industry partner or alliance, and procurement by local government.
Some of the pathways will leverage partners already providing these services.
This EAGER will contribute to a wider body of knowledge on the evolution of
innovative, inclusive, and equitable technology deployment in smart communities
and their social and economic implications. Ability to positively impact equity,
inclusiveness of diverse populations, community engagement, and civic trust will
be important components of the success of this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.