* 2229560
* SWIFT: Coexisting spectrally-dense communications and passive sensing in directed multi-hop sub-millimeter-wave networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Wireless connectivity and networks have experienced dramatic growth in the past
decade, benefiting society in commerce, information access, transportation,
health, and defense. With strong commercial demand of the spectrum such as for
mobile broadband wireless access, the passive uses of spectrum such as radio
astronomy and atmospheric science, along with critical active non-commercial
services such as global positioning system and weather radar, have been
increasingly encroached. Furthermore, the resulting electromagnetic spectrum
below 60 GHz have become increasingly overcrowded, bounded by the carrier
frequency, even with spectrum-efficient advanced modulation and multi-input
multi-output spatially diverse network protocols. In contrast, the
electromagnetic spectrum between 300 GHz to 850 GHz is largely unassigned. This
provides a unique opportunity to utilize this range of the electromagnetic
spectrum, without spectrum crowding and with significant spectrally dense
capacity enhancement, while designing a priori the coexistence with passives
uses in radio astronomy and atmospheric science. The sub-millimeter wave
(smmWave) and terahertz (THz) regions have unique rich spectral signatures for
atmospheric constituents and molecules as well as for astronomical science
observation, in both thermal emission and rotational-vibrational emission lines.
This project seeks to demonstrate the co-designed physical and network layers in
the high-data-rate smmWave communication link with the presence of passive uses
in atmospheric science and radio astronomy. Chip-scale measurements, designs and
nanofabrication will be studied, together with the information theoretic and
architectural aspects of the smmWave active-passive communication network. The
project will integrate the research with various educational and outreach
activities to recruit undergraduate and high-school students from
underrepresented minority groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines a smmWave communication link in directed point-to-point connectivity,
in the presence of coexisting smmWave passive-use systems in atmospheric science
and radio astronomy. To enable the cross-layer integration, the research will
examine proof-of-concept measurements in each of the scientific Thrusts,
together with a co-designed communication-sensing testbed. Thrust 1 will examine
a photonic-smmWave link and sensing module, with an integrated chip-scale
transmitter-receiver-detector block. The narrow-linewidth smmWave radiation
encodes high-speed data per channel, with the directed beam coupled to a
reconfigurable antenna array for dynamic phase-array beam steering. Four
channels will be demonstrated in the link prototype, with a high-sensitivity
large dynamic range heterodyne photomixed receiver. In Thrust 2, an adaptive
communications testbed will be examined, in the presence of passive users.
Spectrally dense scaling and energy-per-bit efficiencies will be studied, along
with concurrent passive detection of smmWave molecular spectral signatures.
Thrust 3 will study the directivity beam steering of the smmWave link to
guarantee low interference for passive users. Spatial footprint, fundamental
bounds on the network capacity, multi-input multi-output and sensing schedules
will be quantified. An expanded network with multiple source-destinations and
passive users will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.