* 2229360
* I-Corps:  Development of a digital therapeutic device for high tone pelvic floor disorders
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* erin carey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a connected wireless device and app to guide users through pelvic
floor physical therapy at home. In the United States today, over 33 million
women suffer from high-tone pelvic floor dysfunction (HTPFD), a neuromuscular
disorder of the pelvic floor characterized by non-relaxing pelvic floor muscles,
resulting in voiding and defecatory symptoms, sexual dysfunction, and pelvic
pain. Due to limited awareness of the condition and the need for a detailed
myofascial pelvic exam for diagnosis, patients are often underdiagnosed and
undertreated. Of women with HTPFD, only 5 million (less than 15%) complete
first-line pelvic floor physical therapy treatment. Potential barriers to PFPT
are well established and include the high cost/copay of treatment, time away
from work, and distances traveled to a certified pelvic health physical
therapist. The commercial application of the device is in addressing the unmet
market need for a potentially effective, guided, self-treatment performed at
home that may reduce the number of therapy sessions necessary for women to treat
symptoms and improve self-treatment compliance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a connected, wireless pelvic
floor wand for the treatment of high-tone pelvic floor dysfunction (HTPFD). The
proposed technology could be an interactive pelvic wand designed to sense its
position intra-vaginally and communicate with a smartphone application in real-
time. This project pursues a potentially disruptive solution to the current
deficit in physical therapy telehealth. It could broaden the opportunity for
HTPFD patients to initiate treatment in collaboration with physical therapy or
alone. Proprietary spatial calibration technology will be designed to help
potentially guide patients through targeted pelvic floor muscles and coaching
sessions and real-time feedback will optimize pelvic floor muscle release. Using
the proposed technology, patients may be able to track, review and share their
progress over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.