* 2229384
* SWIFT: Intelligent Spatio-Temporal Metamaterial Massive MIMO Aperture Arrays with Hybrid Learning-based Channel Classifiers for Spectrum-Efficient Secured Wireless Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 750,000.00

For the next-generation network systems, it is envisioned that billions of
mobile and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices will communicate with each other to
provide unprecedented connectivity in a highly smart and secure manner. It is
thus of paramount importance to ensure spectrum utilization efficiency as well
as physical-layer (PHY) security of mobile and IoT networks against any attack.
While spectrum efficiency can be improved by using many antennas in a massive
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) fashion, the power consumption, hardware
complexity and cost will increase drastically as each antenna element requires a
dedicated RF transceiver. In parallel, although end-to-end encrypted sessions
between the edge devices and the gateway can be used for secure communications,
high computational and battery burden of such cryptographic strategies are
usually a concern in large-scale systems. To overcome these challenges, this
research will harness the spatial dispersion control capability and introduce
time modulation for subwavelength metamaterial (MTM) unit cells to create a new
intelligent space-time modulated MTM (IST-MTM) antenna aperture, which not only
can provide dynamic control of radiation characteristics allowing the optimal
spectrum utilization, but also PHY secure transmission for wireless links
enabled by directional modulation (DM). Moreover, a new hybrid model-based and
learning-based approach (HyPhyLearn) will be incorporated to conduct channel
classification even when limited training samples are available. The IST-MTM-
based secure communication scheme along with the HyPhyLearn channel classifier
will have a profound impact in next-generation wireless networks by providing a
highly secured and spectrum-efficient communication scheme, which can be
deployed in future 6G networks for smart homes/cities and vehicle-to-vehicle
communications. By leveraging outreach activities at Rutgers University, the
educational plan of this project aims to broaden participation of graduate,
undergraduate and high school students, including underrepresented minority
groups in STEM, in relevant research on microwave/antenna technologies, signal
processing, machine learning, and wireless communications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current state-of-the-art antenna systems have treated
antennas as fixed radiator hardware, where extensive signal processing is
required to achieve the desired specifications, e.g., cryptography-based
security or digital beamforming, thereby increasing system cost and power
consumption. Such fixed antenna hardware design also hinders the optimal
utilization of the spectrum owing to the incapability of dynamically
compensating channel effects, thereby reducing the spectral efficiency.
Likewise, conventional data-driven classification methods used for
authentication need large amount of sampling data to achieve a certain degree of
accuracy. To address these issues, the research of IST-MTM MIMO antenna array
with hybrid learning-based classifiers aims to achieve the following synergistic
outcomes: (1) At the transmitter side, the IST-MTM antenna array will distort
the signals towards unintended directions, resulting in a high bit-error-rate
(BER) and thus preventing eavesdropping, while preserving the original signals
along the directions for authenticated users, and thereby forming a secure
communication link. Moreover, the IST-MTM antenna can reconfigure its dispersion
characteristics through programming each sub-wavelength MTM unit cell for
optimal spectral utilization. (2) At the receiver side, the HyPhyLearn method
can conduct classification and authentication even with limited number of
training samples to avoid spoofing attacks without the need of using additional
spectrum, which is particularly useful for DM, since the transmission link of
the IST-MTM array may result in limited training data. (3) In a multipath
environment, DM may cause interference for legitimate users, resulting in a
degradation in SNR. This multipath effect can be mitigated by using HyPhyLearn
to perform accurate classification between desired signals and interference. As
such, the unique integration of the IST-MTM array and HyPhyLearn will form a
synergistic and complementary effect towards achieving spectrally efficient
secured wireless communication networks in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.