* 2229904
* I-Corps:  Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor for Sustainable Wastewater Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Daniel Zitomer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a more sustainable wastewater treatment system using anaerobic
microbes. Most municipal wastewater is treated using aerobic biotechnology in
which microorganisms destroy pollutants while consuming oxygen. Adding the
oxygen is very expensive and can represent about 30% of the total wastewater
management operating cost to run electric blowers to supply diffused air/oxygen
to tanks of microbes. Anaerobic microbes also can destroy pollutants, do not
require oxygen addition, and produce renewable fuel, methane, as a by-product.
The biogas generated from large wastewater treatment plants using the proposed
technology may be used in buildings or as bio-compressed natural gas for vehicle
fuel to meet cellulosic transportation fuel goals. In addition, the proposed
technology may contribute to the development of other applications, such as
industrial wastewater treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the potential development of the downflow filter (DFF) anaerobic
membrane bioreactor to treat municipal wastewater. The proposed technology
includes buoyant media, a downflow recycle velocity of 11 m.h-1 and a polymeric
tubular membrane. Previous research results showed that the DFF may provide high
organic removal rates (&gt;95%) of low-strength wastewater at low ambient
temperature and may be an effective alternative for municipal wastewater
treatment. Additionally, the energy requirement can be lower than in other
treatment systems. The preliminary results also show the proposed technology may
treat municipal wastewater and attain water characteristics to safely discharge
clean water to lakes and rivers while producing methane gas to use as a
renewable energy source. Target customers may include large municipal wastewater
treatment plants where facilities planning for future upgrades is under
consideration. It may be that small wastewater treatment plants, treatment
plants not performing facility planning or other customers (e.g., small package
plant applications, highway rest-stops, cruise ships, and industrial wastewater
plants) may benefit also.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.