* 2229067
* SWIFT: Resilient Spectrum-Sharing among Non-Geosynchronous Satellites
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Alex Hills, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 749,925.00

Multiple constellations of non-geosynchronous-orbit (NGSO) satellites are being
deployed. More have been announced. These constellations aim to provide low-
latency broadband communications services throughout the world, including
regions with little or no broadband infrastructure today. Since the satellites
are normally far apart from the perspective of an antenna on the ground, which
can point at one satellite and ignore the others, it would be highly inefficient
to give each constellation exclusive use of its own radio-frequency spectrum
channels. Regulators have required the constellations to operate in shared
spectrum. As a result, constellations may occasionally cause harmful
interference to each other. This project investigates strategies for mitigating
the effects of the occasional interference, through some combination of
technical mechanisms, coordination agreements among the operators of satellite
constellations, and public policies adopted by spectrum management agencies. The
results of this project will facilitate deployment of NGSO systems and thus help
bring valuable broadband services to the unserved. The results will help make
services offered by these systems more resilient and improve the effectiveness
of spectrum sharing, increasing the total achievable capacity. In addition to
creating research opportunities for students and developing curriculum content,
the project will encourage undergraduate and masters-level students from
underrepresented groups to pursue PhD studies by annually bringing a group to
the top telecommunications policy research conference in the US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmful interference between NGSO satellite constellations
occurs during in-line events, which are events where two or more satellites and
their ground stations form something close to a line. This project investigates
both established and novel methods of mitigating the effects of these disruptive
in-line events. The methods investigated include look-aside, in which ground
users are assigned to a suboptimal satellite; splitting the spectrum band, which
may be asymmetric; and simply accepting the interference through switching to a
lower data rate. The project investigates negotiated arrangements between
satellite operators, default coordination arrangements imposed by regulators,
and the incentives for operators to reach negotiated arrangements. The project
uses a custom-built global-scale simulator that calculates the signal to
interference plus noise ratio (SINR), spectral efficiency, bandwidth,
throughput, and throughput degradation for every cell on the ground for each
constellation at each time step, accounting for inter-satellite interference,
varying weather and propagation effects, different cell sizes based on
population and demand variation, adaptive assignment of cells to satellites,
distribution of ground stations, and other effects. The simulator is used to
assess outcomes of the various interference mitigation methods and arrangements
for many different types of constellations, where constellations differ in the
number of satellites, altitude, type of orbit, bandwidth, beam steering
capabilities, market focus, and other characteristics. Analytical results will
provide insight that could help guide spectrum policy as well as further
coordination among satellite operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.