* 2229156
* FMSG:BIO: Integrating Artificial Intelligence with Bioprinting for Future Manufacturing of Organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Shandong Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Human pluripotent stem cell (hPSC) derived organoids are highly valuable for
disease treatment and therapeutic development. Translating organoids to
practical use will require scalable and reproducible methods to produce high-
quality organoids. This project will devise strategies exploiting three-
dimensional (3D) bioprinting for scalable organoid manufacturing. Machine
Learning (ML)/Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques will be developed to
rapidly assess organoid quality from microscopy images. The goal is to offer a
pathway for large-scale manufacturing of tailored and patient-specific organoids
by augmenting ML/AI techniques for 3D bioprinting. The research will provide
trainees with multidisciplinary skill sets, encompassing bioprinting, organoid
engineering, imaging, and AI methods. In addition, the project will integrate
global and social outreach aspects into engineering curriculum, offering a
holistic educational pathway to train the future, globally aware U.S.
biomanufacturing workforce to lead the world in revolutionary manufacturing
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proof-of-concept Future Manufacturing Seed
Grant (FMSG) project aims to integrate beneficial mechano-signaling pathways for
organoid manufacturing via ML/AI aided 3D bioprinting. In executing this
approach, the goal is to develop non-invasive assays to measure organoid
phenotype to meet the critical quality attributes of the manufacturing pipeline.
The central hypothesis is that imposing cell confinement via encapsulation will
induce favorable mechano-transduction pathways, which will enhance organoid
differentiation by deactivating actin filaments. The resulting cytoskeletal
modification from actin remodeling can be exploited to extract information about
cell characteristics to predict phenotype. This hypothesis will be tested by
developing techniques for (i) cell-confinement driven organoid derivation using
3D bioprinting; and (ii) predicting cell fate from cytoskeletal modifications
using Artificial Intelligence (AI) models to identify features of organoid
development in bright-field images. This FMSG project demonstrate the
feasibility of integrating AI with 3D bioprinting in the organoid generation
pipeline, with the long-term goal of enabling scalable manufacturing of
organoids with stringent in-line quality control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems and the Division of Engineering Education
and Centers in the Directorate for Engineering and the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.