* 2229604
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: CyberTraining of Construction (CyCon) Research Workforce Through an Educational and Community Engagement Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Xiaogang Ma, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2026
* USD 359,828.00

The construction sector is a major contributor to the U.S. economy. It
represents over 4% of the U.S. GDP, equivalent to 1.36 trillion dollars. Despite
recent advancements, studies indicate that the construction industry is still
one of the least computerized sectors compared to manufacturing,
telecommunication, and retail industries. In line with this, the construction
research community faces significant challenges when it comes to adopting new
data science and Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions and techniques. Several
factors, such as complexity and uniqueness of construction projects, the rapid
pace of evolution of such technologies, and unfamiliarity of traditional
construction faculty with such topics, cause this situation. As a result, it is
crucial for researchers and academic experts to develop novel educational and
training strategies to bridge such research skills gaps and strengthen
construction research data literacy and digital fluency. This project addresses
the above challenges faced by educators and researchers in construction
engineering through the development of an educational and community engagement
platform called CyCon (Cyber Construction). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CyCon
platform focuses on state-of-the-art AI/ML techniques and cloud computing
solutions that serve CI (CyberInfrastructure) users, contributors, and
professionals in the construction research community. The CyCon platform
contains the following four training and educational components: (1) CI user
resource modules, including modular learning coursework and course project
libraries, to train CyCon users with basic and advanced CI research skills, (2)
CI educator resource modules that provide novel strategies and online materials
to efficiently train educators, (3) CI competition modules to help CyCon users
practice and further advance their knowledge about AI/ML products and tools
using real-world construction problems, and (4) CI crowdsourcing modules that
provide a well-defined data pipeline using data warehouses to enrich
construction datasets available for public use. The CyCon platform is designed
as a sustainable educational and community engagement framework for the
construction CI research community and is expected to significantly improve the
learning and teaching experiences of CI users and educators at various
construction programs nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.