* 2229386
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Coexistence and Interference Mitigation in the Mid-Band Spectrum: Analysis, Protocol Design, and Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 375,000.00

Rapid proliferation of mobile technologies, manifested by a boom in smart phones
and mobile video, along with the emergence of new verticals such as industrial
IoT and autonomous vehicles, placed high demand on the communications
infrastructure and motivated the introduction of 5G cellular systems. Compared
to its 4G/LTE predecessor, 5G systems promise to deliver orders of magnitude
higher data rates, significantly lower end-to-end latency, much denser
connectivity, seamless coverage, high reliability, and longer battery lifetime.
Facilitating these performance gains are advances on multiple fronts, most
notably access to new swaths of the radio frequency (RF) spectrum. In addition
to opening new spectrum above 24 GHz for 5G systems, the FCC and other
regulatory bodies also created new opportunities at mid-bands below 7 GHz
(“beachfront spectrum”). These bands exhibit favorable propagation
characteristics that enable wide-area coverage at high data
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on addressing coexistence
challenges over three recently available mid-bands: the C-band (3.7-3.98 GHz),
the CBRS band (3.55-3.7 GHz), and the recently unlicensed 6 GHz bands
(5.925-7.125 GHz). These bands have been only recently allocated for commercial
wireless systems, which will have to coexist on these bands with a wide variety
of incumbents, including Navy radar in 3.55–3.7 GHz CBRS band, point-to-point
microwave links and passive radioastronomy receivers (e.g., the Methanol line)
in the 6 GHz bands, and adjacent radar altimeters in the 4.2–4.4 GHz band. The
proposed research agenda includes three thrusts. In the first thrust, the PIs
will focus on coexistence and interference mitigation in the C-band. Despite
extensive media coverage of the potential of 5G interference onto radar
altimeters, there is a lack of rigorous, unbiased analyses and measurement of
such interference in realistic operational scenarios. The PIs will accurately
characterize C-band interference and establish the conditions under which it may
occur. Novel machine learning (ML) techniques will be developed for real-time
detection of interference and mitigation of its impact by adapting the 5G
transmission parameters. The second thrust focuses on coexistence and
interference mitigation in the CBRS band, particularly secondary coexistence
between Tier 3 (GAA) users, which is quickly emerging as a bottleneck to
efficient use of the band. Protocol-based and ML-based solutions will be
explored. The third thrust focuses on coexistence in the unlicensed 6 GHz bands,
where ML-based protocol classification designs will be explored to allow a given
device to detect the underlying protocols of other devices and adapt its
parameters accordingly. The proposed solutions will be evaluated via simulations
and field measurements. These solutions are expected to have broader
applicability beyond the specific studied bands. Research outcomes from this
project will be shared with industry and will be provided to the FCC as case
studies to facilitate subsequent policy making in other bands. The proposed
research will be fully integrated into the educational plan by incorporating its
outcomes in newly designed and existing courses as well as training
undergraduate and graduate students via mentoring, participation in test-bed
development, and special projects. The project contains a detailed plan to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups via various channels
established in the past years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.