* 2229690
* POSE: Phase I:  A Path to Sustaining a New Open-Source Ecosystem for Materials Science (OSEMatS)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Zi-Kui Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. OSEMatS
aims to scope preparatory activities to enable the growth of existing open-
source materials research tools into a sustainable and robust Open-Source
Ecosystem (OSE) that will have broad and lasting scientific and societal
impacts. OSEMatS stems from the team’s nonprofit Materials Genome Foundation
(MGF) incorporated in 2018 for “promoting computational approaches in science
and engineering through organizing workshops and supporting the development of
computational tools and databases”. The existing open-source tools on GitHub
developed by the team are PyCalphad and ESPEI (Extensible Self-optimizing Phase
Equilibria Infrastructure) for the modeling and applications of thermodynamics,
which is the most fundamental component of materials science and engineering,
through the calculation of phase diagram (CALPHAD) method which is the backbone
of the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) and Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI). An advisory council will be established within the MGF
and will include key contributors and stakeholders associated with PyCalphad and
related projects, as well as external subject matter experts in open-source
governance. The near-term goal of OSEMatS is to develop and execute a strategic
plan for a sustainable PyCalphad and ESPEI OSE using an organized and
intentional approach through joint efforts between MGF and The Pennsylvania
State University (PSU). The long-term vision of OSEMatS seeks to promote the
computational thermodynamics library PyCalphad as a foundational component of
scientific computing within materials science, supporting a robust portfolio of
associated software projects and user cases to enable the integrated
computational-experimental fundamental research and data-driven discovery and
inverse-design of materials with emergent
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSEMatS will engage in several planning
and outreach activities with the goal of devising a path to sustainability.
OSEMatS will (i) empower its user community to become contributors, mentors, and
technical leaders through interactive workshops; (ii) ensure a low barrier for
onboarding of new projects by providing access to MGF organizational resources
commensurate with transparent success criteria and periodic evaluation
processes; and (iii) organize outreach activities and events within OSEMatS in a
manner consistent with a commitment to inclusion, diversity, equity, and
accessibility (IDEA). To organize outreach activities coherently, the team
incorporated the nonprofit MGF in 2018, aiming to search for a sustainability
model to continue the development of OSE in alignment with the POSE program for
the creation and maintenance of infrastructure needed for efficient and secure
operation of the OSEMatS. PyCalphad and ESPEI have demonstrated their global
impacts on computational materials science for universities, national
laboratories, and commercial companies. The POSE program will provide necessary
support to kickstart a path to sustainability for OSEMatS, based on the open-
source PyCalphad and ESPEI, along with many new ones on the way from the PI’s
group and in the community through increased coordination of developer
contributions and a more focused route to impactful technologies. OSEMatS will
enable better fundamental understanding of materials and efficient discovery and
design of advanced materials to benefit our society. The team will actively
engage students in these activities via various educational and outreach
programs at PSU as done in the past such as the Summer Research Opportunity
Program for high school students, the Women in Science and Engineering Research
program, and student chapters of various professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.