* 2229046
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Development of Modern Commercialism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Francisco Garcia-Albarido, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 7,370.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the ways in which expanding
markets and the commodification of labor and resources transform local, self-
sufficient economies and societies. Commodification is at the core of the modern
global economy and was a key development in the formation of market economies in
the past. It has long been recognized that European colonialism unleashed
commodification worldwide accompanied by new productive agendas, market-based
consumer patterns, and even ecological rearrangements via species introductions,
depletions, and extinctions. Colonial conquest brought commodification and
mercantilism to many parts of the world as part of spreading the first global
economy, but did this process build on prior forms of commodification and
specialization? How did local populations for example engage with the
overarching Spanish market order, and conversely, how were market mentalities
and practices shaped by native economic arrangements? How were new hybrid
productive structures and practices born in colonial settings as market logics
met native patterns? These questions remain important subjects of investigation
to better understand globalization dynamics, past and the present.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an archaeological perspective this research examines
how indigenous economic practices, largely based on self-sufficiency,
reciprocity and redistribution, confronted a mercantile praxis based on the
commodification of labor and natural resources. The doctoral student examines an
indigenous maritime hunter-gatherer community as this place was transformed into
an important early colonial port. Diverse archeological and archival lines of
evidence on community composition, occupation specialization, production and
consumption (from diet and personal possessions to fishing gear and impact on
fishing stocks) are integrated to track changes in socioeconomic life and
habitat of residents (both indigenous and colonial) from the prehispanic through
early colonial periods. A well preserved archaeological setting provides an
unparalleled opportunity to radiocarbon date at the fine scale important changes
in these lines of evidence, generating critical information on the timing and
sequences of change relating to commodification and market practices. Such a
study provides a vivid picture of an understudied settlement type - - the early
colonial port - - as a revealing, diverse workforce community, and provides an
archaeological case study at the dawn of commodification processes. This
knowledge furthers comparative understanding of the dynamics of initial
commercial nodes and the hybrid nature of the early colonial markets generally.
In addition, the close study of habitat change (marine and terrestrial) by the
research team advances environmental archaeology on the topics of Anthropocene
habitat change and overfishing. Collaboration with local institutions offer
students research materials and training opportunities in archaeology and
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.