* 2229291
* POSE: Phase I:  Scoping the transition of Rosetta to a self-sustaining Open Source Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,982.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. The
Rosetta community has led the field of protein and RNA modeling and design for
the last two decades with state-of-the-art biomolecular modeling and design
software, high-impact scientific advances enabled by the software, and a
workforce with best-in-class biomolecular engineering training. The biomolecular
modeling landscape is rapidly changing with the emergence of powerful machine
learning methods, and the recent entry of several computationally designed
proteins into clinical trials have marked an inflection point in the history of
the field. These disruptions have prompted the Rosetta community to reimagine
their practices to enable continued leadership and innovation in the next era of
biomolecular modeling. Specifically, Rosetta’s existing paid commercial license
model limits Rosetta’s accessibility and impact, and de-incentivizes critical
contributions from industry scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Second, Rosetta's remarkable
success has led to dramatic expansion of both the software and community, yet
the operational structure of the community has not been updated accordingly,
limiting workforce growth, software development, and the diversity of
perspectives that&lt;br/&gt;ultimately lead to higher-impact scientific
advances. This project will create opportunities for coordinated and strategic
software development by leveraging, growing, and supporting the Rosetta
community to provide best-in-class software. The project will serve the national
interest by driving the next generation of the leading biomolecular modeling and
design software that enables scientific discovery and innovation across the
health, food, and energy sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will scope
and build an open-source ecosystem (OSE) for the Rosetta software and community.
Specifically, the goals are to: (1) Create a Strategic Plan that aligns efforts
and drives progress by identifying high-impact opportunities in the biomolecular
modeling&lt;br/&gt;and design ecosystem that the software, science, and
community embodied in a Rosetta OSE will realize; (2) Define an organizational
structure capable of rapid and informed decision-making, empowering community
members and leaders in a “do-ocracy” such that&lt;br/&gt;scientific discovery,
code development, and community engagement are all equally incentivized; and (3)
Identify long-term funding and social engagement strategies that yield expanded
and active user- and contributor-bases that sustain Rosetta’s impact and
leadership. Learn more about Rosetta at
http://www.rosettacommons.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.