* 2229168
* FMSG: ECO: Towards Circular Manufacturing of Hydrocarbon Feedstocks from Plastic Waste
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Bryan Vogt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Plastics present our society with a complex dilemma. We can efficiently and
inexpensively produce a fantastic array of polymer products, yet the resulting
waste is one of the greatest environmental challenges of our time. It also
presents an enormous opportunity for manufacturing; there are literally millions
of tons of reduced carbon feedstocks going to landfills and waterways every
year. If our plastic waste could be converted into a more processible form and
we if we could find markets large enough to accommodate the product materials,
we may unlock a wide range of new manufacturing opportunities. The modern
petrochemical industry is one of the few markets large enough to accommodate our
annual plastic waste. Re-integrating waste plastic into the petrochemical supply
chain would take advantage of enormous economies of scale and develop a circular
plastics economy while simultaneously reducing our annual petroleum consumption.
This project seeks to address this problem by developing the fundamental
chemistry, engineering, and economics needed to convert waste plastic into
“poly-crude”, a material that can be dropped into the existing petrochemical
supply chain. A complementary techno-economic analysis will help direct the
project towards economically viable products and process considerations. This
impact is further buoyed by an integrated workforce development plan that aims
to broaden participation by recruiting future scientists and engineers from
underrepresented groups, while also providing interdisciplinary research and
leadership training that will ensure their success in future manufacturing
roles. Through this fundamental science, we will help to train a wide range of
the future workforce (graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
students) in the technical and critical thinking skills necessary for 21st
century manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to develop the
fundamental chemistry and engineering to help develop a plastics manufacturing
platform by which plastic waste is converted to valuable chemical feedstocks.
Benefits include alleviating demand on natural petrochemical resources, enabling
future manufacturing based upon a circular plastics economy, and addressing
critical societal, environmental, and economic needs. Catalytic methods using
polymer melts are encumbered by slow diffusion and process inefficiencies
associated with batch reactors. This project aims to elucidate the fundamental
thermodynamic factors inherent in competitive transport and size-selective
adsorption of polyolefins on metal oxide catalysts. Using (i) size-specific
polyolefins, (ii) neutron scattering techniques, and (iii) competitive
adsorption measurements in flow reactors, we will develop adsorption models that
will help us probe the deeply interconnected polymer-solvent-surface
interactions that govern competitive adsorption in these systems and drive
polymer adsorption from solution to favor longer chain polymers. This will, in
turn, be used to improve both catalytic activity and selectivity, as it will
provide a means of getting around critical mass transport barriers by dissolving
polyolefins in appropriate hydrocarbon solvents and employing flow reactors to
study polyolefin adsorption onto catalyst surfaces from solution. Isotopic
substitution and advanced neutron scattering techniques to distinguish between
different polymers and solvents provide compelling advantages. Understanding
these interrelated factors will allow us to develop the fundamental knowledge
necessary to design processes (temperature, solvent, catalyst) that minimize the
production of low-value products during catalytic hydrocracking of plastic waste
streams. By controlling these parameters, we postulate selective polymer
adsorption on a catalytic surface can be intelligently biased to control the
product distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award was
supported by co-funding from the Chemical, Biological, Environmental Engineering
and Transport Systems and the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
Divisions in the Directorate for Engineering and the Division of Chemistry in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.