* 2229383
* Microevolution of molecular mechanisms for developmental plasticity in Pristionchus nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Erik Ragsdale, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2027
* USD 300,000.00

Genes alone do not determine traits, and a widespread phenomenon in animals and
plants is for traits to develop differently in response to varying pressures
from the environment. This phenomenon is known as “developmental plasticity,”
which in some extreme cases acts as a “switch” between alternative and often
strikingly different forms. In some examples, such switches have been defined in
terms of individual genes and the products they encode. However, a persistent
challenge has been to understand how these switches, specifically the molecular
processes responsible, evolve in nature. The goal of this research is to
identify, using species of nematodes that assume different feeding-forms in
response to starvation and local competition, the genetic basis for how
developmental plasticity evolves. Moreover, by drawing on multiple,
complementary types of variation in plasticity among populations, the project
will determine which features, if any, are generalizable across them. The
project will train undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in
research that integrates genetics, developmental biology, and evolution. The
research will also support two science-outreach programs at Indiana University:
(i) the investigating laboratory will host and mentor underrepresented minority
high-school students in their own research projects in an annual summer program,
and (ii) the principal investigator will guide Indiana high-school teachers in
developing projects, experiments, and activities to be implemented in the
classroom to improve the teaching and learning of state life-science
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance a functional-genetic
understanding of the evolution of polyphenism, or discrete developmental
plasticity. Using a model system for developmental genetics, Pristionchus
nematodes, this research will link defined molecular mechanisms of a
morphological polyphenism to the allelic variants that explain natural variation
in that polyphenism. First, the research will determine the quantitative genetic
basis for observed divergence of plastic responses between wild isolates of the
species Pristionchus pacificus. This aim will be met by mapping, validating, and
functionally characterizing allelic variants causing differences in a threshold
response to the environment. Second, the research will determine the
quantitative genetic basis for hidden divergence of polyphenism regulation
between wild isolates with similar plastic responses. This aim will be met by
revealing how combinations of variants, which can be uncovered through
transgressive phenotypes, are responsible for polyphenism evolution. Third, the
research will experimentally determine the repeatability of proximal mechanisms
for plasticity evolution. This aim will be met by replicating scenarios of
experimental evolution of Pristionchus populations in response to a polyphenism-
influencing environment. By integrating a model for polyphenism genetics into a
microevolutionary framework, the research will describe: (i) the molecular
capacity of polyphenism’s regulatory mechanisms to change; (ii) how
generalizable the types of changes are across parallel cases of divergence;
(iii) the impact of diverging plasticity modifiers on the polyphenism
developmental network, including those components that effect the ultimate forms
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.