* 2229584
* Conference Support for the 60th Anniversary Workshop at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory; Lima, Peru; July 25-27, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Danny Scipion, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 05/31/2023
* USD 34,846.00

The 60th Anniversary Workshop at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory will be held in
Lima, Peru, in July of 2022. The workshop will commemorate the 60th anniversary
of the founding of the Jicamarca Radio Observatory, the premier geospace
facility dedicated to research in equatorial aeronomy, space physics, and space
weather. Jicamarca began reporting scientific findings approximately 60 years
ago. The purpose of the workshop is to commemorate this, to highlight the most
important research taking place in equatorial aeronomy and space physics
presently, and to highlight how recent and planned upgrades to Jicamarca can
contribute to and expedite this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will bring together some of the most active researchers in equatorial aeronomy
and space physics (and their students). Some particularly auspicious topics to
be covered include fundamental incoherent scatter theory, plasma instabilities
in the valley region and topside, space-weather forecasting, neutral wind
measurements, and experimental methods based on distributed instruments. The
workshop will also familiarize the aeronomy community with recent breakthroughs
in the field, disseminate information about recent and planned upgrades to the
Jicamarca facility, promote the education and training of students and early-
career professionals, including Jicamarca stakeholders, and broaden
participation in geospace sciences by convening a workshop in Latin
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.