* 2229880
* RAISE: MemComputing: From Software to Hardware
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Massimiliano Di Ventra, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2026
* USD 442,622.00

MemComputing is an unconventional, physics-based computing paradigm that
exploits the ubiquitous time non-locality of any physical system, namely memory
of their past dynamics. Although it is fundamentally different from the
traditional computing model, and even quantum computing, it can be emulated in
software on modern computers. This is because it relies on non-quantum dynamical
systems to compute. The software emulation of the digital version of
MemComputing machines (DMMs) has already shown great advantages compared to
traditional algorithms in the solution of some hard computational problems.
However, there are many academic and industrial applications for which a
hardware implementation of these machines is not only preferable, but even
necessary. The main goal of this RAISE project is precisely to implement
MemComputing in hardware, and test its efficiency on a representative set of
computationally-intensive problems. This project will then set the foundations
towards the ultimate goal of realizing such DMMs as co-processors in our
traditional computing systems to both enhance and greatly extend their
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) will be used to implement these computing machines. To assist their
hardware design, a theory of MemComputing maps will be developed to analyze the
dynamics of DMMs, understand their modus operandi, and suggest improvements.
Starting from small-size prototypes, medium- and large-size DMMs will be
implemented in FPGAs. Time, space, and energy scalability in the solution of
various combinatorial optimization problems will be used as metrics to improve
on their design and push the bounds imposed by the hardware (such as the amount
of logic cells in FPGAs). The project goes to the very core of what it means to
compute, with far-reaching implications. In fact, its interdisciplinarity will
help the professional development of a future work force skilled in successfully
navigating across traditional disciplinary boundaries, as it is becoming ever
more relevant in both industry and academia. Finally, MemComputing is that type
of transformative technology that may provide a clear competitive edge to its
users in the rapidly evolving scientific and industrial landscape of
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.