* 2229623
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 UChicago AI+Science Summer School (UChicago AI+Sci SS)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* David Miller, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The University of Chicago Data Science Instituteâ€™s AI+Science initiative, in
partnership with the Institute for Mathematical and Statistical Innovation
(IMSI), the James Franck Institute (JFI) at the University of Chicago, and the
Institute for Foundations of Data Science (IFDS), will launch its inaugural
AI+Science Summer School in August 2022. The goal of the AI+Science Summer
School is to introduce a new generation of diverse, interdisciplinary graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and researchers to the emerging field of
AI+Science. The AI+Science Summer School will help build community and spur new
research directions focused on AI-enabled scientific discovery across the
physical and biological sciences. The program features lectures, panels, hands-
on coding sessions, and poster sessions. The featured workshop speakers include
cutting-edge researchers both from UChicago and other institutions who are
engaging in rigorous work at the intersection of AI and the natural sciences in
a range of domains. The AI+Science Summer School will serve as one of the
inaugural activities under the UChicago Data Science Institute to establish and
build the AI+Science community, both on the UChicago campus and beyond. Travel
scholarships for participating students lower the barrier for participation to
students who might not otherwise be able to attend, and serve the mission stated
above by including as many capable and qualified participants as possible in
this effort to advance the field of AI+Science while simultaneously building
community and providing opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
AI+Science Summer School is to introduce a new generation of diverse,
interdisciplinary graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and researchers to
the emerging field of AI+Science. The topics covered in the Summer School will
focus on four core themes at the heart of this emerging paradigm of scientific
discovery: AI uncovering new laws of nature; AI guiding scientific measurement;
physics-informed machine learning; and scientific discovery advancing AI
frontiers. The AI+Science Summer School will help build community and spur new
research directions focused on AI-enabled scientific discovery across the
physical and biological sciences. Topics of the summer school will include:
physics-informed and -constrained neural networks; AI for geosciences and
climate modeling; AI-guided search in chemistry and molecular biology; tensor
networks for classical and quantum systems; active learning and AI-guided
experimental design. Travel grants will be awarded to 10-15 participating
students in the AI+Science Summer School. The participants who are awarded
travel scholarships will be at least 50% women, other underrepresented
minorities, and first generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.