* 2229278
* RII Track-4:NSF: From Analytic Number Theory to Harmonic Analysis
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Ayla Gafni, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 03/31/2025
* USD 210,430.00

The fields of number theory and harmonic analysis are intricately connected.
Harmonic analysis is a fundamental area of mathematics with applications across
all of STEM, including number theory. Number theory examines patterns in the
integers, and analytic number theory refers to a collection of methods that rely
on analyzing continuous functions to understand discrete objects. Harmonic
analysis provides the bridge that converts problems between the discrete and
continuous settings. The Department of Mathematics at the University of
Mississippi has an active analytic number theory group, but there are no
harmonic analysts in the state of Mississippi. Through this fellowship, the PI
will gain research expertise in harmonic analysis, especially as it applies to
discrete settings. The PI will travel to the University of California, Los
Angeles to collaborate with and learn from Professor Terence Tao. Tao has a
world-class research group of students, postdocs, and visitors, with a strong
record of collaboration and cooperative learning. The PI will bring one PhD
student to Los Angeles to learn from and collaborate with the students in the
UCLA analysis group. This fellowship has potential to have a lasting impact on
the PI’s career, will strengthen the analytic number theory group at the
University of Mississippi, and will enhance graduate and undergraduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship
to an Assistant Professor and training for a graduate student at the University
of Mississippi (UM). This fellowship will result in two or more collaborative
research projects in the general area of decoupling and restriction theory.
There is a deep connection between the circle method in analytic number theory
and the method of decoupling in harmonic analysis. During the first year of this
fellowship, the PI will collaborate with Tao and his research group to explore
this connection by investigating discrete restriction and decoupling theorems
for certain curves which lack translation-dilation invariance. In the second
year, building on the previous work with discrete restriction and decoupling,
the collaboration will pivot into the area of continuous restriction theory.
Through this sequence of collaborations, the PI will gain a new research area
and will form long-lasting collaborative partnerships with some of the strongest
harmonic analysts in the country. The PI will share this new expertise with the
University of Mississippi community by developing an undergraduate course and a
graduate course in harmonic analysis. The undergraduate course will be useful to
mathematics majors planning to go into industry, and will be of interest to
science and engineering students who are studying signal processing and data
transfers. The course will also create opportunities for interdisciplinary
thesis projects co-advised by the PI and UM faculty in other STEM fields. The
graduate course will cover harmonic analysis concepts and techniques that are
relevant to current research in analytic number theory. Both courses will equip
Mississippi students with valuable tools to become more effective
mathematicians, scientists, and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.