* 2229008
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Faculty Resources and Opportunities for Growth in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Molly Weinburgh, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,975.00

The ADVANCE Catalyst grant will support Texas Christian University’s effort to
determine how it has implicitly influenced the inequities found in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) departments. By identifying
barriers and bridges for women STEM faculty, this project aims to produce
institutional change that will impact not only STEM, but also all women faculty
at TCU. More broadly, as any institution develops an environment of equity as
the norm, graduates of master and doctoral programs will enter their academic
careers with a mindset of equity which has the potential to increase the number
of women STEM faculty. In addition, systemic change (with an increase in the
number of women faculty) has the potential to enhance infrastructure for
research and education on our campus. The analysis and resulting five-year
strategic plan may ground the work of other private universities with similar
demographics and historical contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Christian
University ADVANCE Catalyst project is grounded in the robust literature of
three academic areas; challenges for women in higher education (especially
STEM), intersectionality, and self-studies in higher education. Combining these
bodies of work, the focus is on understanding the institution’s role in
cultivating challenges and disparate work contexts for intersectional women
faculty. This project will consider the other identities and positions held by
women/females to understand their positionality. The short-term goal is to
conduct a self-study to identify systemic factors that impede equity and
inclusion of women in STEM, paying particular attention to the ways
intersectional analyses will inform understandings of women’s experiences on
campus given that those differences make a material difference in their lives as
derived from their diverse identities. A key strength of the project is the
qualitative focus on understanding the barriers/bridges when women STEM faculty
are seen as a complex being who are more than their gender. Research questions
include: (1) What are the barriers and bridges for recruiting, hiring,
promoting, and retaining women/female faculty in STEM? (2) What are the most
significant intersections for women faculty for recruiting, hiring, promoting,
and retaining within STEM? The long-term goal is to implement the five-year
strategic plan and document the efficacy of institutional change
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.