* 2229143
* FMSG: Cyber: Nanoscale Single Photon 3D Printing at Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to a
nanomanufacturing process, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
national prosperity and security. Three-dimensional printing or 3D printing is
the process of creating three-dimensional (3D) objects from a digital computer
model. It has been widely used for applications ranging from product
visualization to making engineered parts. Nanoscale 3D printing is useful for
making miniaturized structures and devices and can enable new product functions
for many applications. However, the common 3D nanoprinting methods are slow and
costly because they typically rely on serial point-by-point scanning of an
expensive laser beam. This award supports fundamental research to provide the
needed knowledge for the development of a fast nanoscale 3D printing method,
which uses a low-cost compact light source, similar to that used in laser
pointers, and digital light projection for high-throughput fabrication of 3D
nanostructures. The single photon 3D nanoprinterâ€™s potential use spans
applications in information technology, communications, energy, healthcare, and
biomedical industries, which benefits the U.S. economy and society. This multi-
disciplinary research involves several disciplines including manufacturing,
photochemistry, optics, and materials science. The project helps broaden the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in research and training and
impacts engineering education and development of the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D nanostructures have properties and functions
exceeding those of bulk structures or even properties traditionally not
possible. Printing of 3D nanostructures requires a nonlinear process to locally
define high-resolution features. The state-of-the-art is femtosecond laser two-
photon polymerization (2PP) process. However, the 2PP process is slow, costly
and generates structures with micron-scale resolutions. This research is to fill
the knowledge gap in the development of a high resolution, high throughput, low-
cost 3D nanoprinter. The research team aims to develop a system that uses a low-
cost diode laser and single-photon dosage nonlinearity to achieve 1000 times
higher throughput, at least 10 times less cost and 50 nm or less resolutions
than those possible with conventional 2PP. The team plans to investigate and
understand the nanoscale nonlinear single-photon polymerization process, control
the diffusion of inhibiting radicals to prevent unwanted polymerization to
improve feature resolution, develop a parallel projection method to print entire
nanolayers at a time to speed up the printing throughput, and create a machine
learning (ML)-guided digital-twin database that connects the desired
functionality of the manufactured parts with the build parameters for its future
broad adoption as a cyber 3D nanomanufacturing platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported with co-funding from Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division in the Engineering (ENG)
Directorate, and the Chemistry (CHE) Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.