* 2229825
* I-Corps:  Water treatment technology to remove arsenic from contaminated groundwater
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Ashok Gadgil, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a water treatment technology that may produce arsenic-free
drinking water for small, low-income rural communities. About 200 million
individuals are exposed to high levels of arsenic through their drinking water.
Arsenic is a naturally occurring groundwater contaminant and causes the most
excess cancers of any regulated carcinogenic water contaminant at its permitted
level. The proposed technology may benefit small communities with a water
quality problem that up until now may have been too expensive to address at
small scale. Although other arsenic-removal technologies exist, their unit costs
rise rapidly at small scale, leaving many communities potentially unable to
afford operation and maintenance of such plants once they have been built. In
addition, the proposed technology also may help alleviate the burden placed on
health care systems for costs associated with arsenic-related cancers, which
ranges between $75,000 to $150,000 per person in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology for remediation of arsenic contamination of water. This proposed
electrochemical technology removes arsenic by releasing in the water iron rust
that first binds to arsenic and is subsequently removed through filtration or
settling. The proposed technology may remove high concentrations of arsenic from
groundwater down to levels consistently below the EPA-approved maximum level of
10 ppb. The advantages of the proposed technology over current arsenic removal
technologies include possible better efficacy of arsenic removal, potentially
lower capital and operating and maintenance costs, requires less labor, and
could eliminate the production of any liquid waste
stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.