* 2229680
* POSE: Phase I:  Open hardware for aquatic germplasm preservation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jin Choi, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,866.00

Investments in aquatic species around the world support the annual production of
more than 110 million tons of food, the direct employment of more than 60
million people, and the support many types of scientific research including
medicine. Valuable genetic lines of aquatic species, such as fast-growing
species for fish farmers (aquaculture) or endangered species, must be preserved
in a way that can be recovered years, decades, or even longer after they are
collected. Cryopreservation (freezing) is a valuable tool to protect these
resources, but it must be done in a standardized way with devices and approaches
that can fit all budgets. A new approach is to use 3D printing and consumer-
level electronics to produce devices that users can manufacture themselves. This
“open hardware” needs to be made accessible to new user and maker communities.
This project will develop an Open Hardware Ecosystems in which users can access
files to make devices and help shape future developments. This Ecosystem will
allow laboratories, stock centers, academic institutions, aquaculture producers,
and conservation agencies to preserve and distribute genetic material for future
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open-source hardware offers tremendous
opportunities for science to expand participation and improve outcomes. This
project seeks to establish germplasm repositories to safeguard the genetic
resources of aquatic species. A strategy based on the principles of business
development is needed for creation of an efficient Open Hardware Ecosystem to
avoid pitfalls and to generate opportunities by identifying time, resources,
costs, and personnel needed to maintain and use the Ecosystem. Useful platforms
should be able to distribute fabrication files for open hardware, as well as the
associated user manuals, data collection worksheets, database structures,
training curriculum, and other information needed to produce repository-ready
samples. This project will be user-based and will focus on the process for
recruitment leading to community development, and the progression through user
to maker to developer. This planning stage will include a determination of the
size and characteristics of the target sectors, while identifying opportunities
for expansion. Process mapping approaches will be used to develop simulation
modeling and analysis of the proposed platform. These options will allow for
open distribution of technology, while maintaining protection of intellectual
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.