* 2229461
* III: SMALL: Graph Contrastive Learning for Few-Shot Node Classification
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,987.00

A graph is a data structure consisting of nodes and edges. Graph data is the
data associated with nodes and edges in a graph. Graph data is huge and is
widely present in many real-world applications. Social media data is a typical
example of graph data in which users are nodes and their relationships are
edges. Since users have different profiles, they can form disparate
relationships (i.e., edges) amongst themselves. When a dataset is large,
annotating or labeling it with ground truth is time consuming and labor
intensive. A pressing need for machine learning and data mining to effectively
deal with big data like graph data is to address the labeled data scarcity
problem. When we can only label a miniscule amount of data, can we learn well
from big graph data? Graph few-shot node classification, in which learning can
occur when only a small amount of data are labeled, is one such problem for
which researchers strive to find novel solutions. In such a problem, training
data can vary in the training phase depending on the availability of labeled
nodes - with labels, weak labels, or no labels. To address such unprecedented
challenges, this project aims to develop new approaches. The proposed research
will train students to perform independent research, conduct scientific
experiments, and publish technical results to nurture science and engineering
researchers. Students will be exposed to the core techniques of real-world
problems with graph data and machine learning. The impact of this work will also
extend to critical thinking of dominant approaches, understanding the essence of
difficult problems such as graph few-shot node classification, and exploring
simple and effective solutions considering real-world
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Episodic meta-learning is currently the dominant
approach that has been shown to be effective for supervised few-shot node
classification. This project questions the necessity of this meta-learning
approach and elaborates the need for a novel graph contrastive learning approach
to few-shot node classification to handle supervised few-shot node
classification and more challenging and realistic cases where only weak or no
supervision information is available during training. This project investigates
an alternative approach - graph contrastive learning in search of a general
learning framework for the challenging problem of few-shot node classification
and to handle the cases with noisy or no labels during training by examining
fundamental research issues and developing new algorithms for supervised, weakly
supervised, and self-supervised few-shot node classification. Related work is
reviewed, preliminary studies related to each research task are presented, and
innovative research tasks are proposed to develop original and systematic
solutions. With the proven track record in graph learning and insights gained in
the preliminary studies for each proposed research task by the PIâ€™s team, this
project is envisioned as laying a solid foundation for graph contrastive
learning for few-shot node classification and paving the way to advance the
frontier of learning graph data with noisy or no labels during
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.