* 2229378
* Exploiting the Weighted Graph Laplacian for Power Systems: High-Degree Contingency, Machine Learning, Data Assimilation, and Parallel-in-Time Integration
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Barry Lee, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 10/31/2025
* USD 276,203.00

Modernizing the power grid continues to be a major national and international
challenge. The urgency of this modernization has been accentuated by the
devastating effects of climate change on the power infrastructure and the
societal consequences that can occur when only minor, let alone major, damages
are made to this infrastructure. Mathematics and statistics will play a special
role in this modernization since the power system is modeled by complex systems
of mathematical equations. This project will develop new fast and accurate
computational techniques for solving the core mathematical equations modeling
the grid. The crux of these new techniques will be based on the grid's network
structure, which exposes the flow of electricity in the power grid. A common and
significant problem in these techniques is determining the most relevant
generators, loads, and substations in the grid. Knowing these components will
allow power grid engineers to determine which parts of the grid are most
vulnerable to disruptions coming from natural disasters and cyber attacks, and
hence, help design a more resilient grid. The project will provide training
opportunities to graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop fast and accurate algorithms for analyzing large-scale, real-world power
systems. A common feature of these algorithms is exploiting the system's
associated weighted graph Laplacian to expose the diffusion of electricity in
the network. The fundamental component of this research is determining the
dependency and relevancy of the network buses, which is accomplished through
state-of-the-art algebraic multigrid techniques for weighted graph Laplacians
and approximate diffusion distance measures. The dependency and relevancy will
be used to develop (1) fast and accurate screening techniques for high-degree
contingency analysis; (2) multi-scale graph neural networks (GNNs) for
regression in power grid analysis; and (3) optimal parallel-in-time integrators
for dynamical power systems. Moreover, to avoid the vanishing gradient problem
in the stochastic gradient method and to permit the natural incorporation of
uncertainties in the GNN setting, an ensemble Kalman filter method will be used
to train the GNN weights. More robust models, robust with respect to
uncertainties, will be constructed by appropriately combining the surrogates
obtained from the multi-scale GNNs with traditional power system
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.