* 2229006
* SBIR Phase I:  Renewable platinum catalyst for fuel cell applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Philip Stuckey, FC RENEW, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to overcome a limiting step in creating
viable hydrogen fuel cells for the automotive industry. The solution will renew
the battery catalyst without its removal from the vehicle. This will result in
significant savings toward the total cost of ownership and an increase in
overall system reliability, one of the top features potential customers evaluate
when making automotive purchasing decisions. The transportation industry has
been seeking innovations to transition to sustainable solutions such as zero-
emission and green hydrogen fuel cell technologies, but the broad adoption of
such vehicles is limited by the short lifespan of fuel cell electrocatalysts
that operate, expensive fuel cell stack replacements, and the high costs of
components. This project will make hydrogen fuel cell vehicles viable and cost-
competitive with diesel and gasoline engine vehicles by extending the lifetime
of the electrocatalyst and thereby the fuel cell stack. Such alternative options
are needed, as diesel vehicles are responsible for around 20% of anthropogenic
pollution precursor emissions, and these emissions are linked to approximately
110,000 premature deaths per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to establish a proof-of-concept approach for in-stack platinum
electrocatalyst renewal. Since fuel cell electrocatalysts degrade during
operation, this project will develop a breakthrough technology that enables the
reuse of what was once considered expended, end-of-life fuel cells by renewing
the electrocatalyst. This renewal process can be conducted multiple times after
the electrocatalyst inevitably degrades, increasing the lifetime and durability
for fuel cell operation. As one of the most expensive precious metals, platinum
typically used as the catalyst for automotive applications contributes to about
60% of the total fuel cell cost. This process is the first-in-kind to allow
electrocatalyst renewal at the surface of the electrode without removing or
replacing the fuel cell stack. This project will establish working parameters
for the electrocatalyst renewal and analyze the effects of the process using a
custom testing apparatus with a 3-electrode configuration and on commercial fuel
cell membrane electrode assemblies in custom single-cell configurations. This
team will utilize several techniques including analytical electrochemistry,
microscopy, and electron paramagnetic resonance techniques to verify the effects
of the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.