* 2229250
* FMRG: Eco: Cyber Enabled Transformation to Circular Supply Chains for Sustainable Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Current pharmaceutical manufacturing systems follow the linear model of “take,
make, and dispose”. This model is neither economically nor environmentally
sustainable. To enable future manufacturing to transition to a circular economy,
making more efficient use of materials through recycling and repurposing, there
is a growing emphasis on moving towards circular supply chains (CSCs). Many
industries have begun to convert from centralized batch manufacturing to
automation-driven continuous manufacturing that is based on actual, rather than
predicted, levels of demand. Yet, while this reduces waste at the single-plant
scale, it is not sufficient for the creation of a complete zero waste CSC
integrated industrial ecosystem. Models do not exist that connect single-scale
plants to the larger network, making it impossible to account for feedback
interactions between single-scale process innovations and existing processes
across the manufacturing network to optimize resource utilization. The goal of
this project is to enable the design of zero waste future pharmaceutical
manufacturing networks at a macroscale using an integrative, multidisciplinary
approach focused on novel process chemistry and separation methods, macroscale
modeling of manufacturing networks to integrate new processes at scale, and
pricing optimization for collaborative decision making through dedicated
cyberinfrastructure development. The cyberinfrastructure developed will aid in
understanding the feedback loops between plant-scale automated manufacturing and
macroscale manufacturing networks in making optimal decisions for adoption of
recycling processes at scale and redesign of material flows towards CSCs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Targeted key contributions of the project are: 1) creating
novel modular recycling processes for waste medicines to enable CSCs and digital
twin models for the facilities, 2) automating the integration of novel processes
in an existing network by advancing algorithms for multi- scale integration and
advancing cyberinfrastructure, and 3) creating a dual pricing mechanism and
econometric model to transition the whole system to a CSC by facilitating waste
exchange and use of recycled active ingredients. These advancements will provide
a framework to drive innovations in manufacturing processes at the single scale
in convergence with macroscale manufacturing networks to create a zero-waste
future manufacturing system. The approach of integrating modular manufacturing
processes at the right scale in the overall network for zero waste
pharmaceutical manufacturing will be generalizable to other future manufacturing
networks. Graduate education in engineering will be enhanced to include
convergence thinking by developing a “Computational Lab” to train
interdisciplinary students in process design through macroscale network
interactions for economic and environmental sustainability. Undergraduates and
minority students will be engaged in research through Purdue's SURF program and
existing Purdue partnerships with HBCUs and Purdue’s Women in Engineering
program. For future workforce development in pharmaceutical manufacturing, the
project team will partner with Purdue’s existing Biotechnology Innovation and
Regulatory Science program and Office of Professional Practice to translate the
research outcomes into industrial practice training through workshops for
industrial stakeholders, student internships, and partnerships with Ivy Tech
Community College. Integration through a web-based Hub of citizen data for use
in driving network decisions will facilitate participation of citizens in
sustainable future manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing
award is supported by the following NSF divisions/directorates: CBET/ENG,
CMMI/ENG, CHE/MPS, and SBE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.