* 2229338
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Where Are Particles Accelerated in Coronal Jets?
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Bin Chen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 134,443.00

Key questions remain regarding the source regions of impulsive solar energetic
particles and their escape into the heliosphere. Understanding their origin will
help in forecasting space weather and its impacts on spacecraft and instruments.
This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and Interplanetary Environment
(SHINE) goal to enhance understanding of processes by which energy in the form
of magnetic fields and particles are produced by the Sun and accelerated in
interplanetary space. Graduate and undergraduate researchers will be supported.
Further, a database of solar coronal-jet events will be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an observational and theoretical
study of coronal jets to answer two science questions: (1) Where are electrons
accelerated in active-region periphery jets? (2) How do flare-accelerated
particles from active-region periphery jets escape into the heliosphere? The
approach combines high-quality observations with state-of-the-art numerical
simulations. The team will select and analyze a set of coronal jets at active-
region peripheries from space-based and ground-based observatories, including
the NSF-funded Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array. They will determine which
types of jets are associated with impulsive solar energetic particle events,
where the high-energy electrons are located both within and beyond the solar
sources, and how these events evolve. Their magnetic topologies will be
estimated by nonlinear force-free field extrapolations from magnetograms. Based
on the data analysis results, they will perform simulations with initial
conditions consistent with typical properties of the observed events.
Postprocessing the simulation output with the particle-tracking code will reveal
where electrons are energized, how their spectra evolve, and how these energetic
particle escape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.