* 2229756
* RII Track-4 NSF: Robust, Predictive, and Learning Guidance Algorithms for On-Orbit Servicing and Assembly Using Multiple Space Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Hyeongjun Park, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 180,463.00

Advancements in small space systems enable a variety of on-orbit servicing and
assembly missions, such as on-orbit refueling, assembly of complex objects,
rescue of damaged space systems, and space debris removal using multiple small
space systems. As more space systems will be utilized for sophisticated and
critical on-orbit servicing missions, the importance of robust, efficient, and
highly accurate autonomous close-proximity maneuvering and docking capability is
growing. However, autonomous close-proximity maneuvering is challenging due to
uncertainty, disturbances, and multiple satellites’ variable operational
constraints, such as actuator saturation, collision avoidance, being within the
bounds of the feasible operating region, and achieving a given formation. This
project will provide an opportunity for the researcher to collaborate with the
Spacecraft Robotics Laboratory at the Naval Postgraduate School. This
collaboration will include performing basic and applied research on predictive
and learning path-planning algorithms for autonomous close-proximity maneuvering
required in on-orbit servicing missions using multiple space systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project provides a fellowship to an Assistant
professor at New Mexico State University (NMSU) and support for an NMSU graduate
student. The primary goal of this EPSCoR RII Track-4 fellowship project is to
develop and test novel robust guidance algorithms based on robust model
predictive control and reinforcement learning that can deal with uncertainty and
disturbances in formation flying and proximity maneuvering of multiple space
systems for on-orbit servicing and assembly missions. Specifically, this project
will offer the NMSU team access to world-class facilities for hardware-in-the-
loop (HIL) simulation of space proximity operations using multiple space systems
to test and validate the proposed algorithms in real-time. Computing the optimal
solutions for robust model predictive guidance and control with nonlinear
constraints in real time is a significant intellectual challenge. Researchers
will develop a rapid optimization framework to address this challenge in solving
robust and predictive optimization problems. This research will also contribute
to developing a reinforcement learning framework that learns trajectories and
control inputs of the predictive approaches. This fellowship project will expand
the PI’s research capacity and transform his career path towards a promising
direction in guidance algorithm development and in operations using multiple
space systems. The outcomes of this project will contribute algorithmically to
guidance of on-orbit servicing and assembly missions, and extend the algorithms
to a wide range of autonomous applications using multiple space systems. This
project will also foster a strong partnership between NMSU, a designated
Hispanic-Serving Institution, and the Naval Postgraduate School to increase the
participation of students underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.