* 2229472
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT:  AI-based Sensing for Improved Resiliency via Spectral Adaptation with Lifelong Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Francesco Restuccia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 249,155.00

Resilience to interference via improved spectrum access requires fast sensing,
cognition, and actionable intelligence to algorithmically enforce compliance in
real-time. The ability to measure spectrum usage, quantify legitimate uses,
detect violations and enforce compliance directly leads to improved spectrum
utilization, coexistence of multiple competing users, and enhanced security. To
this end, this SWIFT project will demonstrate a system for spectral situational
awareness through radio frequency (RF) machine learning (ML). The key objective
is to obtain actionable spectrum intelligence in the sub-6 GHz legacy bands
through a real-time understanding of waveform shapes, spectral content, and
modulation schemes. The research will create lifelong incremental learning
approaches to spectrum management and dynamic spectrum access, enabled by
advanced hardware innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to
improve at least 100x over software-based systems, through a combination of
array processing, reliable AI with lifelong learning algorithms, low-complexity
AI, and digital signal processing. Specifically, AI techniques will be used to
achieve spectrum intelligence, and more specifically data driven techniques,
such as deep learning, towards real-time processing of wideband multi-
directional RF signals carrying a diverse set of waveforms, modulations, and
protocols. Led by Florida International University (FIU) - South Florida's
largest public research R1 university with 67+% Hispanic students, this SWIFT
team will include many under-represented students, who in summer research, will
learn key concepts in spectrum sensing. PIs at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University will spearhead efforts in mentoring women in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. The PI at Northeastern University will focus on
creating graduate teaching materials in wireless communications and RF-ML based
on Colosseum (the world's largest RF emulator) and the PAWR platforms. The team
will develop and maintain public open datasets for training AI radios for
usability and reproducibility of the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.