* 2229752
* RII Track-4:NSF: Fundamentals of Creating Trustworthy Medical Cyber-Physical Systems Under EMI Attacks
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Xiali Hei, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 286,453.00

The application of medical cyber-physical systems such as wireless insulin
pumps, infant incubators, and pacemakers continues to rise. Researchers
repeatedly showed how adversaries could deceive the perception of systems by
manipulating sensor signals of medical cyber-physical systems prior to
digitization with intentional electromagnetic (EMI) signals. This proposal aims
to address the threats with systematic and general approaches by enhancing the
hardware and software co-design. The outcomes of this project will enhance the
understanding of the security and reliability of medical cyber-physical systems
under intentional EMI attacks. The training and hands-on experience on cutting-
edge technologies and the collaborations established via this program will allow
the PI to establish a highly productive and reputable cyber-physical system
security laboratory and contribute to the inter-disciplinary research at UL
Lafayette. This EPSCoR grant will be used to mentor and train a female graduate
student in cutting-edge model-building techniques that can be used in pure
research and/or numerous industrial applications, thus, contributing to the
imperative effort of increasing diversity in STEM fields. Lastly, the PI will
incorporate the theories and experiments into her undergraduate/graduate course
on cyber-physical system security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project
would provide a fellowship to an Assistant professor and training for a graduate
student at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette (ULL). The proposed studies
will advance the methodology and design principles to ensure the real-time
reliability of medical cyber-physical systems in the presence of intentional
Electromagnetic Inference (EMI) attacks on analog medical sensors such as
glucose sensors. This project will lay a solid foundation for reliable medical
cyber-physical systems that rely on real-time sensing and control. The proposed
approaches will advance understanding of designing secure and reliable systems
with imperfect medical analog sensors. In this project, one task is to create
new hardware units to limit the injected errors within a tolerable range by
designing and implementing matched dummy circuits to identify EMI signals. In
addition, the proposed studies will improve the understanding of how to utilize
redundant sensor circuits in defenses against intentional EMI injection attacks.
Another task is to create a physics-informed neural network-based framework to
diagnose corrupted sensor data induced by intentional EMI attacks by solving
equations and predicting the sensor value. It will compute a baseline (i.e.,
blood glucose or body temperature) to correct the corrupted sensor
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.