* 2229696
* RII Track-4: NSF: Building Linkages: Assessing the Importance of Terrestrial Climate in Deglacial Ice Sheet Dynamics through Collaborative Research Capacity Building
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Simon Pendleton, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 139,022.00

As the world’s climate continues to warm, it is increasingly important to
understand how the melting Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets will contribute to
sea level rise. Specifically, as the ice sheets retreat over land, it becomes
imperative to understand the role local climate has on the melting of ice sheet
margins. Thus, the goals of this project are threefold. Initially, the
researcher will reconstruct records of past climate (temperature and
precipitation) in New England. The reconstructed past climate will be from
approximately 13,000 years ago when a large ice sheet was retreating under
analogous warming conditions. To accomplish this, the research team will analyze
organic molecules from plants and bacteria left behind in lake sediments and
whose form and composition reflect past changes in temperature and
precipitation. Second, the PI will compare these new high-resolution climate
records to existing records of changes in ice sheet margin activity to elucidate
the role of local climate on the melting and retreat of large ice sheets.
Understanding how local climate impacted the melting of past ice sheets will
help forecast how continued climate change will drive melting of the Greenland
and Antarctic ice sheets. Better understanding and predictions of melting ice
sheet contributions to sea level rise are vital in helping coastal areas
worldwide to prepare for and mitigate associated consequences. The third and
final goal of the project includes capacity building at a small rural
institution and research experience for undergraduate students, helping to
prepare the next generation of earth and climate
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4:NSF) project would provide a
fellowship to a Teaching Faculty member and training for an undergraduate
student at Plymouth State University. This work would be conducted in
collaboration with researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder. The
world's ice sheets are projected to continue to shrink under future warming
conditions, with potentially wide-ranging and catastrophic global consequences.
However, the role of terrestrial climate change on ice sheet fluctuations,
especially during times of ice margin retreat, remains poorly understood. While
changes in ice sheet mass balance and ice dynamics are known to drive ice-margin
fluctuations on millennial to multi-millennial timescales, it is hypothesized
that more local, terrestrial climate plays a significant role in shorter
timescale ice margin fluctuations. A better understanding of the impact of local
climate on past ice margin behavior is necessary to understand how modern ice
sheet margins will respond to continued climate change. The researcher will
pilot the generation of new, high-resolution temperature and hydroclimate
records following the deglaciation of the northeastern United States by the
Laurentide Ice Sheet following the Last Glacial Maximum. Temperature and
hydroclimate will be reconstructed using branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol
tetraethers (brGDGTs) and the hydrogen isotopic composition (δ2H) of
precipitation from preserved leaf waxes, respectively, using sediment cores (in-
hand and to-be-collected) from central New England. The researcher will
accomplish this through extended visits to two laboratory facilities at the
University of Colorado Boulder and in collaboration with their PIs and staff.
These new records will be compared to the existing North American Varve
Chronology which contains a detailed record of LIS retreat and ice margin
fluctuations through the study area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.