* 2229323
* SBIR Phase I: Development of arrays to record dynamic interactions between single cells
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Mohsen Fathi, CELLCHORUS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,988.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to enable experts in the biomedical field to improve
understanding of how new therapeutic approaches are developed and perform in the
context of a complex immune system. This technology could enable new therapies
to translate to patients faster, at less expense, and with higher rates of
success. These therapeutics, such as antibodies, cell and gene therapies, and
vaccines, can deliver excellent results when they work, but available therapies
do not work for all patients. To develop and deliver the next generation of
therapies to improve the lives of patients, investigators need to be able to
understand how immune cells and other cells move, interact, kill, and survive
over time. This project allows researchers, developers, and manufacturing
experts to understand the functional performance of new therapies earlier, more
completely, and at lower expense. Such single-cell analysis is a multi-billion
market among commercial and non-profit markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop and rigorously validate a novel array consumable
that enables scaling dynamic, single-cell analysis from an early access
laboratory to any facility worldwide. Initial design and testing activities for
the next generation arrays using non-scalable proof of concept production
methodologies have demonstrated the value of the dynamic single-cell functional
analysis platform. This project will develop and evaluate two options for
producing the arrays, one with an embossing technique and one with a three-
dimensional printing technique. Successful completion of this project will
support scaling the only platform that can evaluate migration, contact dynamics,
killing, survival, subcellular activity, and biomolecule secretion for the same
individual cell over time and in high throughput to improve development and
delivery of novel therapies faster, with higher rates of success, and at lower
expense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.