* 2229642
* POSE: Phase I:  Evolving Exosphere with Community-Driven Software Stewardship
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Suresh Marru, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,468.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Exosphere
is an innovative web-based interface for non-proprietary cloud computing
infrastructure. Exosphere empowers researchers to wield advanced cloud-based
research tools without needing advanced systems administrator skills. The
project's novelties include: providing a user-friendly dashboard to manage cloud
computing, networking, and data storage resources, and providing interactive
access to these resources via web browser. Uniquely, Exosphere can provide
access to most research-focused cloud systems without custom integration work.
The project seeks to increase the productivity of researchers and reduce the
time to scientific discoveries. Exosphere achieves these goals by closing the
gap between the power of cloud-enabled research techniques and their
accessibility to researchers. Exosphere also enables computational literacy and
workforce development with distributed
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators and community contributors build
Exosphere with a fully public development process. They deliver the result as
free and open-source software. This approach has made Exosphere the most widely-
used interface for Jetstream2, a national-scale research cloud. It has also
resulted in advanced features such as push-button elastic virtual clusters and
reproducible data science workbenches. Exosphere can grow to serve use cases
across the research community and beyond, as it is compatible with the OpenStack
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) used at hundreds of companies and not-
for-profit organizations. A Phase I award from the Pathways for Enabling Open-
Source Ecosystems (POSE) program enables Exosphere’s organizational and
community development activities. These tasks include discovery of the user and
contributor ecosystem via surveys and engagements at conferences, evaluating
organization and governance models in collaboration with mentors, and developing
a contributor engagement plan, user documentation, and a website. The successful
result will be a fully-developed strategy to multiply and sustain the benefit of
Exosphere to research computing and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.