* 2229358
* I-Corps: Passive Infrared Sensor Technology Solution for Advanced Occupancy Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Ya Wang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled solid-state lens integrated
with passive infrared (PIR) sensors to detect occupancy. Today, buildings are
equipped with PIR sensors for occupancy detection, owing to their low cost, low
energy consumption, wide field of view, and high reliability. Despite these
advantages, PIR sensors only detect motion - not stationary occupancy. By
differentially perceiving infrared energy received by standard PIR sensors, the
proposed technology may detect moving and stationary occupants. This may provide
a low-cost plug-and-play solution to achieve personalized heating and cooling,
identify underutilized spaces to more accurately forecast usage, improve
workspaces and reduce operating expense costs. In addition, the proposed
technology provides a privacy-reserving solution to monitor sleep quality and
fall detection. The proposed applications include security systems, smart home
appliances, traffic management, consumer psychology, and public health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the potential development
of a solid-state electronic lens composed of liquid crystal treated with
nanoparticles to enable stationary occupancy detection with current passive
infrared (PIR) sensors. The proposed technology is designed to actively perceive
and differentiate infrared energy by modulating the transmission rate. Though
the occupants are stationary, their thermal signatures, such as body
temperature, body shape, and gestures may be perceived differentially by tuning
the apertures of the lens. Using a well-tuned transmission ratio in the long-
wave infrared range (8-12Âµm) where human skin radiates the most energy, the
standard PIR sensor may now intelligently perceive infrared thermal signatures
of warm subjects in the field of view. In addition, using an online AI
algorithm, the lens is capable of differentiating human from non-human warm
subjects by classifying human identification and activities. Localized
environmental information and training data that is collected can reduce
computing complexity thereby elevating detection accuracy to high
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.