* 2229575
* 2022 Waterman Award
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Lara Thompson, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Lara A. Thompson, Associate
Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of the District of
Columbia, one of three 2022 Alan T. Waterman Award recipients. This award is
NSF's highest honor that annually recognizes an outstanding researcher who is 40
years or younger or not more than 10 years beyond receipt of the Ph.D. degree,
by December 31 of the year of the nomination. The award funds the recipient's
research in any field of science or engineering. This year, each awardee will
receive a $1 million grant over a five-year period for further advanced study in
his or her field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Thompson is recognized for her
innovative research that combines multidisciplinary approaches in engineering,
sensor technology, and sensory-motor physiology to investigate and improve
clinical diagnostics on human posture, gait, and balance for those impaired by
age, trauma, and disease. The revolutionary approaches developed by Thompson are
advancing the field of rehabilitation engineering and biomechanics and improving
the quality-of-life for mobility impaired populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Thompson has trailblazed new research initiatives and educational programs and
spearheaded new infrastructure tied to biomedical engineering. In many of her 59
publications, undergraduate research assistants are co-authors. She received a
Diverse Issues in Higher Education Emerging Scholar National Award in 2017 and a
Black Engineer of the Year STEM innovator Award in 2019. She was a featured
alumna in the Fall 2019 edition of Harvard Otolaryngology magazine: "Finding the
right balance between research and medicine." She was a featured scientist in
three U.S. National Science Foundation events: 1) a 2021 distinguished panel
discussion titled "Black Scientists &amp; Engineers at Our Nation's HBCUs:
Making American History Now;" 2) the 2020 Presentation to Congress: Broadening
Participation in STEM sponsored by the United States House Committee on Science,
Space and Technology; and 3) the 2019 "Science Nation" video "Research immerses
HBCU undergrads in biomedical engineering."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Thompson
earned her Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering from the
University of Massachusetts Lowell, followed by a Master of Science degree in
aeronautical and astronautical engineering at Stanford University and a doctoral
degree in biomedical engineering from the Harvard-MIT Program in Health Sciences
and Technology. Her doctoral research was the first to demonstrate that a
vestibular-based sensory prosthetic can improve the ability to maintain
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.