* 2229018
* POSE: Phase I:  Pathways to Open-Source Hardware for Laboratory Automation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 289,599.00

Scientific experiments are highly varied and require deep domain expertise and
specialized equipment. Although, laboratory automation increases precision and
the efficiency of science experiments, a one-size-fits-all solution does not
necessarily exist for science experiments. The Maker Movement has introduced
open-source hardware toolkits for computer-controlled tasks, enabling low-cost,
customizable, and extensible technologies for automation. These toolkits have so
far predominantly been used for digital fabrication applications such as three
dimensional (3D) printing. However, these technologies are increasingly
customized by scientists for laboratory automation tasks. This project will
bring a community of scientists developing and using open-source hardware for
laboratory automation together to collaborate on ways of sharing, vetting, and
maintaining open source hardware for science and engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystems for open-source hardware are less well
established than their open-source software counterparts -- this project will
provide insight into these nascent communities. This project focuses on open-
source hardware that can be produced without relying on centralized production
and supply chains. This is of interest as it improves the flexibility with which
these technologies can be deployed. The collaboration and co-creation mechanisms
that will be developed in the context of this project will be valuable to others
facing similar challenges stemming from fabricatable designs, distributed
manufacturing, trustworthy hardware, and quality control. This project will
lower the barrier to laboratory automation by supporting a community using,
developing, and maintaining an ecosystem of open-source modular automation
technologies. This resource may increase experimental efficiency/yield, improve
reproducibility/repeatability, and accelerate scientific progress across
different disciplines. Increased access through lower costs will broaden the
application space, enabling a larger number of scientists to take advantage of
the precision of automation and enabling automation tools to be included in
hands-on educational curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Details of the project are
available at http://depts.washington.edu/machines/scienceautomation including
links to current open-source hardware technologies and ways to join the
conversation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.