* 2229385
* NSF I-Corps Hub (Track 1): Desert and Pacific Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Zachary Holman, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this NSF I-Corps Hubs project is the
development of a partnership spanning five states, from the Desert region of the
West to the Pacific, to increase economic competitiveness and societal benefit
through advancing university-developed, deep technology ventures to local,
regional, and national markets. This deliberate partnering of small, medium, and
large institutions is predicated on institutional alignment, combining emerging
and mature cultures of innovation, and reciprocal eagerness to collaborate to
strengthen innovation capacity. The Hub provides access to a rich network of
innovation practices and resources to diverse communities of innovators while
reducing participation barriers for both experienced and less experienced
institutions. In addition, the Hub increases capacity for innovation development
by expanding conventional geographies of innovation to disconnected areas that
are typically outside of venture development hubs and connects them to more
experienced and resource-rich areas. The Hub shares know-how, resources, and
connections to provide I-Corps training virtually and in multiple formats. The
regional training is designed to address skills and knowledge gaps to accelerate
and sustain deep technology ventures across the region. The Hub leverages a
diverse, pooled network of mentors and industry experts to reduce time and risk
in the creation of new ventures. Also, the Hub is responsive to securing
national defense, building on NSF’s investments in cybersecurity, novel
materials, and advanced analytics, by specifically identifying, addressing, and
supporting dual-use technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Desert and
Pacific Region Hub project is based on the development of a network that
advances and deepens the regenerative innovation capacity of the partnering
institutions, providing meaningful experiential development opportunities for
faculty, researchers, students, and collaborators through direct entrepreneurial
engagements and skills development. The Hub facilitates intentional group
learning through a deeply networked community of practice, including I-Corps
instructors, mentors, administrators, faculty, and students ideally positioned
to collectively support the academic community in translating research into deep
technology ventures, regardless of location. The Hub also seeks to diminish
disadvantages, such as the lack of mature assets equal to those in historically
advantaged and resource-rich locales. This Hub provides quality and flexibility,
while enabling participating institutions to incorporate structured
entrepreneurial training and support in a proven online method. Building on a
body of scholarship, a network focused on developing the entrepreneurial
mindset, additive and agile innovation, curricular adaptations, organizational
and infrastructure support including distributed mentor models and shared
customer databases, and the utilization of innovative tools, the Hub advances
entrepreneurial programming and research to inform I-Corps practice, illuminate
national trends, and influence organizational and national
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.