* 2229616
* RII Track-4: NSF:Assessing Dynamic Connectivity of Streams and Wetlands across Spatial and Human Gradients with Deep Learning
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Admin Husic, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 259,515.00

Wetlandscapes, the interconnected tapestries of streams and wetlands, are
crucial for maintaining water quality standards, yet their coverage has
dramatically decreased in recent centuries due to development and agricultural
expansion. The extent to which these systems remove pollutants, such as nitrate,
can greatly impact downstream aquatic systems. There exist major gaps in
understanding the dynamic connections that act to intercept, retain, and
transmit nitrate through wetlandscapes and the extent to which natural and human
features control the strength of these connections. These gaps have limited
ability to predict the function of these landscapes and manage them effectively.
This research will provide an opportunity for a tenure-track assistant professor
and a graduate student to propel research in the area of modeling wetlandscape
connectivity and water quality through collaborations with the USEPA Center for
Environmental Measurement and Modeling (CEMM) in Cincinnati, Ohio. The PI and a
student will work with CEMM scientists, who have established state-of-the-
science process-based models, to advance the modeling frontier with a deep
learning modeling framework that can overcome the limitations of existing
approaches. The PI’s home jurisdiction, Kansas, has lost 48% of its wetland
coverage. Thus, this effort will improve infrastructure for modeling, managing,
and maintaining these landscape features through the education of students and
the development of open access tools to be shared with watershed scientists,
managers, and stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4:NSF) project would
provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a graduate
student at the University of Kansas. This work would be conducted in
collaboration with researchers at the USEPA Center for Environmental Measurement
and Modeling (CEMM). Historically, wetlandscape connectivity and contaminant
removal efficiency has been viewed through a static lens whereby, due to data
and computational limitations, the question often posed is “What is the net
removal of nitrate over seasonal or annual periods?”. However, streams and
wetlands are highly dynamic and there exist moments where disproportionate
removal occurs. Further, it is often assumed that wetlandscape efficacy is
controlled by hydrology, which determines the residence time of nitrate, but
recent work shows a disconnect between efficacy at the individual wetland-scale,
where removal appears high, compared to the catchment scale where overall
removal decreases. Two knowledge gaps exist that the proposed research aims to
close. The first is a move beyond a static assessment of connectivity and the
second is an evaluation of the natural and human controls of wetlandscape
removal efficiency. The research team will collaborate with researchers at the
USEPA Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling (CEMM) who have
developed state-of-the-science, process-based wetland models. While process-
based models can be effective tools, they are often highly parameterized to a
single location and difficult to transfer across scales. Thus, the research
objectives of this project are to (1) improve the representation of dynamic
wetlandscape connectivity with a deep learning model and benchmark that model
performance against existing process-based models and (2) quantify the
hydrologic, anthropogenic, and geomorphic controls on nitrate removal efficacy
using deep learning modeling across regions and scales. This RII Track-4:NSF
fellowship will provide an opportunity for the PI to generate fundamental
advances to identify, quantify, and predict wetlandscape behavior and to develop
tools that stakeholders can use for improved land management
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.