* 2229521
* NSF I-Corps Hub (Track 1): Mid-South Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Padma Raghavan, Vanderbilt University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this NSF I-Corps Hubs project is the
development of a sustainable, inclusive, innovation ecosystem that will impart
shared economic prosperity across the US Mid-South region. The Mid-South Hub’s
formative, evidence-driven approach may inform how inclusive innovation
ecosystems can be established in regions with nascent economic activity. This
knowledge will augment team preparation, maximizing the value extracted from
I-Corps training. The Hub will further amplify the downstream successes and
sustainability of deep technology ventures, including grant acquisition,
fundraising, sustainable revenues, and net-positive liquidity events. Success
will be leveraged to influence innovation culture at regional institutions,
leading to the incentivization of enterprising faculty, students, and staff. The
diverse leadership team and inclusive bench of instructors will increase the
Hub’s ability to connect to innovators and mentors of all backgrounds, including
those who are disadvantaged or underrepresented. These efforts will include
building commercialization capacity at underrepresented institutions. Evidence
from the deliberate implementation of a democratized organizational structure
will be evaluated for its capability to encourage and preserve the cognitive
proximity of ecosystem members. This knowledge will be disseminated via the
National Innovation Network to drive translational impacts and economic
development, shaping the future of American
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is based on the
development of a use-inspired incubator that uses data-driven approaches to
develop best practices, influence economic policy, inspire adoption of inclusive
approaches to innovation, and instruct future programmatic investments.
Currently, a gap exists in understanding how regional innovation clusters can
unify to drive the development of a prolific innovation ecosystem. Addressing
this gap will enable policymakers and government agencies to implement evidence-
based approaches to inform programmatic investments and maximize technology
commercialization, economic development, and overall national innovation
readiness. This consortium of diverse, deep technology-producing institutions
from disparate locations within the Mid-South region will leverage the I-Corps
program to catalyze technological commercialization, spur economic development,
and inform the future of inclusive American innovation. The Hub will prioritize
a formative, longitudinal assessment to iteratively optimize key activities,
including team recruitment, Regional and National I-Corps training, upstream
changes in university innovation culture, downstream impacts on successful
commercialization, and an inclusive innovation corridor across the Mid-South.
This effort will advance technology transfer from academic institutions into
entrepreneurial ventures that seed emergent, regional ecosystems. The data-
driven, performance improvement approach will ensure best practices are
evidence-based and create a model for other regions seeking to induce inclusive
innovation cluster development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.