* 2229016
* Conference: Meeting: Cnidofest: A workshop on cnidarian model organism biology, September 7-10, 2022, Davis, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Celina Juliano, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 11/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The Cnidarian Model Systems Meeting (“Cnidofest 2022”) will take place September
7-10, 2022 at the University of California in Davis, California. This meeting
will focus on cnidarians, a group of mostly marine animals that includes
jellyfish, sea anemones, and corals, with a focus on cnidarians that are used as
model organisms in the laboratory for molecular research to uncover the
mechanisms underlying basic biological processes. Cnidarian model systems are
growing in popularity due to dramatic advances in technology that now allow for
sophisticated mechanistic studies; these studies are expected to have
significant impact on many areas of society, including human health.
Traditionally, most scientists have studied only a handful of model organisms
because importing tools to new animals was a significant barrier. This has
limited our understanding of biology because entire taxa remained severely
understudied, including the cnidarians. However, due to significant and rapid
advances in technology over the past 10-20 years, the number of laboratory model
organisms has grown tremendously. This includes many emerging cnidarian models
that will be featured at our meeting. A growing number of laboratories are
applying these new technologies to cnidarians and making rapid progress in many
fields, including developmental biology, cell biology, neurobiology, immunology,
evolutionary biology, and ecology. Our meeting will highlight new tools that
have already been implemented, introduce attendees to cutting edge technologies
that may be applied to their future research, and facilitate the exchange of
information between cnidarian scientists. This sharing of ideas will positively
impact the advances we are able to make as a community. To ensure the healthy
growth of our field, we will emphasize interactions between experienced
scientists and trainees, with a focus on increasing
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cnidarians are excellent laboratory models for
making fundamental biological discoveries in many scientific fields, including
neurobiology, developmental biology, immunology, and ecology. New advances in
technology are now allowing scientists to apply sophisticated technological
approaches to this historically understudied group of animals. The advantages of
cnidarians are many: 1) They have simple, well-understood body plans and
interesting life cycles with high variability. 2) They hold an informative
phylogenetic position as the clade that is sister to bilaterians; discoveries
made in cnidarians are often reflective of deeply conserved processes. 3) Many
life stages of cnidarians are transparent, making them amenable to live imaging.
4) Some cnidarians are models for studying self/non-self recognition and others
are used to study intracellular symbioses, such as those found in reef-building
corals. 5) Many cnidarians are great models for studying regeneration, stem
cells, and aging. Our meeting will emphasize new technological approaches that
will greatly enhance cnidarian research. Three technology speakers will present
seminars on emerging technologies 1) CryoEM, 2) single cell multiomics, and 3)
live imaging. In addition, we will choose abstracts that emphasize the
development of new technologies, including science supported by NSF Enabling
Discovery through GEnomics (EDGE) awards. Interactions will be fostered among
participants through a schedule that includes oral presentation sessions,
lightning talks, poster presentations, and free time to encourage informal
discussion over breaks and meals, which are all done as one group. The goal is
to exchange ideas for advancing technology in cnidarians, as well as to foster
growth in the community through trainee support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.