* 2229434
* RII Track4: FAST Heat Transfer Enhancement of Cold Plates using Vortex Generators
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jeongmoon Park, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,864.00

The rapid development of technology has resulted in higher performance and
smaller size in electronics. With the improvement of circuit density and faster
operating frequency, more heat is dissipated by the electronics. Due to the
considerable increase in heat dissipation, traditional heat removal system
employing heat sink and fan often becomes insufficient for the modern
electronics to maintain within the operating temperature. Therefore, this
research is driven by the need to develop an advanced thermal management system
to remove the dissipated heat sufficiently and maintain the electronics below
the operating temperature for better performance and high reliability. Through
the collaboration with the NASA Johnson Space Center, an advanced cold plate
heat exchanger will be designed and developed in this project. This development
will result in the ability to remove heat more efficiently and effectively by
using vortex generators (VGs), especially for the electronics in human
spacecraft. When better liquid cooling in cold plates is achieved, it can lead
to significant energy savings as well as the reduction of the equipment size and
weight. Eventually, this research can support the design, development, and
implementation of the next generation of thermal management systems for the
electronics in spacecraft applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold plates have
liquid coolant flow passages bounded by metallic walls. The use of vortex
generators (VGs) in the flow passages has a great potential to enhance heat
transfer while minimizing the weight and pressure drop penalties. Therefore, the
objective of this research is to show that the multiscale vortex structures
induced by microscale VGs can transfer and transport thermal energy more
efficiently and effectively in cold plates. Specifically, this research project
will include 1) development of an advanced cold plate heat exchanger using
multiple micro-VGs, 2) investigation of the effects of the vortical structures
induced by micro-VGs on convective heat transfer, and 3) optimization of the
liquid coolant flow passages with specific emphasis on cold plates in human
spacecraft. It is expected that the vortical flows induced by micro-VGs will
disrupt the hydraulic/thermal boundary layers and will promote the flow
instabilities and the formation of secondary coherent structures that govern
meso- and micro-mixing mechanisms. For thermal analysis, fluid temperature,
thermal efficiency, Nusselt number, and convection heat transfer coefficient
will be evaluated experimentally. The local surface temperature distributions of
the cold plate will also be measured using infrared (IR) thermography.
Furthermore, the coolant flow passage configurations will be modified based on
the experimental results to achieve the uniform temperature distributions
reducing the locally concentrated heat spots. Eventually, success of this
research project will lead to the thermal performance enhancement of cold
plates, thereby reducing of the equipment size/weight and saving
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.