* 2229074
* Collaborative Research: AMPS: Rethinking State Estimation for Power Distribution Systems in the Quantum Era
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Tuyen Vu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 12/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The accelerated transition to renewable energy and the rapid modernization of
power systems with smart Internet-of-Thing (IoT) devices have presented new
integration challenges and made the systems highly vulnerable to new
cyberthreats. These challenges and risks underscore the urgent need for more
advanced and robust state and situation awareness that are essential to the
early detection and mitigation of grid incidents. This project aims to establish
a novel collection of quantum architectures, algorithms, and mathematical tools
for quantum era power system state estimation (SE), a critical process in
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. By capitalizing on the
recent breakthroughs and real-world applications in quantum computing and
quantum networking, the project investigates how the massive power of quantum
computing can provide more rapid and accurate responses to changes in the
systems. Further, the project leverages quantum networking to provide data
communication with high confidentiality and integrity, raising the power grid
security to the next level. This project will have broad community and societal
impacts through open-source software release and the education and training of
the next generation of engineers, particularly those from underrepresented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a holistic quantum-inspired framework for power state estimation,
addressing the cyber risks and operational challenges for decentralized grids.
Towards this goal, four main research activities include 1) Quantum network
architecture - designing a network and service-oriented architecture and
protocols to implement the quantum key distribution and to handle the
confidential communications in smart grids; 2) Quantum computing for SE -
developing timely and high-efficient solutions for power state estimation,
including efficient preprocessing, optimizing Ising Hamiltonian, hardware-
embedding, and annealing; and 3) Distributed quantum systems for SE - proposing
a robust and trust-worthy distributed system state estimation with a support of
quantum networking, quantum computing, and advanced deep learning methods. 4)
Assessment - deploying, testing, and conducting comprehensive performance
assessment of the proposed framework based on a quantum cyber-physical testbed
to support the state estimation in smart grids enabled by quantum networking and
computing technologies. This project will lay the mathematical and algorithmic
foundation for the application of quantum technologies in smart
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.