* 2229445
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: MEDUSA: Mid-band Environmental Sensing Capability for Detecting Incumbents during Spectrum Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Jessica Ruyle, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 10/31/2025
* USD 279,833.00

Spectrum sharing in mid-band offers unprecedented opportunity to harness
desirable frequencies for commercial 5G operators and for unlicensed use,
although higher priority incumbents need to be reliably detected. As an example,
the requirement of detecting naval ship-borne radar signals by the environmental
sensing capability (ESC) sensors in the 3.55-3.7GHz Citizens Broadband Radio
Service (CBRS) band severely limits the transmission power for 5G operators. The
objective of this project called MEDUSA: Mid-band Environmental sensing
capability for Detecting incUmbents during Spectrum shAring is to detect the
presence of static/mobile radar and anomalous transmissions within concurrent
and comparatively higher power 5G and 4G-LTE signals. It achieves this through
machine learning (reacting to existing interference) and receiver antenna design
(proactively avoiding interference). MEDUSA will enable ESC sensors to work with
different types of wireless signals, both for individual spectrum monitoring and
via collaborative methods for enhanced incumbent detection accuracy. The project
will result in open-source release of antenna design files, datasets and
learning algorithms for the research community. It also includes several
outreach and dissemination activities such as hosting recordings of interviews
with spectrum experts on the project website, recruiting students from under-
representative groups, and designing course projects that use CBRS-related
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three goals for radar detection
in the Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band but is also generalizable
for other frequencies. First, it proposes a deep learning framework to enhance
the discriminative abilities of the environmental sensing capability (ESC)
sensor while preserving privacy by using spectrogram inputs. These sensors will
detect radar pulses within 5G and 4G-LTE signals with powers stronger than FCC-
mandated levels by 5 dB. Furthermore, the PIs will develop transfer-learning
methods for unseen conditions. Second, it will advance the science of
collaborative inference, when multiple ESC sensors make (i) independent and (ii)
joint decisions by fusing individual predictions using the algorithms developed
as part of the first goal. It also proposes a method of fusion of spectrograms
and raw in-phase and quadrature (IQ) samples. Third, when the geographically
separated and arbitrarily spaced ESC sensors are time and phase synchronized,
they form a massive virtual array for receive beamforming. The PIs will design
real-time weight adaptation algorithms and horn antennas that can create nulls
towards known 5G/4G-LTE base stations. Finally, the research goals will be
validated in emulation as well as over experimental testbeds through the NSF
Platform for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.