* 2229890
* Travel: SCH: Student Travel Award for IEEE/ACM Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2022)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Hua Fang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This award is to support student travel and participation in the 2022 Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) Conference on Connected Health (CHASE): Applications, Systems,
Engineering Technologies (CHASE), in Washington, DC. CHASE is a leading
international conference in the field of connected health and aims at offering a
unique opportunity for researchers worldwide to exchange innovative ideas and
develop collaborations. This award particularly provides a scientific forum for
students with substantive potentials in computing and engineering research
associated with the multidisciplinary field of connected health. CHASE will
offer opportunities for students to receive networking support, research and
career advice from internationally recognized experts. This award will make
possible the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend
and to interact with mentors and peers of varying gender, ethnicity and
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports about 20 students by
providing a live Student Research Forum focused on encouraging students to
examine technologies from multiple perspectives and understand how innovative
technology, advanced analytics, persuasive computing, biomedical expertise and
information combined to make the most impact. By participating in technical
sessions and panels, students also have opportunities to learn about the
research frontiers in the connected health field and interact with senior
members of the profession and representatives from industry, academia and
federal agencies in this field. In addition, the Career Panel enables students
to understand different career paths for researchers in this area. Overall, the
CHASE conference exposes student participants to different scientific
disciplinary approaches and is designed to support the development of the next
generation of scholars in connected health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.