* 2229697
* NSF/FDA SIR: Robust, Reliable, and Trustworthy Regulatory Science Tool for Stroke Recovery Assessment using Hybrid Brain-Muscle Functional Coupling Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* John Ross Rizzo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Stroke is the leading cause of age-related motor disabilities and is becoming
more prevalent in younger populations. The development of post-stroke motor
rehabilitation technologies is at an all-time high. Many of these technologies
claim to accelerate recovery. However, subjective and coarse evaluation of motor
capacities have generated inconsistent recommendations regarding rehabilitation
devices. There is a need for the development of a robust, reliable, and
accessible biomarker for post-stroke recovery. Such a biomarker could be used as
a regulatory science tool (RST) that improves the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) review process for rehabilitation device applications. This proposal
focuses on the design and validation of a robust and high-fidelity marker of
recovery, considering the directional information exchange between regions of
the central and peripheral nervous systems. There is currently no approved RST
for assessing the efficacy of rehabilitative devices for post-stroke motor
recovery. This research is a collaboration between New York University and the
FDA, and represents a unique joint effort from the clinical, engineering, and
regulatory sectors. The project will include seminars and undergraduate research
to promote STEM education with a focus on engaging students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project
is to implement a noninvasive biomarker that demystifies the directional
(afferent and efferent), nonlinear, and complex patterns of neural
communication, realizing a “neurophysiological magnifier” that objectively
quantifies degradation in the interaction between anatomy, activation, and
pathway in post-stroke patients. The project will analyze the reliability and
efficacy of the proposed biomarker based on data acquired from recovering stroke
patients with the goal of developing the first-ever stroke-focused
rehabilitation RST. For this, the project (1) proposes a mechanistic view of the
modulations of afferent and efferent neural pathways in correlation with motor
performance and mobility, (2) quantifies the cortical sources involved in
sensorimotor processing after stroke and their connectivity to the motor units
in muscles, (3) establishes corticomuscular biomarkers that predict motor
performance and mobility for stroke patients, and (4) performs inter-and intra-
subject reliability analyses in addition to validation analyses using
independent datasets. This project will also promote FDA regulatory science on
next-generation brain-machine interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.