* 2229356
* NSF/FDA SiR: Pulse Oximetry Measurement Errors Correlated with Patient Skin Pigmentation: Optical Mechanisms and Effect Multipliers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Yu Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Pulse oximeters are powerful and inexpensive devices commonly used for early
detection of health problems and monitoring of treatment. However, studies have
shown that patient skin pigmentation levels can affect the measurement accuracy.
A better understanding of the underlying mechanisms will help the refinement of
instrumentation and algorithms to improve the device performance. Computational
modeling will be used to simulate light propagation in adult finger tissue and
investigate the impact of different biological and device design factors on
device performance. Laboratory measurements of tissue-mimicking models will be
performed to validate the computational model under well-controlled conditions.
Such effective, least-burdensome evaluation of device performance has the
potential to lead to improvements in clinical performance that will impact
patients undergoing surgical procedures, anesthesia, and other critical
conditions. Furthermore, the planned research will be seamlessly integrated with
educational, mentoring, and outreach activities to advance the cross-
disciplinary program in the field of Biomedical Optics and Regulatory Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and validate a series of test
methods for pulse oximetry. The components of this work include: (1) Fabricating
physical models with biologically relevant properties of adult fingers (e.g.,
epidermal layers with different pigmentation levels, bio-mimetic microvascular
networks, and mock cardiovascular flow loop with tunable oxygenation to generate
real-time physiological flow/pressure waveforms); (2) Developing in silico
models of adult fingers of different sizes and performing Monte Carlo
simulations to elucidate light-tissue interactions in pulse oximetry; and (3)
Validating computational models using spectroscopic measurements in finger-
simulating physical models, and investigating effects of epidermal melanin
content along with other biological factors (e.g., perfusion level, finger size)
and device characteristics (e.g., source bandwidth, sensor reflectivity) on key
light-tissue interaction parameters, as well as on estimated oxygen saturation
measurement accuracy. This project will provide extensive insights into the
factors influencing quantitative accuracy of pulse
oximetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.