* 2229614
* POSE: Phase I:  Tapis Advancing Collaborative Open Source (TACOS)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Sean Cleveland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,783.00

The advanced computing infrastructure landscape has evolved tremendously with
many sophisticated capabilities for tackling the world's most challenging
computing problems. But with that sophistication comes complexity. The Tapis
Framework provides a hosted, unified web-based API for securely managing
computational workloads across institutions so that experts can focus on their
research instead of the technology needed to accomplish it. The Tapis Advancing
Collaborative Open Source (TACOS) initiative seeks to explore transforming Tapis
into a self-sustaining organization. TACOS will look for the tools, services,
and infrastructure support needed to transform into an Open Source Ecosystem
(OSE) and enable Tapis to expand to a collaborative and asynchronous development
environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Tapis platform allows easier
implementation, sharing and re-use of complex computational applications,
workflows, and infrastructure and enables analysis previously too challenging
for researchers. Tapis maximizes application portability, allowing flexible
scheduling of geographically distributed computational workloads, offering a
HTTP-based RESTful API science-as-a-service to enable multi-facility,
decentralized deployments, and provide production-grade support for sensors and
streaming data. By transforming Tapis to an Open Source Ecosystem, Tapis
leadership will establish organization and governance structures along with
contribution pathways and processes for the greater community ecosystem,
including reusable Tapis artifacts such as containerized functions, applications
and Jupyter notebooks, in addition to the core code base. Tools to accelerate
community development, such as push-button sandbox environments, template and
scaffold libraries for SDK, CLI and user interfaces, will also be identified and
adopted.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s primary objectives will be to grow
and strengthen the engagement of developer communities to provide long-term
sustainment. These engagements will look at opportunities to shift the community
from not only being users of Tapis but also contributors to Tapis. The project
team believes deeply in the power and importance of an open, inclusive,
community driven approach to software development, and the POSE program will
enable us to create inroads to direct engagement by the developer community. By
making Tapis an OSE, going beyond source code, Tapis will evolve to an ecosystem
of components that the community can contribute to at any level of expertise. To
this end the project will engage beyond existing user base and pursue community
members amongst teaching intensive institutes and EPSCOR communities via student
mentoring and hackathons to broaden outreach and create opportunities to
contribute to the Tapis ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further details about
the Tapis project can be found on https://tapis-project.org/ including a getting
started guide at https://tapis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. The wider Tapis
community is available to join using Slack at: http://bit.ly/join-
tapis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.