* 2229100
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Observational and Theoretical Studies of the Parametric Decay Instability in the Lower Solar Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Michael Hahn, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 588,728.00

It is unclear how the outer layer of the Sun, the corona, is heated to millions
of degrees. One potential mechanism is through the parametric decay instability
(PDI). This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and Interplanetary
Environment (SHINE) goal of understanding the solar corona through numerical
simulations and analysis of space-based and NSF-funded ground based solar
observations. The project also supports outreach activities in New York City and
New Mexico. Two post-doctoral researchers will be supported, along with
undergraduate students at Columbia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will determine whether PDI is an important process in the solar atmosphere. The
team will analyze observations from the Coronal Multichannel Polarimeter, the
Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometer, the Interface Region Imaging
Spectrometer, and the NSF-funded Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope. Numerical
modeling will be used to better understand the behavior of PDI in the presence
of gradients in the plasma properties of the transition region and the corona.
Magnetohydrodynamic simulations will be carried out to study Alfven waves and
PDI growth in the lower solar atmosphere, where the scale length of gradients is
smaller than the wavelength. This is critical to understand how density
fluctuations are generated very close to the Sun. Moreover, ion heating
associated with acoustic waves produced by PDI will be investigated using hybrid
simulations, to estimate what fraction of the Alfven wave power can be
dissipated in the lower atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.