* 2229021
* SWIFT: Advancing Coexistence through a Cross-Layer Design Platform with an Adaptive Frequency-Selective Radio Front-End and Digital Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 749,965.00

As the crowding of the frequency spectrum continues, it becomes increasingly
important to create new devices, circuits and computational algorithms with the
ability to adaptively suppress unwanted electromagnetic interference during the
reception and processing of wireless signals. This project is centered around
the realization of a development platform that can enable transceivers for
wireless communication to be designed across different disciplinary boundaries.
The design platform will allow the prototyping of new devices and circuits,
together with new reconfigurable computing and wireless communication
algorithms. The research aims to lay the groundwork for enhanced radio frequency
(RF) communication systems that make use of real-time tuning to adapt to
different spectrum environments for higher interference tolerance, as well as to
provide design techniques and tools that improve the coexistence of wireless
devices in a broad range of scenarios. By enabling more compact devices with
higher performance, interference robustness and digitally-controlled tuning for
reliability, this research will help improve the well-being of our society that
increasingly relies on wireless devices and systems for a plethora of needs. The
project will also establish a foundation for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students who can apply and develop cross-layer design techniques
involving devices, circuits and computational algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a platform and first hardware
prototypes for the co-design of next-generation RF receivers with the ability to
suppress both in-channel and adjacent channel interferers without compromising
the reception of desired signals that may have much lower power than the
interferers. Recent progress in the design of time-modulated devices has led to
the possibility to form frequency selective limiters (FSLs), which can
intrinsically distinguish and attenuate interference characterized by power
levels higher than a certain threshold. However, to realize FSLs that can
protect receiver modules of various existing radios, these components require
new monolithically integrated resonators with high quality factors (Q &gt;
2,000) and with varactors having low loss-tangents, wide tuning ranges and low
capacitance values. By taking advantage of the acoustic properties of Aluminum
Scandium Nitride (AlScN) thin-films and of the ferroelectric properties of
Hafnium Zirconium Oxide (HZO) atomic layers, the research addresses this
fundamental challenge through the development of fully integrated
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) FSLs that can be manufactured with
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) process compatibility, and that
can be deliberately tuned by analog CMOS circuits towards accomplishing the best
possible digital signal processing results when operating in crowded spectral
environments. The AlScN/HZO components will be co-developed with custom-designed
analog circuits to achieve adaptive characteristics based on detected power
levels, allowing to continuously optimize the signal processing quality at both
device and system levels. To broaden the benefits across wireless system layers,
digital coexistence algorithms and adaptive analog front-end circuits will be
conceived to strategically tune the operating points of the FSLs and of the
receiver circuits towards the highest communication quality. A prototyping
platform with a reconfigurable field-programmable gate array (FPGA) will be
constructed to develop the digital coexistence algorithms and apply them to
Bluetooth Low Energy, Zigbee and Wi-Fi signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.