* 2229782
* POSE: Phase I:  Wildbook: Building an Open Source Community for AI-Enabled Wildlife Science and Computer Science Education
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jason Holmberg, WILD ME
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 297,000.00

Digital images and video have become the most ubiquitous and inexpensive data
sources for wildlife research, especially when well designed scientific efforts
can partner with the public to increase the breadth of coverage and volume of
data. From population estimation to mapping migration routes and complex social
networks, collected imagery of individual animals can foster new discoveries in
statistical modeling, AI for computer vision, and conservation biology, as well
as provide a data-driven basis for effective resource management policy. The
open source Wild Me ecosystem (https://github.com/wildmeorg) aids wildlife
researchers at universities and local NGOs in curating large volumes of this
visual data, employing a multistage machine learning pipeline to find, count,
and even individually identify wildlife in photographs in support of population
biology, social ecology, and more. The project’s software-supported data and use
cases have advanced university education in computer science and applied AI
using compelling, real world data of wildlife to challenge students. Through
open source community building, the project can scalably grow its species
coverage and its interdisciplinary research impact, providing an advanced
foundation for education and wildlife research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance the Wild Me ecosystem through building an open source
managing organization, which is responsible for the initial open source
community growth effort (i.e. attracting software professionals and scientists).
The managing organization will establish the foundational contribution model for
code, AI models, and related data and define the community governance model for
the Wild Me ecosystem. The project’s efforts also include developing training
materials to encourage open source code contribution, reaching out to related
professional and academic users (potential code contributors), and defining the
flow of data and machine learning models back and forth between academia and
field biologists for interdisciplinary collaboration. The project begins with
identifying existing, unmet needs and open source appetite in our existing user
community. It then will create a gap analysis translated into needed services
and provide code examples and documentation to make it easy and secure for third
party contributions. The project will establish quality and security standards
for code and model contribution and review, as well as set a code of conduct for
community discussion and contribution. The project ultimately establishes the
foundation for a thriving and growing open source ecosystem that supports
multidisciplinary, collaborative wildlife biology and ecology using AI as an
effective tool to scale and speed each research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.