* 2229627
* POSE: Phase I:  Establishing an Ecosystem for Open-source Educational Computer Aided Design (CAD) Models
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Glen Bull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. During the
past decade, many K-12 schools have established makerspaces with three
dimensional (3D) printers, digital die cutters, and other fabrication tools. To
facilitate effective use of school makerspaces, an open-source ecosystem is
being developed to provide students and educators with curated, carefully
reviewed Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models. The ecosystem will be structured
around an existing open-source Educational CAD Model Repository. The long-term
ecosystem includes a clearinghouse for CAD models with (a) peer-reviewed
articles describing classroom use, and (b) the models linked to associated
downloadable files in the repository. Accepted practitioner-based articles will
be published in a new journal, Educational Fabrication &amp; Design (ED&amp;F),
established as one component of the ecosystem. The project’s novelty is that
educational CAD models will be externally reviewed, tested, and validated before
they are added to the repository. The widespread availability of design and
fabrication tools in K-12 makerspaces offers the potential to create new objects
and remix existing designs. Science, mathematics, and engineering educators and
their students will benefit from access to carefully curated models and
associated instructional materials. The resulting open-source ecosystem’s impact
will increase effective use of K-12 makerspaces across all of the relevant
disciplines and lead to broader literacy in design and
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the one year scoping activities of this
project, the International Technology and Engineering Education Association
(ITEEA) will revise its flagship curriculum, Engineering by Design (EbD ©
ITEEA), to incorporate the ecosystem constructed around the repository of CAD
models. More than 5,000 teachers and more than 50,000 students using the
curriculum can engage with the models integrated as a keystone element of the
revised curriculum. In addition, the Fab Foundation, established through the
Center for Atoms and Bits at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
will collaborate to engage a network of 2,000 Fabrication Laboratories (FabLabs)
in this process. The eduFAB Network, an educational extension of the Fab
Foundation, will work to coordinate activities across the respective
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.