* 2229076
* RII Track-4: NSF: Development, Characterization and Performance Evaluation of Surface Engineered Additively Manufactured Parts for Nuclear Reactors
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Sougata Roy, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 248,376.00

Metal additive manufacturing (AM) has developed significantly since its
invention. In this project, a laser-based directed energy deposition (DED)
process will be utilized to fabricate metallic parts for nuclear reactor
application. The top few layers will be further engineered using an ultrasonic
impact peening treatment to enhance its wear resistance. Post printing, the
samples will be analyzed using neutron diffraction to reveal the evolution of
microstructure, residual stress, and phase fractions at different build height
regions along the build direction of fabricated samples to correlate the
microstructural details with process conditions. Friction and wear behavior of
these additively manufactured samples will be conducted via both reciprocating
sliding and fretting wear testing. Tribology is the science of friction, wear,
and lubrication, making it inherently inseparable from surface engineering. AM
offers unique capabilities that can be leveraged to enhance the reliability of
various tribological contacts. This project will explore the symbiotic
relationship between AM, surface engineering, and tribology with respect to
sliding and fretting contact problems specifically connected to nuclear
reactors. However, the major findings from this research will provide valuable
insights to wide varieties of contacts in critical applications, such as
biomedical, automotive, and aerospace sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an Assistant professor and
training for a graduate student at the University of North Dakota (UND).
Tribology, a complex and highly interdisciplinary field, is the science of
friction, wear, and lubrication. It is necessary to understand the differences
in an AM partâ€™s friction and wear mechanism compared to traditionally fabricated
parts and in-depth material characterizations for proper commercialization.
Surface engineering is connected to materials science since it pertains to the
surface of solid matter. Additive manufacturing, surface engineering, and
tribology have an interdependent relationship. Our research goal is to leverage
this perspective to develop next-generation nuclear reactor components with
enhanced reliability and customizability when encountering friction and wear at
different temperatures. We will fabricate functionally graded metallic
components made of Nitronic 60 stainless steel by leveraging customized laser-
based directed energy deposition (DED) technique equipped with an ultrasonic
impact peening (UIP) capability. Nitronic 60 is an inexpensive austenitic
stainless steel widely used in the nuclear sector due to its galling-resistance
properties. This material can present high-temperature wear and corrosion
resistance, and widely used in valve seats, bushings, roller bearings, and
rings. We believe that optimized process parameters during UIP treatment can
result in a strain-induced FCC to HCP martensitic phase transformation (SIM) in
the deposited near-surface layers of Nitronic 60, and enhanced materials states,
such as residual stress with refined grains, can result in improved tribological
behavior. Process-microstructure-property of deposited Nitronic 60 will be
revealed by understanding phase fractions, residual stress evolution along build
height through neutron diffraction and correlated that with reciprocating
friction and wear testing as well as grid-to-rod fretting characteristics of
fabricated samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.