* 2229304
* POSE: Phase I:  Toward a Task-Parallel Programming Ecosystem for Modern Scientific Computing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Tsung-Wei Huang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,814.00

Open-source software systems designed for task-parallel programming have become
central to a wide range of modern scientific computing applications, such as
machine learning and quantum computing. While decades of research has yielded
many open-source task-parallel programming systems, most of them are led by a
handful of developers and their impacts do not sustain in the long run. To
overcome this challenge, this project proposes scoping activities to establish a
route to a long-term sustainable ecosystem for task-parallel programming. These
activities build atop the open-source software, Taskflow, a high-performance
task-parallel system to streamline the building of complex scientific computing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project starts by discovering an
ecosystem based on three increasing applications of Taskflow, quantum computing,
circuit design automation, and multimedia. The discovery effort consists of
designing showcase software products and organizing workshops to pursue the
optimal ecosystem for Taskflow. Then, the project designs a series of developer
training programs to engage potential content contributors who can help develop
and maintain Taskflow in a community-driven fashion. Finally, the project
establishes a transparent and publicly visible governance model to formalize the
decision-making process of Taskflow for various elements, including technical
contributions, partnership, and security policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project lays the foundation for Taskflow to transition to a robust and
sustainable system asset for the scientific computing community to quickly
respond to emerging parallelism using scalable task-based approaches. Many
scoping activities in this project can instill confidence in commercial adoption
of Taskflow and grow its partnership with other open-source scientific computing
projects to further broaden its impact and enhance sustainability. Also, results
produced in this project can be used in classrooms to renovate existing learning
materials for high-performance computing and software practice, engaging a
diverse group of students in open-source development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project website is available at https://taskflow.github.io/ which contains the
latest news, source code, step-by-step learning materials, and benchmarks. The
authors are committed to developing and maintaining the project in the long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.