* 2229996
* RAISE: IHBEM: Modeling Dynamic Disease-Behavior Feedbacks for Improved Epidemic Prediction and Response
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nicholas Papageorge, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2025
* USD 654,321.00

Epidemiological models inform policymakers about how infectious diseases like
COVID-19 may spread through the population. These predictions guide the
allocation of health resources and interventions to reduce disease spread or
mitigate its burdens. While these models incorporate information about how an
infection is transmitted, the disease course in infected individuals, and the
effects of interventions like vaccines, they rarely capture how individuals make
behavior decisions or how these choices respond to an epidemic. As individuals
face different economic and health circumstances, the population will not
uniformly respond to the epidemic or policy interventions. This omission
materially affects the accuracy of these models and by extension, the
effectiveness of policies deployed to combat the disease and its impacts. To
address this limitation, this project brings together expertise in epidemiology,
mathematical biology, systems engineering, economics, and decision science at
Johns Hopkins University to develop a new integrated modeling framework that
combines traditional epidemiological models of disease spread with economic
models of individual decision-making. The three most significant benefits of
this new approach are: 1) Improving future epidemic forecasts for existing and
new emerging infections; 2) Allowing for a cost-benefit analysis of disease
mitigation policies that reflects changes in human behavior and economic
outputs; 3) Helping predict the disparate impact of an epidemic and mitigation
policies across socioeconomic groups facing different health-wealth tradeoffs.
The broader impacts of the project include dissemination of research results to
broad audience and training of public health practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The tools to understand the complex dynamic interactions between
human behavior and pathogens during disease emergence, dissemination, and
control are lacking. Current epidemiological models generally do not endogenize
individual behaviors, while agent-based models from economics that have this
feature miss critical aspects of disease transmission and progression. The goals
of this study are to: 1) More accurately predict disease spread and health
outcomes during an outbreak, epidemic, or pandemic; 2) Enable multi-objective
policy design by simultaneously quantifying both the disease burden and economic
costs of proposed policies, allowing for the evaluation of both economic and
health policies; and 3) Evaluate heterogeneity and equity by quantifying the
distributional impacts of disease burden and economic cost across socio-
demographic and risk groups. To address these goals, this project brings
together a multi-disciplinary team at Johns Hopkins—with expertise in
epidemiology, mathematical biology, systems engineering, economics, and decision
science—to develop a novel integrated mathematical framework that combines
mechanistic models of infectious disease dynamics with economic models of human
behavior. This framework is designed to capture behavioral responses to both the
epidemic state and policies in place, and the effect of individual-level
behavioral responses on the trajectory of the disease within a
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the
Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.