* 2229498
* RII Track-4:NSF: Spin-orbitronics in quantum materials for energy-efficient neuromorphic computing
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Fei Xue, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 264,338.00

The rapid development of artificial intelligence relies on modern computing
technologies. However, the existing von Neumann-based technology suffers from
high energy consumption for data-intensive tasks. This high energy consumption
may limit the future adoption of artificial intelligence technologies. Inspired
by the biological brain, neuromorphic computing provides the promising
technological capability to tackle this challenge by creating superior energy-
efficient hardware for information processing. This research project exploits
the superior nonlinear nonvolatile spin-related responses in quantum materials.
The key challenge to implementing neuromorphic computing is to create artificial
neurons and synapses with great energy efficiency. Spintronics study the
interplay between electron spin transport and charge transport, so they
naturally couple electronic and magnetic configurations, thus offering non-
volatility and nonlinearity. Nonvolatile spintronics memory devices can emulate
artificial synapses and nonlinear spin-torque nano-oscillators can emulate
artificial neurons. The proposed research activities will provide a unique
opportunity for students at the University of Alabama at Birmingham to gain
computation skills and collaborate with distinguished scientists at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Additionally, as a part of this
project, the PI will develop a new advanced physics course about artificial
intelligence and how to implement it with physical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR
Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship to an
Assistant Professor and training for a postdoctoral fellow at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). Brain-inspired neuromorphic computing offers
appealing technology capability for artificial intelligence applications.
Spintronics devices, which couple electronic and magnetic configurations, can
emulate synapses and neurons in an energy-efficient compact manner. The magnetic
random-access memory can serve as the synapses and the spin-torque nano-
oscillators can serve as the neurons. The quantum materials provide additional
appealing features including more efficient control of magnetization and new
functionalities due to the coupling of spin, orbital, and magnetization degrees
of freedom. Understanding and modeling microscopic mechanisms with state-of-art
first-principles methods of neuromorphic spintronics with quantum materials is
the main goal of this proposal. The two main thrusts focus on utilizing the
superior spin-orbitronics properties in quantum materials for artificial
synapses and neurons. By collaborating with the experts at the NIST, the project
will apply first-principles methods to calculate the band structures and spin
dynamics in spin-orbit coupled quantum materials. This allows for the
understanding of the microscopic mechanism of spin-orbit torque switching and
dynamics and provides a pathway to improve the figure of merits. Project
outcomes will also include illustration of how to utilize these nonlinear
nonvolatile properties of spintronics devices into emulating neurons and
synapses for neuromorphic computing. The proposed work will provide the physics
foundation for implementing neuromorphic spintronics devices with emerging
quantum materials such as two-dimensional materials and topological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.