* 2229036
* FMRG: Cyber: Manufacturing USA: Cyber-Enabled, High-Throughput Manufacturing of Multi-Material, 3D Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Rajesh Menon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,999,732.00

High-speed, nanoscale 3D printing has the potential to transform manufacturing
and enable the fabrication of many products that are currently infeasible to
produce. Unfortunately, contemporary 3D printing techniques fall well short of
the throughput, resolution, and yield requirements of many potential
applications. This grant will support research to develop a novel nanoscale 3D
printing technique that will revolutionize our ability to manufacture products
such as water filtration membranes that require precise, multi-material 3D
nanostructures. Compared with state-of-the-art micro/nanoscale 3D printing, we
expect this work to increase the spatial resolution by over an order of
magnitude and the throughput by five orders of magnitude by allowing volumetric
nanostructures to be fabricated from multiple materials simultaneously. The new
water filtration membranes enabled by this nanoscale 3D printing process will
improve the tradeoff between selectivity and permeability in water filtration by
an estimated factor of 10x while reducing membrane costs by a factor of 100x.
These improvements will result in an overall cost reduction in ultrafiltration
of up to 25%, potentially save billions of dollars per year. This project will
also enhance workforce development by: (1) creating a new NanoEngineering
certificate program to rapidly train workers for the semiconductor industry, (2)
developing a new NanoEngineering Master’s program targeting students from
underrepresented groups, (3) leveraging the Research Experiences for Teachers
(RET) program to bring the “learning labs” to schools with large
underrepresented-minority populations, and (4) working with industrial partners
to create internships opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
traditional approaches to nanoscale 3D printing, improvements in resolution,
precision, and throughput often conflict. The nanoscale 3D printing process
developed under this grant will end these tradeoffs by using sub-wavelength-
patterned metamasks to create near-field multi-colored holographic patterns in
new multi-wavelength photocurable resists to allow entire multi-material 3D
structures to be patterned with sub-diffraction resolution in a single light
exposure. Cyber-data analytics will be used to create feedback loops for both
individual sub-processes and the overall mask and materials designs. Smart
sampling of these 3D nanostructures using novel metrology tools will be combined
with machine learning and physics-based models to create a hybrid framework to
test the fundamental limits of nanoscale 3D printing. Expected outcomes of this
work include: (1) new methods for creating near-field metamasks for multi-
wavelength 3D nanopatterning, (2) new resist chemistries enabling multi-
wavelength, multi-material patterning, (3) new understanding of the physics that
limit resolution, throughput, material properties, and yield in nanoscale 3D
printing, (4) new high-speed, data-enabled hybrid metrology approaches for
measuring nanoscale 3D features in real time, and (5) new hybrid control
techniques that use metrology data and physics-based models to intelligently
enhance yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing research is
supported by the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(ENG/CMMI), Chemistry (MPS/CHE), and Engineering Education and Centers
(ENG/EEC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.