* 2229454
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Accelerating Serverless Cloud Network Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yan Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Serverless computing has revolutionized cloud programming and is poised to
become the next dominant cloud computing paradigm. Among the major allures of
serverless computing is “agile autoscaling”, which brings forth both efficiency
and economic advantages. However, such flexibility is accompanied by new network
performance challenges that are uniquely endemic to the serverless compute
environments. For example: (1) internal function chain communication becomes a
bottleneck for serverless applications and (2) a unified function gateway
increases the number of indirect connections in function chains that further
impairs network performance. This project proposes a cross-layered effort that
seeks to optimize the function chain communication in severless-cloud
environments by exploring multiple, synergistic strategies to reduce latency in
function-chain communication. The proposed solution includes (1) a new QUIC-
based network substrate that can simultaneously improve performance and
security, without the need for tenant code modification and (2) use of data-
plane programming and informed request prediction to optimize resource
allocation and mitigate cold-start issues in serverless multi-tenant
clouds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will empower a broad class of novel
serverless applications with stringent latency and security requirements and our
proposed designs will be universally applicable across popular cloud platforms.
This project will make the proposed implementations open-source and publicly
release our evaluation environments through the NSF Fabric testbed, thus
benefiting diverse stakeholders. This project will actively explore the
transition of our work to commercial cloud services and open-source serverless
communities, such as OpenFaaS and the QUIC-go project. This project will
incorporate a detailed education and outreach plan targeting undergraduate and
graduate researchers (through courses and summer internships), and women and
minorities (through organizations like ThriveWiSE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.