* 2229746
* RII Track-4:NSF:  The Monitoring of Invasive Yellow Sweet Clover Using Landsat/Sentinel-2, UAV Imagery and Machine Learning
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Ranjeet John, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 100,607.00

Invasive yellow sweet clover (YSC) is an annual legume herbaceous flowering
plant, other than grass, planted initially for bee habitat and soil erosion
management. YSC can also cause hemorrhaging and poisoning in livestock as a hay
component. The goal of this fellowship is to initiate a long-term collaboration
between the University of South Dakota (USD, home) and the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Earth Resources Observation and Science Center (EROS,
host) for the mapping of YSC blooms. The PI and graduate student, with the help
of Host scientists, will jointly develop machine learning predictive models
using High-Performance Computing (HPC). The knowledge transfer will involve the
adaptation of the EROS processing chain to the supercomputer at USD, which would
immediately improve computational ability and the long-term competitiveness of
USD in invasive plant species mapping. The research methods developed here will
enable the production of species distribution maps to inform land managers and
policymakers to help manage the rapid spread of YSC across South Dakota (SD) and
the Northern Great Plains. The proposed product would have long-term impacts on
STEM education at USD by providing a series of topics for undergraduate
research, masterâ€™s theses, and Ph.D. dissertations. Students could also
collaborate with USGS scientists at a world-class Federal Lab, leading to summer
internships and possibly full-time job offers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) proposal would provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and
training for a graduate student at the University of South Dakota. This work
would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at the USGS Earth Resources
Observation and Science Center. There has been a dramatic increase of Yellow
Sweet Clover (Melilotus officinalis; YSC) with super blooms in SD and the
Northern Great Plains (NGP) following higher precipitation in recent years. YSC
has the potential for establishing significant biomass in its biennial lifecycle
and provides competition to native grass species through shading. There are
major knowledge and data gaps regarding the drivers, spatiotemporal extent, or
tipping points of YSC blooms. Hence, near-real-time mapping tools, at a broad
spatial scale and high resolution would be helpful in identifying drivers and
enabling targeted monitoring and management of YSC. Our objectives are 1) to
develop an annual YSC % cover predictive model for SD and train on field samples
of YSC along with site-specific variables (topography, land cover, soil
moisture, and edaphic factors) and climate to optimize model estimates; 2) The
model parameters will be applied to the Sentinel-2 (HLS) time series to produce
a time series of annual YSC % cover and biomass maps. The PI will adapt and
evaluate USGS EROS process flows to develop high-resolution vegetation mapping
capabilities that include three future scenarios: wetter &amp; cooler, normal,
hotter and drier, from short, mid, and long-term weather forecasts. These maps
could be used to detect year-to-year changes in YSC and enable species
distribution maps to inform land managers and policymakers to help manage the
rapid spread of YSC across SD and the NGP. Methods developed could serve as
prototypes to map other invasive plant species as well as structure and function
attributes of rangeland vegetation leading to new opportunities and
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.