* 2229260
* FMRG: Manufacturing USA: Cyber: Data-Driven Methods for Future Cyber Manufacturing as a Service
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Cyber manufacturing anticipates a networked service for on-demand manufacturing
of engineered parts and products. Such a service has the potential to
democratize access to the means and know-how of discrete parts manufacturing at
the reduced time, scale, and cost. Advances in digital design, low-cost sensing,
and networked manufacturing machines have potential to enable ready access to
the means of production, along with design and production data. However,
computational methods and tools that enable a future cyber manufacturing service
to automatically translate a digital design into a manufactured product using
the available means of production are needed. This award supports fundamental
research to automate the selection, planning and acquisition of the
manufacturing processes and resources required to produce discrete parts and
products on-demand. This capability is applicable to a wide range of
manufacturing industries including aerospace, automotive, energy, and
biomedical. Therefore, this research will benefit the competitiveness of the
U.S. manufacturing sector and society. The research integrates several
disciplines including design, manufacturing science and technology, human-
computer interaction, artificial intelligence, and machine learning. Through
partnership with a Hispanic Serving Institution, industry, a Manufacturing USA
institute, and outreach to other underrepresented communities, the project will
educate and train a diverse future cyber manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will research a data-driven computational framework that
enables computers to infer design elements and processing details for new parts
from the accumulated design and production experience of industry with parts
that have been manufactured previously. This capability rests on extracting core
manufacturing intelligence in the form of scalable and generative manufacturing
process capability knowledge and design-for-manufacturing knowledge from past
and current design and manufacturing data. Specifically, the research will yield
fundamental knowledge of the generative capability of manufacturing processes to
transform part shape, material properties, and quality to meet product design
requirements, and generative redesign-for-functionality and manufacturability.
Process planning and part redesign methods will be developed from a combination
of new deep learning, shape descriptor, and manufacturing reasoning
technologies. The resulting data-driven computational framework will provide the
fundamental software tools to implement future cyber manufacturing services that
provide a scalable and efficient solution for automatically translating digital
designs into physical products on-demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future
Manufacturing award was supported by the Office of the Assistant Director (OAD)
and the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) of the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG), the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE)
of the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) and the Division of
Computer and Network Systems (CNS) of the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.