* 2229064
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Investigation of Mini-filament Eruptions and Their Relationship with Small Scale Magnetic Flux Ropes in Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 435,681.00

It is well known that magnetic flux ropes (MFRs) exist ubiquitously in the solar
surface and in the interplanetary space. MFRs are generally defined as a bundle
of magnetic fields that are twisted about each other and wrap around a common
axis. The large scale MFRs are often associated with solar filament eruptions,
subsequent propagation of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) in solar wind, and
furthermore, the Interplanetary CMEs (ICMs) towards Earth. In recent years,
small-scale MFRs (SMFRs) in both solar surface and solar wind are receiving
significant attention. Initial evidences show that they are numerous and
ubiquitous from high resolution observations from the NSF-funded 1.6m Goode
Solar Telescope (GST) of Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) and from NASAâ€™s
Parker Solar Probe (PSP). This project addresses the Solar, Heliospheric, and
Interplanetary Environment (SHINE) goal of linking the generation and
propagation of SMFRs from the solar surface to the solar wind. Two female early
career researchers will be supported, as well as undergraduate, graduate, and
high school students. The team will mentor students at the NSF REU sites of New
Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) and the University of Alabama Huntsville
(UAH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high-resolution, high-polarimetric and
spectroscopic data from GST, in-situ observations from PSP as well as other
ground-based and space observations, NJIT and UAH join an effort to carry out
comprehensive case and statistical studies of SMFRs in solar surface and solar
wind. The team will investigate the kinematic, thermal and magnetic properties
of them, as well as possible photospheric magnetic field evolution associated
with eruption of mini-filaments. In addition, they will find the connection
between solar mini-filament eruptions and detected SMFRs in solar wind. The
project uses data from NSF funded ground-based observations of BBSO. Combining
the most advanced data from GST/BBSO and PSP, the team will disclose detailed
properties of SMFRs and address the following key science questions. (1) What
are the dynamic properties of mini-filament eruptions (velocity, temperature,
density, energy)? (2) What is the photospheric magnetic structure and evolution
associated with mini-filament eruptions? (3) What are the statistical
distributions of mini-filament eruption in coronal holes and regular quiet sun?
(4) Statistically, is there a possible connection between mini-filament
eruptions and the SMFRs in the solar wind? These questions are of importance
from two aspects: (1) to disclose the basic plasma properties of SMFRs and (2)
to advance understanding of the formation of transients in the solar
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.