* 2229406
* 2023 FOCAPO/CPC Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Michael Baldea, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 30,875.00

This grant will make it possible for a combination of 25 postdocs and graduate
students and 10 early career faculty members to attend the third joint
Foundations of Computer-Aided Process Operations/Chemical Process Control
(FOCAPO/CPC) conference to be held 8-12 January 2023 in San Antonio, TX.
Advances in mathematical modeling, computation, data collection and processing,
as well as changes in markets and economic circumstances, have over the past two
decades blurred the distinctions between the chemical process operations and
process control fields; this motivated the first joint conference in 2012. The
2023 conference will attract leading researchers in the field of chemical
process systems engineering from US and international universities, industries,
and national laboratories. It will provide an excellent opportunity for the
expected 200 participants to learn about the state of the art in process systems
engineering through 6 joint-session plenary speakers, 16 keynote lectures
delivered jointly by pairs of speakers with complementary interests, 2 joint
poster sessions, 12 parallel FOCAPO/CPC sessions, and ending with a joint
topical discussion to summarize trends identified during the conference. The
meeting is structured to encourage interaction between the process operations
and control communities, as well as between established and early career
faculty, and academic and industrial researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integration of chemical process operations and process control provides exciting
opportunities to address the challenges society faces in human and ecosystem
health, sustainable use of food, water, energy, and other strategic resources,
mitigating the impacts of climate change, and effective and ethical use of data
and automation. In response to these grand challenges, the 2023 FOCAPO/CPC will
examine four themes: Digitalization, Sustainability and Globalization,
Innovation Speed, and Process Systems Engineering in 2050. Four of the plenary
talks and the four keynote sessions will be organized around these grand
challenges; specific technical topics that address these challenges include
cybersecurity, process safety, integration of data-driven techniques in
mathematical optimization, hardware platforms, integration of PSE with
infrastructure, the circular economy, rapid scale-up of chemical and drug
processes, open-source modeling, supply chain operations, and the future of
process control. These issues will be explored by the 25 postdocs and graduate
students and 10 early career faculty members partially supported by this grant
to attend FOCAPO/CPC 2023. Emphasis will be placed on selecting PSE researchers
who might not otherwise be able to attend the conference and researchers from
groups underrepresented in the PSE community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.