* 2229428
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Closing the Loop for Accountable Interference-free Spectrum Sharing with Passive Radio Receivers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Gregory Hellbourg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 119,418.00

Spectrum in the US is incredibly valuable to science, education, commerce,
transportation, and contemporary life. Wireless bandwidth needs are rapidly
growing, but allocation of spectrum to wireless users should not come at the
expense of scientific observation in astronomy and earth science which are
already under-allocated and subject to interference when operating
opportunistically outside the narrow protected bands. This project is developing
new secure and accountable sharing protocols that not only enable more efficient
sharing of the spectrum between terrestrial commercial wireless systems and
passive receivers, but also empowers passive systems to force a particular
interfering transmitter to switch band. Improved coexistence allows more
reliable operation of radio astronomy receivers. This project is creating open
source software and data, and working with the ITU-R to ensure that results
impact the research community and future spectrum sharing policy. Developments
are impacting undergraduate and graduate education through course material and
research experiences, and the project is engaged in K12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing RF watermarks that
embed random pseudonyms into transmitted wireless communication signals so that
passive receivers can demodulate the pseudonym of any interferer. The proposed
system then allows passive receivers to indirectly inform the interfering device
to change band. To prevent any other device from inferring private information,
the proposed system leverages differential privacy to quantitatively limit
privacy leakage. Further, the project is adapting software attestation to
develop proof of correct execution of spectrum decision on user equipment, and
complementing the watermark-based detection system with spectrum policy
enforcement. Protocols under study are being implemented and tested on PAWR
testbeds as an open source project. Extensive experimentation, including at the
Owens Valley Radio Observatory, is validating the technical contributions, and
quantifying its performance and robustness to attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.