* 2229108
* Collaborative Research: AMPS Stochastic Algorithms for Early Detection and Risk Prediction of Hidden Contingencies in Modern Power Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gang George Yin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 109,797.00

Modern power systems (MPS) are complex systems involving conventional and
renewable generators, smart distribution networks, and advanced information
exchanges. High penetration of random low-inertia renewable energy sources,
increased natural disasters such as the 2021 Winter storm Uri, and unprecedented
man-made cyber-physical attacks have posed a threat to the reliability and
security of MPS. Several cascading failures in MPS started with smaller
undetected contingencies such as California's wildfires (e.g., Camp Creek Fire,
Zogg Fire, and Dixie Fire) caused by equipment failures. Smaller contingency
events, particularly on the distribution side of the grid, may not be directly
detected. This project focuses on the early detection and risk prediction of
hidden contingencies in MPS. The research fits within efforts to enhance the
resilience of the U.S. power grid and move toward carbon-free energy
infrastructure. Therefore, it has broader impacts on the carbon-free economy and
social welfare. This project will also enhance teaching, training, and learning
in mathematics and statistics, renewable energy, smart grids, and green
technologies. The team plans to develop new courses for undergraduate and
graduate students to facilitate the training of next-generation scientists and
engineers. Every effort will be made to promote the participation of
underrepresented students in the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project introduces a novel framework of stochastic prediction,
estimation, and early detection (SPEED) for MPS. Covering a broad range of
cyber-physical contingencies (CPC), this research will have the following
distinct and novel aims and outcomes. First, the project introduces a new
stochastic hybrid system (SHS) model, consisting of continuous dynamics and
discrete events. Second, the project will develop new estimation and prediction
computational methods. Starting from the Wonham filter for hidden Markov chains,
to detect discrete jump changes, this research will focus on finding more
computationally feasible schemes. Furthermore, rates of convergence of the
algorithms will be obtained, and extensive numerical experiments will be
performed. Third, fundamental concepts such as joint observability will be
introduced. New estimation algorithms will be developed for joint estimation and
prediction of CPC in SHS. Fourth, since early and quick detection of abrupt
changes is vitally important for the risk management of MPS, this project will
provide a new computable scheme based on Markov chain approximation for optimal
stopping and will quantitatively predict risks of potential near-future
cascading CPC. Fifth, evaluation and validation of the theoretical findings will
be conducted through utility-level operational data, large-scale power grid
simulations, and hardware-in-the-loop emulation on a microgrid. The synthetic
operational and summary data of the distribution power grids and transmission
systems will be incorporated into the validation and evaluation of the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.