* 2229136
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Co-Designed Control and Scheduling Adaptation for Assured Cyber-Physical System Safety and Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Arun Prakash, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Taylor
* 03/31/2026
* USD 592,000.00

The safety and performance of cyber-physical systems (CPS) depend crucially on
control and scheduling decisions that often are fixed at design time, which
significantly restricts the conditions under which a system can operate both
safely and with suitable performance. Going beyond prior work that has explored
different control and scheduling adaptations in individual system designs, this
project will conduct more general and in-depth investigations, into how cyber-
physical systems’ control and scheduling can be co-designed to adapt jointly,
automatically, dynamically, safely, and effectively even in response to rapid,
large, and diverse changes in: (1) the system’s controlled behavior; (2) its
environment; (3) its physical components; and (4) its platform software and
hardware. Our project will immerse multiple graduate students in cross-
disciplinary research, with extensive education, training, and mentoring
spanning computer science, control theory, natural hazards engineering,
structural engineering, mechanical engineering, and computer engineering. We
will also involve undergraduate students via summer REU supplements and in-
semester mentored independent study projects for academic credit, and will
leverage our existing initiatives and relationships with partner organizations
for K-12 outreach. As we have done in each of our previous collaborations, our
multi-university team will recruit, mentor, and retain participants from groups
traditionally under-represented in science and technology fields, leveraging
effective and established outreach programs at our institutions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this cross-disciplinary research project we will develop new
formal models, analyses, system infrastructure, and evaluation metrics, to
explicitly represent, respect, and even exploit control and scheduling inter-
dependencies, to ensure that systems’ behaviors remain safe while enabling
significant improvements in performance. The novel co-design approach we propose
will enable radically improved cyber-physical system performance capabilities
while respecting safety constraints that may cross-cut cyber and physical
components and the system’s environment. For example, it will enable more
extreme (but safely realizable) stress testing and adaptive management of
mechanical systems and civil structures, to gauge and maintain resilience to
significant (potentially adverse) changes to conditions in a system and its
environment, and to enact adaptive mitigating responses
accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.