* 2229155
* FMSG: Cyber: Perceptual and Cognitive Additive Manufacturing (PCAM)
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Houbing Song, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 499,998.00

This grant supports fundamental research on a radical transformation of additive
manufacturing through digitally connecting machines, humans, and manufactured
products. Additive manufacturing has enabled a new paradigm shift from
conventional design for manufacturing approaches into manufacturing for design.
A fundamental change in additive manufacturing is necessary as we enter a new
era of intelligent future manufacturing beyond additive manufacturing. A
promising solution is the convergence of wireless embedded sensors with
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) data processes, which can
transform the way people interact with manufacturing processes, factory
operations, optimizing efficiency, and anomaly system detection that could
provide critical information about evaluated components and systems. This
project opens a new transitional door to perceptive and cognitive additive
manufacturing, enabling true internet of things and digital twin, connecting
devices and machines in factories with robots, computers, and humans, and every
product we manufacture in factories. The grant will also support educational
activities to upskill the manufacturing workforce, K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students, and the public, significantly influencing diverse populations
of all ages and backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformation to cyber-
physical production manufacturing demands advanced process monitoring through
distributed sensing beyond the current state of digitally connected machines and
robots collaborating with humans. This project seeks to enable unprecedented
wireless fingerprinting and sensing of additively manufactured parts by
embedding wireless sensors and performing predictive analysis and health
monitoring using AI and ML techniques. This project proposes a holistic approach
involving four core research tasks: 1) to study the effects of embedding sensors
during additive manufacturing; 2) to design embeddable acoustic sensors and
insert them during the manufacturing process to read physical parameters; 3) to
prove that embedded passive sensor signals can be sensed wirelessly using
millimeter-wave antennas, and 4) to quickly monitor and evaluate the state of
manufactured products using ML algorithms. This project has the potential to
enable next-generation cyber-physical production systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award is supported by the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Computer and Network
Systems (CNS) of the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.