* 2229131
* FMSG: BIO: Manufacturing of Molecular-Precision, Scalable 2D Material Memory Array for Future Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Manjeri Anantram, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 518,950.00

This project will develop a new approach to manufacturing computer memory, a
critical component in modern computing and data storage. Currently, memory
technologies are made from silicon wafers, which require expensive instruments
to pattern. It is also increasingly difficult to shrink the size of the memory
device using this approach. Our approach will leverage DNA’s self-assembly
properties and two-dimensional (2D) materials to overcome this manufacturing
bottleneck. 2D materials are atomically-thin films and have outstanding
electrical properties. Leveraging DNA’s size will create nanometer-scale
templates to pattern and modify 2D materials. Our experiments are complemented
by atomic-scale theoretical models of these systems, to advance memory
technologies in both storage and computing applications. Results from this
research will advance semiconductor technology for the U.S. and benefit the
nation’s economy and security. This research is a close collaboration between
chemists, material scientists, and electrical engineers from three research-
intensive universities, a four-year college, a community college, and a
historically black university. This project will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact science and
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
test the hypothesis that DNA nanostructures can pattern defects and deliver
dopant ions to 2D materials with molecular precision, and that this strategy can
produce high-precision, low-variation synaptic devices. The team will use DNA
nanostructures to create a defined number of defects and intercalants on single-
layer graphene and molybdenum disulfide and use these modified 2D materials to
fabricate synaptic memory devices. The devices are critical to enable energy-
efficient computing architectures that mimic the human brain. Atomistic models
will be developed to understand the material and device behaviors. The project
also includes education and workforce development activities, designed to
highlight the integration of biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering as a
potential career path towards the future manufacturing of semiconductor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award was supported by
the Engineering Directorate and the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.