* 2229453
* NSF I-Corps Hub (Track 1): Southwest Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Christine Dixon Thiesing, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The NSF I-Corps Southwest Hub’s broader impact is establishment of a
standardized regional I-Corps infrastructure across the southwest region with a
robust expansion plan and ready access to entrepreneurial training to assist
researchers in applying customer discovery principles in technology translation.
Even with over 50 Fortune 500 research and development (R&amp;D) and corporate
headquarters located across the region, this vibrant ecosystem still has large
disparities in terms of access to capital, experienced entrepreneurs, and
mentors for deep tech researchers, resulting in challenges in meeting the
growing innovation and workforce demands of the region. The Southwest Hub
addresses these challenges by bringing together a unique coalition of partner
institutions to mitigate workforce, knowledge transfer, and capital disparities,
which are critical impediments to a thriving deep tech venture ecosystem. The
Southwest Hub institutions have successful track records of training researchers
to apply customer discovery principles to develop products that are commercially
relevant and attractive to potential investors and downstream partners.
Additionally, the Southwest Hub may increase the participation of
Underrepresented Groups (URGs) in the I-Corps program, which historically have
not had the same access to entrepreneurial education, investment capital, and
mentors. The Southwest Hub region includes 123 Hispanic Serving Institutions
(HSIs), 16 Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and 20 Native
American Serving NonTribal Institutions (NASNTIs), and Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs) and will have a special focus on the three largest minority
groups in the southwest region: Hispanic, African American, and Native American.
The Southwest Hub will use its reach findings to increase diversity at all
levels, including I-Corps teams, instructors, and leadership across the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is based on the
development of a systematic and comprehensive regional network of programming
that accelerates the translation of federally funded research into innovations
that benefit society and support deep tech workforce development and economic
growth. The Hub represents educational partners from four states in one of the
fastest growing regions in the United States with a vibrant innovation ecosystem
driven by an R&amp;D portfolio of over $3 Billion. This group has prior
experience as regional I-Corps Nodes and Sites. With a diverse demography of
faculty, graduate students, post-docs, and other researchers, and an expert
network of trainers, mentors, and entrepreneurs, a key impact will be increased
participation in national I-Corps programs throughout the region, leading to an
ecosystem that is diverse, inclusive, and representative of its population. The
commercialization roadmap has enhanced partnerships between academia and
industry. In addition, this project will introduce the first regional I-Corps
cohorts taught exclusively in Spanish, reaching a key underrepresented group in
the region. The research component will test a data-driven hub-and-spoke model
and its impact on training for successful outcomes, improving the understanding
of innovation processes, and generating policy findings to improve the speed and
likelihood of success for deep technology
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.