* 2229704
* POSE: Phase I:  Open Source Ecosystem for OpenCilk
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* John Owens, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. The goal
of this POSE project is to scope an open-source ecosystem (OSE) for OpenCilk, a
new task-parallel, fully open-source platform for programming multicore
computers, the dominant architecture for computing today. The recent demise of
Moore's Law and the impending end to the miniaturization of semiconductor
circuitry have ended semiconductor technology's virtual monopoly on growing
computing performance. OpenCilk is a key technology for multicore performance
engineering - developing fast code for applications that run on commodity and
cloud multicore computers - giving application developers a powerful alternative
source for performance. The project's novelties include pursuing an academic-
first strategy for developing an OpenCilk OSE by focusing on winning the hearts
and minds of academic researchers, educators, and students who are not well
served by existing task-parallel programming platforms. Among the project's
impacts are the creation of an effective strategy for expanding the set of
OpenCilk users and contributors, for building an academic community for
performance engineering, and for providing teaching materials for performance
engineering using OpenCilk. The broader impacts of the project are to enable the
newly created performance-engineering community to improve modern performance-
critical applications ~W including machine learning, simulation of physical
phenomena, and computer security - which are national strategic
priorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;OpenCilk's adoption market is constituted
largely from the following segments: (1) nonacademic software developers who are
mostly from industry; (2) researchers developing task-parallel programming
technology and applications; (3) educators teaching parallel computing and
software performance engineering; and (4) students who take their classes. The
mission of OpenCilk is to make it easy for developers to write fast and correct
multicore code, for researchers to pioneer technologies that empower developers,
and for educators to teach and students to learn software performance
engineering. To that end, OpenCilk abides by the following guiding
principles:&lt;br/&gt; - The language should be simple and easy to reason
about.&lt;br/&gt; - Bugs should be easy to reliably discover and
diagnose.&lt;br/&gt; - Parallel performance should be scalable, composable, and
backed by simple mathematical guarantees.&lt;br/&gt; - The system should be open
source and easy to use, teach with, modify, and extend.&lt;br/&gt;This OSE
project is experimenting with strategies for outbound, inbound, and peer
networking to identify and engage potential OpenCilk users and contributors in
academia. Once an academic niche has been established, the OpenCilk OSE being
scoped can evolve to address the entire market, which includes commercial
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.