* 2229274
* RII Track-4:NSF: Bioactive Surfaces Through Affinity Tag Protein-Polymer Conjugation
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Tristan Clemons, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 05/31/2025
* USD 157,688.00

The technology addressed in this project has potential to mitigate everyday
common challenges associated with interacting with surfaces. Spilling coffee on
a shirt at an inconvenient time or having trepidation about touching a door
handle during a global pandemic are examples of challenges that this research
aims to mitigate. The surfaces that one interacts with on a daily basis are
passive, requiring constant cleaning to be convenient and safe. However,
interaction with surfaces would be different if surfaces were self-cleaning,
antibacterial, protective, or therapeutic. Proteins provide many functions
important to health, agriculture, defense, and food processing. Permanent
conjugation of polymers to proteins, creating protein-polymer conjugates, is a
widely used strategy to enhance protein stability for these many applications.
However, challenges remain with this chemistry, including the potential of
reducing protein activity through indiscriminate conjugation, or via the polymer
disrupting the protein from folding into its active structure. Further, these
covalent strategies contribute to material waste. Once the protein is rendered
inactive, the protein, polymer, and any surface these are conjugated to will
also be lost due to this permanent covalent chemistry. This project aims to
develop strategies for achieving protein-polymer conjugation through a simple
yet strong non-permanent interaction to produce regenerative, protein decorated
‘bioactive’ surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide
a fellowship to an Assistant professor and training for a graduate student at
the University of Southern Mississippi (USM). Proteins provide a myriad of
functions important to health, agriculture, transportation, defense, food
processing and many others. This demand for proteins has led to an increase in
the desire to find strategies to incorporate these biological catalysts into
synthetic systems, while providing stability and longevity of protein activity.
Despite some successes in developing covalent protein-polymer conjugates to
achieve this, challenges with covalent modification remain, leading to reduced
or loss of protein activity resulting from protein denaturation. This project
will employ scalable histidine tag (His-tag) affinity ligand chemistries,
developed and routinely used for recombinant protein purification, coupled with
reversible-addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization as a
strategy to create non-covalent protein-polymer conjugates to coat surfaces and
impart bioactivity. Utilizing the His-tag for conjugation will ensure polymer
attachment at the site of the N- or C-terminus of the protein, avoiding polymer
attachment at the protein active site, preventing denaturation, while being
amenable to almost all recombinant proteins purified with this chemistry. The
non-covalent coupling chemistry will allow for the construction of protein
specific bioactive surfaces, with the ease of wash removal and recoupling of
active recombinant protein, creating a regenerative surface, suitable for waste
reduction. Successful completion of this proof of principle approach will
provide a platform technology suitable for high performing bioactive coatings.
PI Clemons will be mentored by Heather Maynard, Professor of Chemistry at the
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Co-Director of the NSF-funded
BioPACIFIC MIP, and a world-leader in protein-polymer
conjugation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.