* 2229636
* RII Track-4:NSF:Understanding the Fundamental Physics of Acousto-Magnetic Microswimmers to Realize Precise, Tunable Motion at Microscales
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Nitesh Nama, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 185,120.00

Microscale synthetic devices (or microswimmers) that can offer precise and
controllable motion at microscales have the potential to transform healthcare
and bioengineering. For example, these devices can provide direct access to
complex regions of the human body through on-board imaging and wireless data
transmission to enable targeted drug delivery and localized medical
interventions. However, despite considerable progress in microscale propulsion
research, controlled, programmable and biocompatible motion of microswimmers is
yet to be realized. This project combines external acoustic and magnetic fields
to achieve tunable and computationally predictable motion at microscales. To
this end, the PI will integrate his computational methods with experimental
measurements using state-of-the-art fabrication and characterization facilities
at the University of Pennsylvania. This systematic investigation will generate
crucial insights into microscale propulsion and will provide a comprehensive
understanding of microswimmer motion and its relation to acoustic and magnetic
fields. This project will establish a long-term collaboration between the PIâ€™s
home institution of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the University of
Pennsylvania to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms that govern the
microswimmer motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide
a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a graduate student at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). Synthetic devices (microswimmers) that
offer controlled, powered, autonomous motion at microscales can enable novel
applications such as diagnostic sensing and targeted drug delivery. However, an
ideal propulsion strategy that combines advanced navigational capabilities with
excellent biocompatibility is yet to be realized. The overarching goal of this
research is to combine acoustic and magnetic fields to achieve controlled motion
at microscales. To this end, the PI will integrate a novel fluid-structure
interaction computational framework with advanced experimental approaches to
perform extensive characterization of microswimmer motion and develop a
predictive computational capability that can relate the microswimmer motion with
external fields. The PI will adopt an integrated computational and experimental
approach by working in collaboration with a team at the University of
Pennsylvania to leverage state-of-the-art fabrication and characterization
facilities for understanding microswimmer motion. Objectives will include to:
(1) understand the relation between acoustic frequency, bubble oscillation
modes, and the flow field around the microswimmer; (2) relate microswimmer
trajectories with the external acoustic and magnetic fields; and (3) identify
novel microswimmer designs and functionalities by exploring the parametric space
via an integrated computational and experimental approach. This fellowship will
lead to new fundamental knowledge on the physical underpinnings of acousto-
magnetic microswimmers and will facilitate novel microswimmer trajectories,
functionalities, and applications. Ultimately, the PI will utilize the knowledge
gained during this fellowship to advance research infrastructure at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln and sustain a long-term collaborative research
effort for microscale propulsion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.