* 2229735
* RII Track-4: NSF: Insights into Pathogenicity of Chlorine-Stressed Bacteria Using Combined In Vitro Assays and Metatranscriptomics
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Yanyan Zhang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 216,478.00

Bacterial pathogens in water pose a significant worldwide threat to public
health, especially for individuals with weakened immune systems. Currently,
chlorination is the most widely used water disinfection process to cause the
inactivation of microorganisms in the water to ensure public and environmental
health. While most bacteria in water can be effectively killed after
chlorination, some may survive due to their resistance to disinfectants. There
has yet to be a comprehensive study to investigate the ability of the surviving
bacteria to infect a host and cause disease. This Research Infrastructure
Improvement RII Track-4 fellowship project will explore the impact of water
disinfection on the pathogenicity of bacteria, which will help overcome the
current knowledge gap regarding microbial risk assessment after water treatment.
This goal will be addressed by using advanced cellular tools and next-generation
sequencing techniques developed at the host site, the Biological Measurements
Branch of the US Environmental Protection Agency. The fundamental knowledge
obtained from this project is expected to provide valuable information to
stakeholders and policymakers for reassessing the current water treatment
processes and reducing health risks. This research will also offer training
opportunities for underrepresented students at New Mexico State University,
which is an Hispanic-Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4)
proposal would provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a
graduate student at New Mexico State University. This work would be conducted in
collaboration with researchers in the Biological Measurements Branch of the
Watershed &amp; Ecosystem Characterization Division at the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in Cincinnati, OH. Knowing if the
surviving bacteria after disinfection still hold their initial characteristics,
especially pathogenicity, is essential. There is a possibility that
inappropriate chlorination may stimulate the pathogenicity of surviving bacteria
due to the induced transcription of gene encoding virulence, reactive oxygen
species (ROS) response, or horizontal transfer of virulence genes. This project
aims to better understand the pathogenicity of surviving microorganisms after
chlorination by investigating host-bacteria interactions. Specifically, this
project aims to: 1) Investigate the tolerance of chlorine-stressed bacteria
under simulated gastrointestinal conditions; 2) Examine the adhesion and
invasion of chlorine-stressed bacteria to human intestinal epithelial cells; 3)
Compare the inflammatory responses of cells under exposure to non-stressed and
chlorine-stressed bacteria; 4) Determine the changes in virulence gene
expression using multiple qPCR arrays; and 5) Elucidate cellular response of
chlorine-stressed bacteria to chlorine through genome-wide transcriptional
analysis. The expected outcomes of this fellowship project will facilitate the
development of novel disinfection strategies to reduce the pathogenicity of
surviving bacteria and minimize the spread of bacteria with pathogenicity into
the water distribution system. The methods developed in the proposed study could
be expanded to the fields of food preservation and medical disinfectants. The
support from the EPSCoR RII Track-4:NSF program will allow the PI's institution
to advance its research capacity and establish collaboration networks with EPA.
It also provides a foundation for building the PI's research program into a
significant and regular contributor to pathogen removal in water
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.