* 2229695
* RII Track-4:NSF: Photochemical Studies of Isoprene Oxidation Products and their Atmospheric Implications
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Tolga Karsili, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 02/28/2025
* USD 201,579.00

This EPSCoR Research Fellowship will enable Professor Tolga Karsili and his
graduate student to work with Professor Marsha Lester at the University of
Pennsylvania to undertake studies on how solar light interacts with hydroperoxyl
aldehydes (HPALDs) in Earth’s atmosphere. The photochemistry of HPALDs has
significant consequences for our atmosphere as they are implicated in the
breakdown of harmful hydrocarbons emissions. We will synthesize and undertake
state-of-the-art measurements to discover how sunlight perturbs the chemistry of
HPALDs and the atmospheric implications of the resulting products. The project
will provide excellent opportunities for an underrepresented and first-
generation graduate student who will be trained in state-of-the-art
photochemical experiments. Through knowledge gained from this collaboration,
Professor Karsili will bring the state-of-the-art techniques back to the home
institution, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, which is expected to
catalyze new collaborations within Louisiana and across other EPSCoR
jurisdictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship
to an Assistant professor and training for a graduate student at the University
of Louisiana at Lafayette. Isoprene is the second most abundant volatile organic
compound (after methane) emitted into the troposphere. It is biogenically
emitted predominantly in deeply forested regions of our planet, such as the
Amazon. Reaction with the hydroxyl (OH) radical represents its dominant removal
from the troposphere, where continued chemical processing eventually forms
HPALDs. The resulting HPALD decays to form OH radicals upon solar-light
irradiation, thus recycling some of the OH radical budget back to the
troposphere. These OH radicals are important in enhancing the troposphere's
oxidizing capacity and removing hydrocarbon emissions. The overall goal of this
proposal is to visit the group of Professor Lester to undertake state-of-the-art
velocity map imaging, laser-induced fluorescence, and quantum chemical studies
on stabilized HPALDs. The overarching vision is to establish a long-term
collaboration that demonstrates new capabilities in the PI’s research profile –
creating a transformative trajectory for the PI’s research career in atmospheric
and climate sciences. The research outcome of this project will be integrated
into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum at the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette and will create a promising path toward enhancing atmospheric
chemistry research in Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.