* 2229742
* RAPID: Sensorimotor function in complex environments in a primate neuroanatomical model species
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Craig McGowan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 95,288.00

Humans rely on visual cues to navigate complex terrain safely and stably. This
project uses a primate model to investigate how visual and locomotor adaptations
that occurred during early primate evolution shaped strategies for navigating
complex environments. Major evolutionary transitions in both the visual and
locomotor systems took place in our tree-dwelling early primate ancestors.
However, it is not fully understood how animals with visual and locomotor
systems similar to those of early primates approach specific sensorimotor
challenges posed by environmental complexity. The investigators examine how
primates move through complex environments by addressing questions related to
the mechanics of movement as well as the spatial relationships between visual
gaze and foot placement. The findings have the potential to benefit society by
providing data necessary to understand how human integrated visual and motor
function evolved, thus providing insights into addressing dysfunction in these
systems. The project also enhances education by providing STEM learning and
training opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Early
primates inhabited a discontinuous, three-dimensional, visually obstructed, and
variably illuminated arboreal habitat that posed substantial biomechanical and
visual challenges. Comparative studies of locomotion, visual adaptations, and
neuroanatomy have shown that primates evolved specialized cortical processing of
visual signals, and relatively greater cortical control over patterns of limb
movement during locomotion, all while facing the selective pressures of life in
a challenging arboreal environment. However, there is limited understanding
about how non-human primates navigate environments that mimic the complexity of
the natural habitats in which these adaptations arose. This project addresses
the following fundamental questions: 1) How do primates move through arboreal
habitats that are visually and mechanically challenging? 2) Did the patterns of
visually guided locomotion observed in humans emerge early in primate evolution
along with other visual and locomotor adaptations? The project involves data
collection on forces, joint angles, and gaze behavior during navigation of
complex substrates and with varied light conditions in a nocturnal strepsirrhine
primate. The species is an appropriate model because it is a generalized
arboreal quadruped and its visual system is likely similar to that of the
earliest primates. Results from this project can facilitate synthesis of
comparative experimental data on non-human primates and existing neuroanatomical
data to improve our understanding of integrated visuomotor function in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.