* 2229313
* RII Track-4: NSF: Understanding Wildfire Risks to Drinking Water Source Waters: Pyrogenic Changes to Organic Matter and Disinfection By-product Formation
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* David Hanigan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 247,686.00

Wildfires are growing in size, severity, and frequency due to drought, forest
management, and climate change. Wildfire mobilizes soil organic matter through
partial combustion. This partially combusted organic matter is then transported
after precipitation events to downstream drinking water treatment plants.
Disinfection is a key component of drinking water treatment and inactivates
pathogens. However, the chemicals used for disinfection also react with the
diverse organic compounds present in all water sources. Some of these reactions
result in the production of carcinogenic disinfection by-products, which have
regulatory limits in finished drinking water set by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. There is currently conflicting evidence of whether partially
combusted soil organic matter causes more or fewer disinfection by-products to
form than would otherwise, leaving uncertainty about the future security of
water supplies in wildfire-prone regions. The overarching goal of this research
is to understand how fire severity affects the formation of disinfection by-
products at downstream drinking water treatment plants. To achieve this goal,
the PI and a graduate student will travel to and conduct experiments at the
University of Colorado-Boulder in collaboration with wildfire and organic matter
experts currently serving as faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4:NSF)
project will provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a
graduate student at the University of Nevada Reno. This work would be conducted
in collaboration with researchers at the University of Colorado-Boulder. The PI
and one graduate student will 1) learn new organic matter characterization
methods from experts in the field and apply them to Caldor Fire samples
collected near the PI’s home institution, and 2) apply the learned skills to
samples produced under highly controlled laboratory conditions. Success of the
two aims will prove or disprove the overall hypothesis, that moderate wildfire
severity results in the greatest production of disinfection by-product
precursors, which are destroyed at higher temperatures (e.g., above 350°C). The
rationale for the proposed research is that disinfection by-products are
hazardous to human health, and mitigating exposure (i.e., meeting regulatory
standards) is challenging for drinking water utilities without an understanding
of how specific fire conditions affect pyrogenic organic matter mobilization and
reactivity. The findings will advance the fundamental knowledge of wildfire
impacts on organic matter contained in drinking water source catchments, which
is somewhat well understood in terms of material transport, but not well
understood in terms of potential oxidation chemistry involving disinfectants and
transport of small, drinking-water-regulated, pyrogenic molecules. The findings
will also inform scientists, regulators, and local utilities of the potential
for regulatory exceedances during and after wildfire events. The collaborative
research will ultimately improve the research capacity of the home institution
and benefit the State of Nevada, which is the driest state in the nation and
subject to both water scarcity and wildfire. A graduate student will also
benefit through exposure to subject matter experts, improving their technical
and communication skills, and providing networking opportunities. One to two
undergraduate students will gain experience in sampling remote
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.