* 2229440
* SWIFT: Electric Field Controlled Integrated Multiferroic Radio Frequency Devices for Interference Immune Broadband Wireless Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Wireless networks are a mainstay of modern society, enabling communication,
synchronization, and organization though 5th generation networks (5G) and the
Internet-of-Things (IoT). Growth in the number of network participants and
therefore the amount of machine-to-machine communication has exacerbated radio
spectrum scarcity, making it increasingly valuable: its efficient utilization is
vital. Devices like smartphones, radios, televisions, routers, vehicles, and
computers are approaching the limits of existing approaches to spectrum sharing.
Smartphone developers already require upwards of 100 unique filters to serve the
needs of different communication schemes such as Bluetooth, LTE, AM and FM
radio, 5G, and Zigbee. This project will investigate the use of novel self-
biased, multiferroic materials in conjunction with novel algorithms to learn how
other network participants are using time and spectrum and cooperatively adapt
to increase the communication possible within a limited spectrum. The new
multiferroic materials, devices, and circuits will enable very rapidly adaptable
filters, which in turn will enable monitoring, predicting, adapting to, and
coexisting with other network participants. Instead of requiring that all
network participants conform to a particular spectrum sharing protocol, the
project advances a decentralized framework within which "smart" network
participants learn predictive models of other, potentially legacy or passive,
participants and use these models to maximize spectrum sharing efficiency. The
end result is more communication among more network participants using the same
amount of wireless spectrum, with greater resistance to jamming and more compact
wireless devices such as smartphones and wireless
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses novel material and device
technologies to enable flexible, rapidly tunable filters within receivers that
in turn enable implicit wireless environment monitoring and prediction. The
gathered information will be used by jamming prevention techniques and
transmission schedule prediction algorithms that enable scheduling of future
transmissions to maximize spectrum sharing efficiency. Conventional
ferromagnetic based RF components require a DC or variable external magnetic
field bias for operation and tuning, making them power hungry, bulky, and
impractical to integrate. This project leverages self-biased multiferroic
hetero-structures enabled by enhancing the self-biasing of a magnetic insulator
through interface exchange coupling between a stratified thin, highly
magnetostrictive, metallic ferromagnetic layer and a layer of ferroelectric
material to achieve total electric field control without needing any fixed or
variable magnetic bias. The total electric field control of ferromagnetic
resonators enables tunable, very low latency, integrated compact filters that
require no DC magnetic bias. Algorithms will be developed alongside these highly
reconfigurable filters to realize receivers that are impervious to various kinds
of interference and more capable of characterizing their wireless environments,
and this information will be used to learn predictive models of transmission
patterns, enabling efficient spectrum sharing among network participants,
without requiring them to adhere to a particular sharing protocol. The project
will evaluate conventional approaches to transmission timeseries prediction such
as long shortterm memories, but will also consider alternatives better
supporting rapid search for efficient transmission schedules, including causal
and distributed learning. These predictions will be used to inform the
optimization of transmission schedules and channel use to avoid interference and
improve goodput. The project will make scientific and engineering contributions
in the areas of multiferroic materials, analog RF circuit design, network
spectrum sharing, decentralized network protocols, and machine learning for
predictive modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.