* 2229686
* RII Track-4: NSF: Obtaining Data Science Expertise to Enable Rapid Data Driven Material Discovery
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Xiaodan Gu, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,886.00

Designing new materials for advanced applications, despite being costly, are
important for improving the US economy and national security. Chemical
tunability provides almost infinite possibilities to explore and discover new
materials. In the meantime, it is almost impossible to sample all the available
chemistry combinations for new materials due to limited time, labor, and
resources. This greatly limits the speed of new materials discovery due to the
above constraints in a typical academic research laboratory. Such limitation can
be potentially addressed by recent developments in data science. Advanced
artificial intelligence technologies have also been used to enable autonomous
vehicles and humanoid robotics, and new drug discovery. Despite their large
success in the industry, they have not been widely adopted in physical and
materials sciences in academia. The new generation of computational science,
supported by open-source platforms and databases, is likely to revolutionize the
discovery of the next generation of advanced materials. Inspired by this
backdrop, researchers at the University of Southern Mississippi see that data
science will soon become an integral part of the scientific research skills of
their students. Thus, this NSF EPSCoR RII Track-4 fellowship project provides a
unique opportunity for them to acquire this emerging skill set to serve their
research group, and broadly researchers in Mississippi through collaborative
projects. Support from this project will also be uses to recruit and advance
students traditionally represented at the University of Southern
Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII Track-4) project would provide a fellowship
to an Assistant professor at University of Southern Mississippi (USM) and
support for a USM graduate student. This project supports a six-month fellowship
visit to the world-class scientific computation facility at the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory to acquire the data-driven material discovery
expertise for the research team from USM. The researchers from Mississippi will
work with world-leading experts from the Center for Advanced Mathematics for
Energy Research Applications (CAMERA) facility to receive hands-on training on
high-throughput data collection and data science using microscopy and scattering
tools to rapidly screen and synthesize new materials to recycle plastic wastes.
The proposed data science skill could only be acquired through an extended on-
site visit due to a high initial learning curve for newcomers, which can be
uniquely enabled by this NSF EPSCoR RII Track-4 program. Using this new skill,
this Mississippi research team will be able to rapidly synthesize and screen
non-covalently bonded copolymer compatibilizers to better recycle the plastic
wastes using plastic wastes collected in Mississippi and along the Gulf coast.
This proposed data-driven material development skill would uniquely benefit the
principal investigator throughout his career beyond this project time as a new
methodology to tackle other scientific problems within his group. The fellowship
could also provide unique research opportunities for resource-limited
Mississippi STEM students. In addition, a new data science curriculum would be
introduced for the first time at the USM. The project will help to address a
diverse range of research challenges, not only inside USM but also in other
institutions in Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.