* 2229608
* POSE: Phase I:  Establishing an Open-Source Ecosystem for the Interdisciplinary Networked Community Resilience Modeling Environment (IN-CORE)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* John van de Lindt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) which
seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the creation of new
technology solutions to problems of national and societal importance. Community
infrastructure includes housing structures, electrical power, water and
wastewater, transportation, and communication networks - all systems on which
the economic and social well-being of any community depend. These systems are
susceptible to damage due to natural hazards, such as hurricanes and floods,
tornadoes, wildfires, earthquakes, and tsunamis. In additional to economic
losses, damage to a community’s physical infrastructure has been shown to have a
significant impact on its social systems. Community resilience planning
encompasses the community’s preparedness, response to and recovery from a
damaging event. Enhancing community resilience remains a national imperative as
reflected in recent significant financial investments in resilience enhancement
at federal, state, and local levels and progress in disaster-related science and
technology. IN-CORE is an open-source, comprehensive environment that can model
a community across its physical, social, and economic systems. The project
includes the complex interdependencies within and across various infrastructure
systems. The need to adapt, mitigate, and improve these systems has become
critical as the natural disasters increase. The proposed open-source ecosystem
(OSE) project for IN-CORE will result in a rapid acceleration and adoption of
the science of resilience modeling by harnessing the power and breadth of open-
source. Researchers will be able to examine undiscovered and indirect
interdependencies of the physical, social, and economic systems within a
community using scientific algorithms and interdependencies. The datasets
provided by the ecosystem can be used for validation and verification of new
models and implementations. Finally, the de facto ontology and standards for
resilience research will be formed by the ecosystem. The project’s impacts
include the development of science-based, validated tools that are needed to
make risk- and resilience-informed policy decisions. These tools include the
ability to quantify the effects of policy decisions at the community level, and
on the population and local economy over time. This ability to perform “what if”
scenarios for long-term quantitative planning will be enabled by this OSE
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this NSF POSE Phase I project the team will
begin by hosting focus group meetings among project participants and key
stakeholders to operationalize metrics for success and engage in community
building. The founding open-source ecosystem (OSE) committee will partner with a
consulting resource to identify appropriate organizational and governance models
with continued engagement throughout the project. Project activities will
culminate with a final refinement of the governance structure and identification
of methods for scaling the OSE. IN-CORE models are open source-driven and
improvement/additions in these models will enable broader impacts in both
research and graduate education. Specifically, the ability for students to
utilize IN-CORE as the computational environment for their theses and
dissertations, investigators to write proposals and complete research projects,
and enable training of IN-CORE users who can serve as consultants. The IN-CORE
ecosystem requires review and validation of science related to community
resilience and thus while the code contribution may be of very good quality and
good functionality, the scientific contribution must also be fully validated by
the contributor. Secondly, the data contribution to ecosystems is very
important, and therefore IP management for data is as equally important as the
software IP. However, we recognize that a rigorous review process could hinder
contributions to the ecosystem. Therefore, the IN-CORE OSE will consider how to
maintain the scientific quality/validation of the contributions while
encouraging the contributions. This Phase I POSE project is an ideal setting to
balance these complex and conflicting needs for the IN-CORE
OSE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.