* 2229538
* NSF/FDA SIR: Towards the Establishment of a Validation Framework for Wearable Motion Analysis Systems:  Development and Evaluation of an Open-Design Sync Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Damiano Zanotto, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,967.00

Consumer-grade wearable sensors are increasingly used in biomedical and clinical
research. The ability to “measure what it is supposed to measured”, is a basic
requirement for any sensor used in research. Conventional validation procedures
involve comparing the outputs of a wearable device with those of gold-standard
laboratory equipment. For devices designed to measure human motion, this process
requires millisecond-level alignment of the data measured by the two systems. As
a first step toward the development of a standardized validation framework for
wearable devices, this two-year NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence project will
establish novel data-driven method to enable accurate time alignment between
consumer-grade wearable sensors and stationary laboratory equipment. The models
will be implemented in an open-source, affordable hardware/software Sync
Platform, whose design will be disseminated for use and further development by
the research community through an open repository. The project will contribute
new educational materials for the PI’s graduate-level course on wearable
technologies and provide a unique training opportunity for a graduate research
assistant, who will learn about regulatory science by working in the
collaborating FDA laboratory for part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to address the current lack of standardized validation approaches
for wearable sensors used in clinical and biomedical research to quantify human
motion in controlled and natural settings. The team at Stevens Institute of
Technology will develop the Sync Platform consisting of a Sync Module (hardware)
and a companion Sync App (mobile application) featuring novel probabilistic and
learning-based data-driven delay compensation models (D3CMs) to enable accurate
on-line time alignment between wearable sensors and stationary laboratory
equipment. In collaboration with researchers at the FDA Center for Devices and
Radiological Health (CDRH), the team will jointly evaluate the usability of the
Sync Platform and its reliability under different levels of electromagnetic
interference with a representative set of wearable sensors. The project will
advance the state of the art on wearable technologies and biomedical research,
by addressing the challenging problem of precisely synchronizing data streams
from consumer-grade wearables and stationary reference instrumentation, thereby
providing the foundations for the development of a standardized procedure to
characterize validity and reliability of wearable devices with enhanced rigor
and granularity. The methods developed in the project will also serve the broad
research community by providing a tool to enable the precise alignment of data
streams from heterogenous wired and wireless devices designed to capture human
motion. Ultimately, these methods will promote understanding of the validity and
reliability landscape afforded by commercially available wearables and assist in
the design of future clinical and biomedical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.