* 2229819
* RAISE: IHBEM: Mathematical Formulations of Human Behavior Change in Epidemic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Ran Xu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2026
* USD 221,316.00

This research contributes to epidemiological modeling by integrating
mathematical modeling and social and behavioral sciences to enhance the
infectious disease modeling paradigm. From social distancing and mask-wearing in
response to perceived risk of infection to changes in non-pharmaceutical
Interventions under economic pressures, human responses altered the COVID-19
pandemic outcomes. In this project, foundational steps are taken toward the
vision of merging behavioral and epidemiological models. This line of research
leads to epidemiological models that represent human behavior and the spread of
the disease in interconnected structures, contribute to more accurate
forecasting of an epidemic, and enhance policy-making with major impacts on
societal well-being. This project is funded jointly by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the
Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three specific objectives of this research are:
(i) Model human behavior with a focus on five behavioral constructs:
interactions (e.g., mobility), compliance with preventive measures (e.g., mask
use), willingness to vaccinate, risk perception, and adherence fatigue, all of
which are at the nexus connecting personal decision or government policies to
outbreak dynamics; (ii) Integrate these human behavior mechanisms into disease
models so that they are projected endogenously; and (iii) Analyze the resulting
changes in epidemic forecasting as well as their implications on model-based
policy recommendations regarding vaccine prioritization, economic-public health
tradeoffs, and emergence of a new normal endemic state. Mathematically, the
system dynamics approach builds on ordinary differential equation models and
various statistical methods for estimation and validation. The modeling approach
and validation techniques rely on multiple data sources on human behavior and
the spread of the disease during the COVID-19 pandemic. Upon building and
validating coupled behavior-disease models, the central hypothesis of the study
is tested: Models that incorporate human behavioral changes endogenously
outperform those that lack such feedback mechanisms in long-term forecasting
tasks, and offer distinct policy recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.