* 2229033
* Experiential and international polar science education for U.S. students in Greenland (JSEP) and Antarctica (JASE)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Ross Virginia, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 808,527.00

The Arctic and Antarctic are undergoing rapid changes in their marine, glacial,
ecological, atmospheric, and social systems. Addressing the societally relevant
consequences of this change, which are local and global in scope, requires a
more diverse and integrative U.S. polar STEM community with leaders prepared for
international and cross-cultural collaborations. Dartmouth will lead the U.S.
component of two international efforts to develop inclusive polar STEM learning
opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students that will
help build capacity for U.S. leadership in the polar regions. The Joint Science
Education Project (JSEP) includes a close collaboration with international and
Indigenous partners in Greenland and Denmark, and the Joint Antarctic School
Expedition (JASE) includes a partnership with Chile. The field-based JSEP
program will immerse U.S. students in experiential learning in Kangerlussuaq and
Summit Station, Greenland. JSEP will include a remote short course for a large
number of U.S. high school students to learn about the Arctic through data-
focused activities. The JASE program includes a partnership with the Chilean
Antarctic Institute to co-lead a virtual symposium for students to share Arctic
and Antarctic research. Applications for both programs will be encouraged from
students across the U.S. and recruitment will focus on reaching students who
have limited access to STEM experiences and who come from groups historically
excluded from STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JSEP and JASE experiences
will be developed around a unique intergenerational mentor-mentee model that
gives U.S. high school students access to undergraduate and graduate students as
near-peer mentors and opportunities for the student mentors to develop their
communication and outreach skills. The effort includes an evaluation and
dissemination of the inclusive models for U.S. polar STEM education and research
programs that prioritize diversity, collaboration, communication, outreach,
cultural sharing, and building sustained relationships with Arctic and Antarctic
partners. This includes implementing new approaches for recruiting and
supporting students whose opportunities for polar STEM have been limited by
factors such as gender, race, ethnicity, and socio-economic and ability status.
Results will inform future efforts to successfully provide education and
research experiences to U.S. students interested in polar science and
engineering. This project will expand an international and diverse network of
students, educators, and scientists with skills for polar research, outreach,
and STEM careers. JSEP and JASE will involve at least 100 U.S. high school
students and up to 20 undergraduate or graduate students with a goal that many
of these students come from groups historically excluded from STEM fields.
Students, educators, and scientists involved with this project will gain
exposure to field-based polar research and improve their skills for: science
communication; cross-cultural and international collaborations; framing
scholarship to meet the needs of Arctic communities; and recognizing and
respecting Indigenous knowledge. The undergraduate and graduate students will
receive hands-on training in interdisciplinary research and outreach, which will
prepare them as STEM leaders with skills for broadening impacts of their future
scholarship. The project also provides significant opportunity for science
diplomacy and to strengthen relationships by engaging our Arctic and Antarctic
partners in all aspects of project planning, implementation, assessment, and
reporting. Assessments will allow evaluation of how the following pedagogical
elements impact outcomes for U.S. students (high school, undergraduate, and
graduate): field-based versus virtual, hands-on activities, interdisciplinary
curriculum, Indigenous perspectives, intergenerational mentor-mentee
relationships, and a multicultural setting. Results will inform future efforts
to successfully provide education and research experiences to U.S. students
interested in polar science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.