* 2229245
* FMSG: Cyber: Process Monitoring Methods for the Product Quality Improvement of Electron Beam Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Processes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ola Harrysson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,149.00

Additive manufacturing is a computer-controlled process that creates three-
dimensional objects with complex structures by depositing materials layer-by-
layer. Among many additive manufacturing processes, Electron Beam Powder Bed
Fusion (EB-PBF) has shown its great promise in the production of metallic parts.
One of the most significant barriers that prevents the EB-PBF and many other
additive manufacturing processes from becoming more widely adopted is the lack
of effective product quality control methods. Consequently, EB-PBF machines have
a very high probability of fabricating defective products whose quality fails to
meet specifications. To address this challenge, this project focuses on research
to facilitate the possibility of establishing an in-situ quality control
framework for EB-PBF additive manufacturing processes. The framework uses real-
time sensing data to monitor the quality of products and adaptively adjusts
process control parameters for quality improvement whenever necessary. This
research explores new capabilities for EB-PBF to significantly improve the
quality of manufactured parts and manufacturing processes. The project also has
a variety of educational and outreach components that form a basis for
attracting and training the next generation of manufacturing
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to provide
a basis for in-situ quality control of EB-PBF additive manufacturing processes.
There are three primary research directions. The first is a computationally-
efficient run-time defect detection method using a novel statistical learning
model that builds on real-time electron-based data for detecting defects during
manufacturing that would adversely affect product quality. The second is a
privacy-preserving federated model to engage the manufacturing community on
root-cause defect diagnostics; it is constructed on a new regularization-based
statistical learning model, particularly for EB-PBF, to identify crucial process
control parameters responsible for product defects. The third focuses on
designing and conducting experiments to validate the effectiveness of these
models. The automatic defect detection and root-cause diagnostics methods not
only serve as the fundamental basis of the in-situ quality control of EB-PBF,
but also significantly enrich the knowledge base of the statistical learning,
data analytics, and machine learning communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Future Manufacturing award is supported by the Division of Computer and Network
Systems (CNS) of the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), and by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.