* 2229279
* FMSG: Bio: Rapid Bio-Printing of Hybrid Piezoelectric and Magnetostrictive Platforms for Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jessica Lancaster, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Tissue engineering is a biomedical engineering process that usually involves
combining cells, biomolecules, scaffolds, and biologically interactive materials
to maintain, restore, or improve tissues or organs. However, these manually made
functional tissues have only limited use in human patients (e.g., artificial
skin or cartilage). The challenges include innovating cost-efficient tooling
engineering, creating materials with suitable biochemical and physicochemical
factors, and sustainable platforms delivering in-situ diagnosis for directing
the disease healing strategies. This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant
(FMSG)-BioManufacturing project supports fundamental research for developing a
new 3D printing technology to overcome some of these difficulties. For example,
the newly developed printer can print multifunctional implants and scaffolds
with high throughput and resolution, avoiding tedious tooling engineering. In
addition, the newly invented biocompatible composites will also bring
opportunities for various biomedical applications, such as tissue regeneration,
neurotrauma treatment, and cancer curing. This project unites researchers with
diverse expertise, including 3D printing, polymer science, nanoparticle
engineering, and biomedical engineering. These investigators will also conduct
STEM outreach at all levels, from K-12 public education to graduate course
development. Significantly, the investigators will develop education-oriented
TikTok/YouTube content to expose the most updated printing techniques to local
and national K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though 3D printing has been
utilized to print piezoelectric or ferromagnetic composites separately, some
bottlenecks remain. For example, conventionally 3D printed multiferroic
magnetoelectric (ME) composites for biomedical uses have poor printability and
limited efficiency in manufacturing fine features. This FMSG project aims to
develop a new printing technology, named Multi-Scale and Multi-Material
Continuous Liquid Interface Printing (MM-CLIP), by integrating scanning-
projection and microfluidic flow control strategies. The MM-CLIP technology can
enable scalable manufacturing of functional devices with increasingly small
features and multiple materials, which have been the main challenge for the 3D
printing field. With the MM-CLIP, multiferroic ME composites can be printed into
hybrid piezoelectric and magnetostrictive platforms, i.e., multifunctional
implants or tissue scaffolds, which can generate electrical signals from
externally controlled magnetic fields that rarely attenuate in biosystems. An
additional thrust is the multiphysics modeling framework for elucidating the ME
coupling efficiencies of the printable composites and, thus, predicting and
precisely controlling the electrical stimulation. In parallel, the project will
systematically explore ME-induced electrical stimulation's effects on cell
proliferation and correlates it to cell differentiation and growth factors. The
iteration within the proof-of-concept studies will lead to optimal scaffold
performance, and biomedical application is the ultimate goal of the multiferroic
ME platforms. The research outcomes will facilitate the research on novel
composites for application in regenerative medicine and multi-material
bioprinting for the direct realization of functional
implants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award was supported by
the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.