* 2230879
* SBIR Phase I:  Neural Blockade Monitor Technology for Precision Pain Management
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Wayne Sternberger, BLOCKSYNOP, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,686.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is found in its ability to provide a novel tool
for clinicians for perioperative, post-surgical, and chronic pain management.
This technology supports enhanced patient safety, international standards for
enhanced recovery after surgery, reduced addiction potential and opioid sparing,
reduced loading on clinicians and healthcare resources, reduced cost of
healthcare services, and advanced capability of clinicians through training. The
commercial impact exists in all facets of healthcare, including perioperative
procedures, in-hospital step-down and recovery, ambulatory surgery center
procedures, and chronic pain management. The potential exists to expand into
other clinical markets including the military and first responders. This
technology can support the national defense of the country by providing advanced
care capability for wounded troops on the front lines, in recovery, and through
rehabilitation. The solution also applies to use during times of national,
state, and local crisis, and, as the hospital-at-home trend increases, that
market can be pursued. Ultimately, the commercial impact exists in both
worldwide use and in contributing to the overall projected increase in use of
regional blocks in the coming decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project applies technology to a medical
application that has not been addressed for over 130 years. Based on clinical
needs, a minimally viable device (MVP) has been developed and prototyped that
objectively quantifies neural blockades. This project advances the capability of
the MVP and advances information about the real-time in vivo status of a neural
blockade. The goal is to assure device robustness under challenging clinical
conditions, for different neural blockade types, and for physiologically diverse
patient populations. The plan to reach these goals is to apply human factors and
design engineering standards to the MVP to assure that: a) the user displays are
readily understood, provide the expected information in an appropriate form and
format, and support the required clinical processes and procedures; b) the user
controls perform the required functions, are complete, reflect the appropriate
nomenclature for the clinical environment, and support the required clinical
processes and procedures; and c) the monitor is reliable, well fabricated, safe
for the patient and user, and completely supports the acquisition, processing,
display, and recording of pertinent data. The resulting technology will be a
robust patient monitoring device that assures patient safety and optimized
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.