* 2230243
* I-Corps: Self-assembling, protein-based contrast agent targeted to collagen Type 1
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a preclinical imaging agent for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disease worldwide, with some
estimates placing its prevalence at 25-30% of the adult population in developed
Western nations. Because NAFLD develops insidiously, it may be difficult to
detect in its early stage, and diagnosis is often incidental. A hallmark of the
disease is inflammation and progressive fibrotic collagen deposition in the
liver, leading to liver failure. Although biopsy is the gold standard for
diagnosis, it is invasive and, therefore, not preferable. The proposed
noninvasive longitudinal imaging technology fulfils many of these testng needs.
In addition, the exploration of self-assembling proteins as biomedical imaging
agents may also be used for other targets such as kidney or lung diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
self-assembling, protein-based contrast agent targeted to collagen type I for
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The technology seek to improve
noninvasive diagnosis and monitoring of NAFLD in vivo. The core technology, Type
I collagen-binding thermoresponsive assembled protein or COL1-TRAP, is a
recombinant protein amphiphile composed of a type I collagen binding peptide
fused to a pentameric coiled-coil (C) domain and an intrinsically disordered
elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) domain. COL1-TRAP forms hierarchical, multimeric
micelles at room temperature. These micelles are distinguished by their
reversible self-assembly and disassembly in solution, forming a versatile class
of stimuli-responsive materials with diverse applications. Recombinantly
expressed protein micelles are of particular interest due to their hierarchical
folding and potential for multivalent targeted interactions with binding
ligands. The multimeric self-assembled structure means that a relatively short
binding sequence with a moderate affinity for collagen may be used, with the
combination of weak interactions summing to a high affinity interaction. The
result is a targeted, high affinity smart binder for collagen type I. Tracking
of collagen type I deposition may help visualize the fibrosis across the liver
as NAFLD progresses. In addition, the proposed technology may form the basis for
more sensitive and effective noninvasive imaging
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.