* 2230221
* I-Corps: Underwater Wireless Communications for the Blue Economy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Yahong Zheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential is the potential development of
underwater wireless communication systems. Compared to terrestrial
communication, underwater communications have low data rates because it uses
acoustic waves instead of electromagnetic waves. The proposed communication
modem uses high-frequency acoustic bands to support high data rates. It may have
a significant impact on ocean technologies and applications, such as autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUV), ocean navigation and coastal mapping, ocean energy
harvesting, and underwater sensing and surveying. The AUV market and the
underwater acoustic communication sector are predicted to be the fastest-growing
blue economy sectors in the next five years with a 23.1% and 10.8% CAGR
(Compound Annual Growth Rate), respectively. The proposed technology may have
the potential to enable and accelerate the commercialization of underwater
acoustic communication systems that may impact the growth of the blue
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of underwater acoustic transmitters and receivers that leverage multiple-input
multiple-output communication technology to achieve high data rates. The
proposed technology utilizes a large number of transmitting and receiving
elements, as well as receiver algorithms to potentially improve the reliability
and data rate. More than 30 real ocean and lake experiments have demonstrated
potential 20x ~100x higher data rates than conventional acoustic modems. In
addition, the proposed technology may transmit compressed videos and images at a
200 kbps – 500 kbps rate while the conventional underwater acoustic modem can
transmit only text or low-rate sensing data at 5 kbps – 10 kbps. The technology
may enable underwater WiFi services to connect many Internet of Underwater
Things (IoUT) such as underwater sensors and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUVs) and support wireless video transmission through
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.