* 2230462
* Conference: HBCU-UP OPEN (CONFERENCE) QUANTUM LITERACY IN THE QUANTUM AI AGE: CLOSING THE HYPER-DISPARITIES GAP THROUGH DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION FOR WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Kevin Peters, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. Quantum science and a quantum literate workforce is a growing field of
critical importance for the nation. The current workforce is not meeting the
needs of industry in preparing for the emergence of quantum technologies, while
individuals from historically underrepresented groups constitute less than one
percent of the current quantum workforce. To address these issues, Morgan State
University and the National Quantum Literacy Network aim to bring together
HBCUs, industry, national laboratories, government agencies, and nonprofit
organizations to provide awareness of the critical necessity of diversity,
equity, and inclusion in the quantum workforce. With a focus on education, the
conference aims to explore new and emerging teaching and learning tools and
technologies to rapidly develop a quantum literate workforce and address the
hyper-disparities of historically underrepresented groups. This project is
aligned with the goals of the HBCU-UP program in building opportunities for HBCU
undergraduate students in emerging STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five-
day hybrid conference seeks to address objectives centered around quantum
science awareness and opportunities, the critical importance of including HBCUs,
other minority-serving institutions (MSIs), and minority business enterprises in
quantum science initiatives, introducing the Serious Gaming Initiatives for
Quantum Literacy Education as an innovative educational strategy, and
highlighting talented and diverse undergraduate students, including ROTC
students and community college students. Daily conference themes focusing on
Education, Workforce Development, Public Policy, Government, and Industry aim to
provide broad coverage of societal arenas. The project will include formative
and summative evaluation activities that include pre- and post-workshop
assessments and surveys conducted six-months after the conference. Conference
proceedings will be published, focusing on diversity, equity, and inclusion in
quantum literacy efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.