* 2230853
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of a real-time, palm-size, low-cost, and wireless SARS-COV-II detector
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Zheng Tian, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wireless nano-biosensor for detection of live coronavirus
particles and potentially other pathogens. Currently, a positive result from an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)- or polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based COVID test does not determine if the coronavirus particles are live
(infectious) or dead (or neutralized or noninfectious). The proposed technology
is designed to detect interactions of live coronavirus particles with target
cells, antibodies, and drugs in real-time. Those with a negative result from the
proposed technology have confirmation that they are free of live, infectious
coronavirus particles and would not need to quarantine. This technology may
provide a tool for effectively combatting the COVID-19 virus and future
pandemics/epidemics as well as other infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a nano-biosensing methodology for
pathogen detection initially focused on SARS COV-II. The proposed technology
integrates a bio-ceramic nanowire/graphene core/shell nanocomposite with a radio
frequency identification (RFID) tag on a wireless communication chip surface.
The hardware of the nano-biosensing system is composed of three parts: a radio
frequency nano-sensor, a radio frequency reader, and a handheld device or smart
phone. The proposed nano-biosensor is made by coating the biosafe nanocomposite
on a disposable RFID tag to maximize the sensitivity. Further, nano-biosensors
may be integrated to simultaneously detect samples in a multi-well plate, which
is versatile and effective in the detection of virus particles, viral antigens,
and antibodies, as well as in evaluating virus-neutralizing antibodies and
vaccine efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.