* 2230610
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Adversarial Malware Analysis - An Artificial Intelligence Driven Hands-On Curriculum for Next Generation Cyber Security Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Mahmoud Abdelsalam, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 05/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) techniques can bolster
cybersecurity by aiding security administrators in detecting suspicious
behaviors and initiating responses to threats. However, AL/ML technology remains
susceptible to malicious exploitation, potentially leading to unintended
outcomes. Therefore, it is important to ensure that AI-based decision processes
are reliable in critical operational systems when facing adversarial situations.
As deep learning (DL) and other AI/ML algorithms become integrated into
operational systems, it is essential to defend security, privacy, and fairness
of AI/ML against adversaries. This can be achieved by implementing more robust
ML methods such as AI reconnaissance prevention, analysis of adversarial models,
model poisoning prevention, and secure training procedures. By equipping
students with the knowledge needed to secure AI in malware analysis
applications, this project will foster growth of next-generation cybersecurity
talent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will research and develop self-
contained course modules focused on Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) within
the context of malware analysis applications, which will transit cutting-edge
research topics into the teaching and learning process. The goal of these
modules is to develop students at Tennessee Tech University (TTU) and North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (NCAT) with specialized
knowledge in this area. Course modules will include adversarial malware
generation, robustness of file structure against random perturbation, poisoning
attack and defense, white-box evasion attack, and surrogate model construction.
The AML cyber modules will be integrated into different non-security courses
such as AI/ML or data science or provided as an independent cybersecurity
course. Students will acquire practical and conceptual knowledge by engaging
with different AI/ML techniques for security solutions pertinent to the malware
analysis domain. Additionally, students will develop advanced skills necessary
for safeguarding AI systems. The interdisciplinary team, composed of experts in
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education, will utilize a guiding
conceptual framework to strategically develop cybersecurity education modules.
They will investigate the impact of these modules on learning outcomes, while
refining pedagogical strategies to promote diversity and inclusion in
cybersecurity education. Developed modules, instructional materials, and
tutorial activities will be widely available for dissemination. This project
will support integration of security and education research topics to create new
knowledge in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.