* 2230482
* Modeling Dynamics and Impacts of a new class of Kelvin-Helmholtz Instabilities that Drive Enhanced Turbulence and Mixing in the MLT
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Tyler Mixa, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 539,588.00

State-of-the-art general circulation models (GCMs) used for weather and climate
prediction underestimate the amount of turbulent mixing in the middle atmosphere
by up to a factor of 2, and as a result, mischaracterize the transport and
global distributions of CO2 and other primary atmospheric constituents. GCMs
attribute mixing to a single dynamical source that neglects newly discovered,
small-scale turbulent processes thought to be widespread, and perhaps even
ubiquitous, in the middle atmosphere and beyond. This project will identify
these unique “tube and knot” (T&amp;K) instability dynamics and their
implications for mixing through observationally guided, high-resolution modeling
studies. Sophisticated turbulence and chemical analysis capabilities will be
employed to address scientific goals among a diverse range of atmospheric
research communities. The resulting knowledge of T&amp;K-driven momentum
transport and deposition will aid the development of improved mixing
parameterizations in GCMs and yield higher accuracy weather and climate
forecasting to address a critical societal need. It will also support the
education of a University of Colorado Boulder graduate student and a Utah State
University undergraduate student while facilitating outreach events that promote
climate science education to under-represented pre-college students in the
surrounding communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify and
quantify Kelvin Helmholtz instability (KHI) T&amp;K dynamics and implications
for mixing in the MLT via high-resolution modeling, utilizing the unique
capabilities of in-house models CGCAM and SAM to characterize instability
dynamics extending to turbulence scales and mixing in deep domains with
realistic environments. The results will improve mixing parameterization schemes
in weather and climate models by addressing GCM underestimation of the eddy
diffusion coefficient Kzz. The goals of this research are to identify and
quantify the large-scale (mean and tidal) and GW environments that enable KHI
T&amp;K dynamics, and account for their spatial scales and intensities; to
quantify the diversity of KHI T&amp;K dynamics, and their implications for
energy dissipation, mixing, and influences in the MLT via high-resolution
modeling; and to employ our KHI T&amp;K modeling to assess their enhancements of
energy dissipation rates, mixing, and implied Kzz relative to those expected for
GW breaking. The analysis and modeling approach addressing these research goals
will employ KHI T&amp;K observations by USU Advanced Mesospheric Temperature
Mapper (AMTM) OH airglow imaging and GATS SAAMER radar and lidar profiling of
winds, temperatures, and Na densities in Tierra del Fuego, Chile, and Poker
Flat, Alaska, to guide representative modeling environments (e.g., GW and tidal
shears, multi-scale superpositions). Informed by these observations, a wide
range of KHI T&amp;K simulations will be performed to capture the diversity of
responses for varying environmental conditions and evaluate KHI T&amp;K mixing,
enabling definition of the parameters dictating a KHI Kzz for representative
shear layer scales and Richardson and Reynolds numbers. This research will
directly result in a better understanding of unresolved mixing dynamics in the
MLT and how they impact constituent particles and energy transport to higher
levels of the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.