* 2230729
* Collaborative Research: Probing and Controlling Exciton-Plasmon Interaction for Solar Hydrogen Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 85,000.00

Both semiconductors and metals can be produced in the form of nanoparticles, a
size of about 10,000 times smaller than the thickness of a typical human hair.
Certain semiconductor nanoparticles, called semiconductor quantum dots, exhibit
new properties when the electrons, also called excitons, in the tiny crystals
are spatially squeezed and exposed to light. Similarly, when a group of
electrons in a small metal nanoparticle are confined in space and subject to
light, hot electrons, called plasmons, are generated in these metal
nanostructures that exhibit novel characteristics. Interaction between excitons
in semiconductor quantum dots and plasmons in metal nanostructures are expected
to result in new fundamental phenomenon and to be useful for many emerging
technologies. In this collaborative project, PI Jin Z. Zhang from the University
of California Santa Cruz and PI Shengli Zou from the University of Central
Florida will study semiconductor quantum dots-plasmonic metal nanostructures
with controlled electronic interactions as a new class of hybrid nanomaterials
called semiconductor-metal heterojunctions. Unlike traditional semiconductor or
metal materials, these heterojunctions give rise to unusual properties and novel
functionalities. Working with their students, PIs Zhang and Zou will develop
ways to create new semiconductor-metal nano-heterojunctions where the electrons
communicate in a controlled manner by linking molecules. This project can have
significant impacts on applications ranging from nano-photonics to environment
and energy, for example advancing renewable solar fuel generation. This project
will also provide opportunities for training future scientists and engineers in
advanced experimental and computational techniques. Through their “open lab”
focusing on “Solar Hydrogen from Seawater” each summer, local high school
students and teachers will be introduced to the research of this project to
enhance public awareness about science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research team will develop novel semiconductor-metal nano heterojunctions to
investigate the fundamental interactions between exciton generated on
semiconductor quantum dots and plasmon produced in plasmonic metal
nanostructures, named “plexciton” from a dynamic perspective using ultrafast
laser spectroscopy. This research is motivated by the need to address the
challenge that electronic coupling between semiconductor quantum dots and
plasmons in plasmonic metal nanostructures is not well understood, hindering
device applications in emerging technologies based on semiconductor-metal
heterojunctions involving light illumination. The project involves the
systematic study of fundamental factors, such as size, shape, and surface of
both the semiconductor quantum dots and plasmons in plasmonic metal
nanostructures, which determine the electronic coupling between the
semiconductor quantum dots and plasmons in plasmonic metal nanostructures. This
will be accomplished by developing designer linker molecules that control and
enhance the coupling between them. The electronic coupling between semiconductor
quantum dots and plasmons in plasmonic metal nanostructures will be
characterized using a combination of time-resolved photoluminescence,
transmission electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic
resonance, electrochemistry, Raman spectroscopy, and ultrafast pump-probe laser
spectroscopy methods. Unique conductive or aromatic ligand molecules will be
used to both stabilize the semiconductor quantum dots and plasmons in plasmonic
metal nanostructures and alter and enhance their electronic coupling so that
synergistic effects are achieved between the two nanostructures for photonics
applications including light energy conversion into electricity or chemical fuel
such as hydrogen. Computational studies will explore the semiconductor quantum
dots-plasmons in plasmonic metal nanostructures interaction and guide and
corroborate experimental studies. The project will also provide opportunities
for training future scientists in advanced experimental and computational
techniques. Through their “open lab” which focuses on “Solar Hydrogen from
Seawater” each summer they will introduce the research of this project to local
high school students and teachers to enhance public awareness about
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.