* 2230355
* RARE-1: Understanding catalyst activity to improve the production of 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephanie Wettstein, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The manufacturing of polymeric materials is one of the leading contributors to
carbon emissions in the chemical industry due to the high energy requirements
associated with the production, refining, and conversion of fossil fuels to
polymers. A greener alternative to using fossil resources is bio-based polymers.
The project investigates more efficient chemical processing for the production
of 2,5- furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) â€“ a bio-based chemical that can be
upgraded to polymers analogous to fossil-derived polyethylene terephthalate
(PET), which is widely used in the production of films, polyesters, and nylons.
The corresponding FDCA based polymer (polyethylene furanoate, or PEF) is
particularly attractive for food and beverage packaging, such as plastic
bottles, and is estimated to be a $200 billion market. However, FDCA is produced
via oxidation of a biomass precursor, 5- hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), which has
several major production limitations. This project addresses several challenges
associated with the manufacture of FDCA from HMF, thus enabling more economical
production of PEF and its related products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses several challenges of FDCA synthesis by improving the reaction using
organic solvents and heterogeneous catalysts. In particular, the project focuses
on fundamental aspects related to the interactions of solvents, reactants, and
products with the surface and active sites of the catalysts. Specifically, the
research focuses on two main limitations of FDCA production: catalyst activity
and product concentration. Identifying solvents that have high FDCA solubility
in the absence of salts will significantly improve the range of heterogenous
catalysts that can be used in the reaction. Bimetallic and non-noble metal
catalysts will be synthesized using atomic layer deposition (ALD) in order to
achieve uniform catalyst particle dispersion, while also controlling particle
size, structure, and composition. The ALD-synthesized catalysts provide a
platform conducive to identifying catalyst properties that enable efficient HMF-
to-FDCA conversion, while providing fundamental insight regarding the surface
reactions involved. Additionally, base-free reactions at high HMF concentrations
will be run to elucidate reactant/product/solvent interactions with the
catalysts. Beyond the technical aspects, the project integrates research with
education at all levels, especially via efforts targeted towards
underrepresented minorities with the goal of motivating young students to
consider the STEM fields as a possible career path. To that end, sustained
contact will be made with over 120 4th graders in under-served, rural areas of
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.