* 2230225
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Promoting Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue Between Experts in Argumentation and Innovative Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Evgeny Chukharev-Hudilainen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,309.00

Helping students develop the ability to construct high-quality arguments and to
engage in productive argumentation with others is now widely seen as an
essential goal of schooling that should be at the forefront of our efforts to
develop an educated citizenry. From major policy documents, academic
publications, and the popular press, we hear the call for teachers to prepare
their students to make well-reasoned judgments about complex, controversial
issues. Today, students are expected to actively engage in knowledge
construction through inquiry and argumentation, by asking questions, defining
problems, challenging the ideas of others, formulating their own positions, and
supplying reasons and evidence for what otherwise would be unsupported opinions.
These ambitious educational goals call for profound changes in the roles and
responsibilities traditionally assigned to students and teachers. They require
creative solutions, which include the use of innovative pedagogies and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will organize a workshop to
support a dialogue among scholars in argumentation and technology, creating a
shared space for researchers to discuss existing barriers and blind spots and
engage in cross-disciplinary collaboration. During the two-day, online workshop,
participants will present innovative research in their respective fields and
form cross-disciplinary teams to discuss opportunities for joint projects and
grant applications. In addition, participants will complete an open-ended online
survey to address ideas, barriers, and opportunities for continued
collaboration. They will also evaluate their experience during the workshop and
suggest improvements for promoting dialogue between the fields of argumentation
and technology. The workshop will bring together learning scientists
specializing in research on argumentation and computer science experts
developing innovative technologies, thus supporting frontier research in both
fields. It will survey existing challenges in argumentation and technology,
identify additional areas of concern, explore possible solutions, and create new
opportunities for cross-disciplinary collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.