* 2230335
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The influence of ants on regional-scale soil carbon dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 527,729.00

Soil organic carbon is an important property of ecosystems that impacts soil
fertility and the global carbon cycle. Animals have been shown to affect carbon
in soils, but it is poorly understood how different types of animals ultimately
affect processes that determine the amount of carbon in soils. Ants are highly
abundant animals that nest in soils all over the world. Their nests impact
bacteria and fungi living in the soil which, in turn, affect soil conditions
including carbon content. Ants may therefore be an important animal group
affecting the processes that determine carbon content in soils. This research
advances our understanding of how highly abundant insect animals that live in
the soil alter and improve conditions for bacteria and fungi that live in or
near ant nests. Over many ant nests across large areas, these impacts on soil
conditions and microbes may be very large and important for determining, for
example, how much carbon is present in soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
includes (1) a controlled field experiment to test how ants influence soil
physical, chemical, and biological conditions, hypothetically creating microbial
hotspots that affect carbon content in soils; and (2) field surveys across a
1,550-km regional transect to quantify ant nest impacts on soil conditions in
forests and grasslands in southeastern North America. The approach allows
testing of causation to discern the directionality of ant effects on carbon
dynamics and microbial communities. The observational surveys facilitate
estimates of the magnitude of ant effects on carbon. This combined approach
provides the basis for scaling ant effects to their potential ecosystem,
landscape, and regional significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.