* 2230103
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the relationship between size and the balance between carbon acquisition modes in mixotrophic protists
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Nicole Poulton, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2026
* USD 536,104.00

Microplankton in aquatic systems have traditionally been categorized as
phytoplankton or zooplankton. However, a growing body of research has documented
that a substantial portion of plankton belongs to a third group, mixotrophs,
that can use both photosynthesis and prey ingestion to obtain resources
necessary to maintain growth. Biological oceanographers have a poor
understanding of mixotrophs’ activity and their role in the aquatic food web due
to the methodological challenges of studying them. In this project, the
investigators are assessing how mixotrophs’ cell size relates to their
dependence on photosynthesis and prey ingestion for nutrient acquisition. Among
phytoplankton, size is considered a “master trait” because it impacts metabolic
processes, growth rates, cellular composition, and nutrient uptake kinetics.
While size has been used to constrain mixotrophic activity in some numerical
models, the functional relationship between cell size and the balance of
nutrient acquisition modes has not yet been empirically established. As part of
broader impacts, all project investigators are participating in an Ocean Carbon
and Biogeochemistry (OCB) mixotrophy working group. The project team includes
early career investigators and is providing training to a postdoctoral
scientist, graduate student, and multiple undergraduates through an established
research experience for undergraduates (REU) program. Finally, educational
outreach includes collaboration with a professional development program for
science teachers, providing experiential science curricula and equipment kits
for teaching ocean science in the classroom and outdoors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixotrophs obtain carbon from photosynthesis and ingestion
simultaneously but the contribution from each nutrient mode to an individual
organism is rarely measured simultaneously. Less is known about how the
contribution of each nutrient mode differs between species and or with changes
in growth-limiting factors. The investigators are conducting incubation
experiments with eight species of mixotrophs to measure the proportion of carbon
obtained from both nutrient acquisition modes across a range of environmental
conditions. Using cutting-edge isotopic labelling methods, the investigators are
assessing the relationship between cell size and trophic strategy among
mixotrophs, with the potential for new, generalized understanding of carbon
transfer and transformation in marine ecosystems. A relationship between
mixotroph size and their two nutrient modes could transform biological
oceanographers’ understanding of mixotrophs at the cellular and community
levels, improve the accuracy of ocean ecosystem models, and enable more accurate
predictions of how plankton communities and biogeochemical cycling will be
altered with changing ocean conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.