* 2230538
* Research Security Training:  International Collaboration
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shawna Cox
* 10/31/2023
* USD 499,338.00

This project will explore the efficacy of using a competency framework as an
organizing system for research security training for U.S. researchers. It will
create an online module for research security training. This activity will focus
on the importance of principled international collaboration to the U.S. research
enterprise and the ongoing threats posed to this enterprise by improper foreign
government influence. This project directly addresses the need to strengthen the
security of U.S. government-supported research and development, per the National
Security Presidential Memorandum – 33 (NSPM-33) and the CHIPS plus Science Act
of 2022 (P.L. 117-167). Dissemination and use of this training will better
protect U.S. research interests from both foreign and domestic risks and
threats. The training module will be Internet-based, scalable, flexible, and
widely accessible to researchers and stakeholders in a variety of settings,
including researchers with disabilities. The project will develop a research
security competency framework as the design basis for the training module.
Training will be customized for distinct stakeholder groups within the U.S.
research ecosystem and use real-world case studies and hypothetical scenarios to
progress learners through increasingly advanced levels of knowledge and skills.
The development of the research security training module series is
collaboratively funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the Department
of Defense (DOD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research security training module
focused on the importance of principled international collaboration will be
designed and developed in consultation with a Content Expert Group, which
includes of experts in research security across government. The project will use
the ADDIE Model to sequence design and development activities. Methods drawn
from the Universal Design for Learning Guidelines, Mayer’s 12 Principles of
Multimedia Instruction, and the revised Bloom’s Taxonomy will guide
instructional and curriculum design activities. Following the initial design
work and consultation, focus groups will be convened to acquire rapid and
ongoing design and development input from research stakeholder groups. Focus
groups will represent key stakeholder groups within the U.S. research ecosystem,
such as principal investigators, visiting international faculty, and post-
doctoral fellows. The project team will assess the effectiveness of the module
by using the Kirkpatrick Model for course evaluation to test module iterations.
Kirkpatrick Level 1 assessments will evaluate the reaction of learners to the
module; Level 2 assessments will evaluate the extent to which learners acquired
the intended research security knowledge and skills. Following end user testing,
evaluation, and revisions to the design, the module will be made available for
dissemination to research security stakeholders, including university-based
researchers, undergraduate and graduate students, academic administrators,
research security administrators, and researchers and staff in government
agencies and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.