* 2230046
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: A Cybertraining Program to Advance Data Acquisition, Processing, and Machine Learning-based Modeling in Marine Science
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Qianqian Liu, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 205,678.00

Marine science researchers have access to a variety of cyberinfrastructure (CI),
including software applications, facilities to host large datasets and provide
computational power, and scientific tools that enable them to explore and
predict the ever-changing ocean. However, the use existing CI resources are
often not intuitive for new researchers. Furthermore, early-career marine
science researchers have limited experience with advanced computing and data
engineering techniques, which makes adoption of advanced research CI resources
difficult. This project will carry out two summer training programs to educate
and train early career researchers in marine science to promote CI awareness and
related technical skills development to facilitate and support their research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team includes oceanographers and machine
learning scientists. This project will create a publicly available training
material repository on core CI skills for marine science researchers and provide
two summer training programs in 2023 and 2024. The training will introduce the
design principles of a data workflow for research projects on CI. To support
researchers in the workflow-building process, this project will create a drag-
and-drop tool that helps researchers generate scripts for common data workflow
components such as data acquisition, data processing, and data visualization.
The scripts generated can be added as components of a data workflow system and
then deployed to advanced CI platforms. This project will train early-career
researchers in marine science to integrate and use CI in their research through
hands-on projects and hackathons to solve open-ended research questions. The
training programs will be broadly disseminated through various outreach programs
to encourage participation from researchers at community colleges and minority-
serving institutions that have marine science or related
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.