* 2230728
* Technologies for One Water in Extremely Resilient-buildings (TOWER)
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Diana Aga, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to build collaborations between US
researchers and international partners from five countries - Philippines, United
Arab Emirates, Costa Rica, Egypt, Taiwan. &lt;br/&gt;From drought to flooding,
water is central to the discussion of urban climate resilience. Existing,
centralized urban water systems are unlikely to meet the growing water stress
due to climate variability. Buildings are essential elements of the built urban
environment. The proposed TOWER project envisions extremely resilient-buildings
across a wide range of climate and geographic zones; these buildings can self-
sustain in water supply and disposal during normal occupancy and rapidly recover
from disasters. The research team will: (1) acquire critical knowledge in water
quality in buildings, especially on disinfection byproducts, a group of harmful
compounds that may be prevalent in water-efficient buildings, (2) develop
innovative and efficient advanced oxidation treatment technologies to reuse
wastewater and stormwater; (3) design novel polymer materials to capture water
vapor efficiently; and (4) develop guidance for implementation of these novel
technologies in extremely resilient buildings. The project embraces the “One
Water” concept that recognizes the interconnectivity of water resources. The
educational activities in this PIRE project utilize the “persistence framework,”
which integrates early research experience, learning communities, and active
learning. This approach has been shown to increase retention of underrepresented
minority students, while improving all students’ academic performance. In
addition to offering training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate
students, the project will provide science outreach to middle and high school
students, and increase the science literacy of the general public. The education
activities parallel the interdisciplinary research collaboration among
architecture, chemistry, environmental engineering, and chemical engineering.
The undergraduate, graduate, and outreach education opportunities all contribute
to building a climate-aware workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2.&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have transformative impacts on enabling
net zero water buildings. To safely achieve close-loop potable water reuse in
buildings across different climates, innovative and reliable treatment systems
must be developed to expand the sources for water reuse to include wastewater
and stormwater, along with a thorough understanding of the quality and their
health risks of the treated water within the building. The research team will
utilize state-of-the-art high resolution mass spectrometry to investigate the
occurrence, formation, and transformation of disinfection byproducts. They will
build models to enable “smart” advanced oxidation processes that can be
optimized for building-scale applications; the models will bridge fundamental
radical chemistry with system performance. The proposed effort towards efficient
and scalable water vapor harvesting focuses on the most critical system
component: the water sorbent. Using a zwitterionic molecule-based platform, the
researchers will engineer novel temperature-switchable polymers at the molecular
scale. Lastly, building on the technology advancement and leveraging the
international collaboration, the team will develop a framework to guide the
implementation of extremely-resilient buildings based on building practices,
occupancy, water usage profile, climate zone, and socio-cultural parameters. The
research team will analyze plumbing and health regulatory documents related to
water harvest across our testing sites to identify opportunities for guidance in
regulatory updates. Through international collaboration, the research team will
be uniquely positioned to accelerate scientific and technology advancement
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.