* 2230620
* SHF: Small: Towards High Performance Serverless Edge Computing for Data-intensive Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Edge computing has become an indispensable booster for the rapid development of
Internet-of-Things. It provides users not only low-delay and high-bandwidth
services but also unprecedented security and privacy guarantee. However, the
unique challenges of network edge, such as resource limitation and device
heterogeneity, greatly increase the difficulty of developing and managing edge
applications. Researchers have turned to emerging serverless computing paradigm
for efficient and cost-effective solutions. The light-weight virtualization of
serverless edge computing largely mitigates the resource shortage of edge
environments while providing extra flexibility. Furthermore, edge application
developers are completely liberated from complicated management of edge
resources, facilitating the portability and short time-to-market of edge
applications. Nevertheless, serverless edge computing is still impeded by the
inherent natures of network edge. The computation/data geo-dispersion and device
heterogeneity in edge environments may introduce long transmission and
computation delay to the initialization and execution of data-intensive edge
functions. The resource limitation and volatile network conditions further
exacerbate the negative impact and increase the risk of network congestion. This
project aims to systematically investigate the challenging issues towards
building a high performance serverless edge computing framework for data-
intensive applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a
hardware/software co-design to construct a novel serverless edge computing
framework for data-intensive applications. More specifically, it consists of
following inter-related research tasks: (1) develop a hardware-enhanced
architecture for accelerating data processing, transmission and distribution of
serverless edge computing; (2) design a data-aware computation orchestration
system that adapts to unique edge conditions and the data acceleration
architecture; (3) develop a computation-aware data orchestration system that
adjusts the data acceleration architecture dynamically; (4) conduct a
comprehensive performance evaluation through extensive simulations and
implementation of a prototype of the framework. &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this
project will not only enhance the performance of many current data-intensive
edge functions, but also facilitate the edge adoption for numerous future
applications that rely on efficient data processing and transmission. As edge
computing is penetrating into all aspects of human lives, this research will
have a profound impact on the society. The project trains graduate students and
promotes the participation of female students in computer engineering. The
important findings of this project will be integrated into a graduate course and
disseminated to research community and industry by way of conferences, journals
and website access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.