* 2230108
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: CIP: A Cross-Institutional Research Engagement Network for CI Facilitators
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Marisa Brazil, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,499,405.00

The University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) and Arizona State University (ASU)
are creating a cross-institutional research engagement network (CIREN) for
cyberinfrastructure (CI) facilitators. The purpose of CIREN is to fill a
critical gap in the development of CI facilitators by training current and
future CI facilitators and expanding their ability to engage in transformational
research utilizing high-performance computing, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence. These highly sought after facilitation skill sets are difficult
for many research projects to acquire. To address this challenge, CIREN provides
and executes a framework that will recruit, train, and engage CI facilitators
within multi-disciplinary, cross-institutional research projects, thereby
increasing their impact and scope, and serving as an effective model to nurture
an innovative research community. This activity provides an entry point for
novice facilitators and a sustainable career path for CI facilitators at
academic institutions by increasing the availability of candidates as well as
increasing the diversity of this talent pool through outreach, entry-level
training, and peer-mentoring opportunities. CIREN elevates the role of CI
facilitators in the research community and lowers barriers to their entry into
the CI workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIREN implements a diverse facilitator
pipeline, bolstered by training, mentoring, and knowledge exchange through
organized community networking events that serves as an effective model to
nurture an innovative research community. Network websites increase the
visibility and recognition of CI Facilitators and connect them to researchers.
Training and resource materials are available through an open repository. CIREN
recruits facilitators from broad and diverse communities including regional and
national CI organizations, partner universities, and engages with national CI
infrastructure via ACCESS. Through mutual collaboration, governance, and
assessment, the CIREN project develops a CI facilitation model that is easily
reproduced and adopted by other institutions to meet their scientific and
research goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.