* 2230291
* CRII: CHS: Developing Youth Data Literacies through a Visual Programming Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Sayamindu Dasgupta, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2024
* USD 153,400.00

This research investigates blocks-based programming with everyday information as
a vehicle for teaching secondary school youth data science skills. Professional
opportunities in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and
beyond increasingly require abilities for making sense of data. These skills
require literacies involving data collection, processing, visualization, and
analysis. This project investigates new ways to foster these data literacies in
middle and high-school-aged students. New software and educational material will
be publicly available for learners and educators to use. Workshops for youth
will involve the Teen Science Caf√©, run by the Morehead Planetarium and Science
Center. Through this investigation, the project is expected to advance knowledge
of how to support youth in developing data-centric problem-solving skills, while
enabling them to program with everyday information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A data-
focused, visual block-based programming environment will be created. The
environment will enable students to manipulate and experience everyday data
sources with filtering and information visualization. This programming
environment will be developed iteratively through formative research studies
involving young people. Qualitative and quantitative results from these studies
will be used to both improve the design of the system, as well as to create new
knowledge addressing misconceptions and difficulties that kids experience as
they engage with data concepts and practices. The goal of this project is to
have young people invent and develop their own data tools, rather than only use
them. It is expected to advance scientific understanding of (1) design
principles and best practices for creating visual, block-based data programming
toolkits that can engage youth with diverse interests in programming with data;
and (2) misconceptions and difficulties faced by youth while learning to program
with data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.