* 2230615
* PIRE: Climate risk, pollution, and childhood inequalities in low- and middle-income countries
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Emily Hannum, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,485,510.00

Concern is rapidly increasing about accelerating climate changes and their
implications for the health and welfare of children. In a recent press release,
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimates that approximately one
billion children are at extremely high risk of experiencing impacts of the
climate crisis; many will experience multiple climate shocks combined with poor
essential services such as water, sanitation and healthcare. At the same time,
while air pollution is decreasing in many high-income countries and some middle-
income countries, it remains very high in large areas of low- and middle-income
countries in which the majority of the world’s children reside. Children from
poorer countries and from economically and socially marginalized groups within
countries may be particularly vulnerable to climatic and environmental hazards.
To date, there has not been a global study of the degree to which the ill
effects of extreme climate and air pollution exposures are borne differently by
children according to individual, family, and overall country characteristics.
Focusing on low- and middle-income countries, this project advances and
disseminates scientific knowledge about how global childhood inequalities
condition both the risks of experiencing climate hazards and extreme air
pollution and the implications, once exposed. Project partners include faculty
members and students at the University of Pennsylvania and the University of
Houston and researchers at the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American
Development Bank, the Regional Institute for Population Studies in Ghana,
UNICEF, and the World Bank. These research partnerships will inform analyses and
provide direct support for dissemination of findings to stakeholders in a
position to support interventions or advise on policy. In addition, these
collaborations will provide global engagement and training opportunities to a
diverse group of students and emerging scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project establishes university-international agency collaborations to
investigate how global childhood inequalities condition risks of climatic and
environmental hazards exposure; implications, once exposed; and capacity to
buffer ill effects. These collaborations will facilitate data-sharing,
collaborative analysis, feedback between academic researchers and the policy
community, and training for future generations of interdisciplinary population
scientists. The project team will link population, environmental, and climate
hazard data and consider possible differences across groups defined by
household, community, and country socioeconomic status (SES), demographic group,
gender, and health/nutrition status. We will apply novel group-based
climate/environmental measures to investigate the distributional patterns of
ambient risks among intersecting regional and sociodemographic groups. In
addition, the team will adopt statistical and machine learning techniques to
investigate the heterogeneous effects of climate/environmental risks along the
full distribution of child human capital outcomes given observed SES and
demographic characteristics. Finally, the team will develop accessible data
portals that will provide policy makers, researchers, and interested citizens
with frequently updated and real-time global and regional maps of changing
patterns of inequalities along the environment, population, and human capital
axes across time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.