* 2230648
* US Junior Oberwolfach Fellows
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Gerhard Huisken, Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2028
* USD 150,000.00

This 5-year award supports annually 100 “US Junior Oberwolfach Fellows”,
outstanding graduate students and postdocs from US universities and institutes
with at most 10 years experience after their PhD, in their participation in
week-long activities at the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO).
The MFO is a leading international mathematical research center in Germany with
annually nearly 3,000 international scientific visitors who are leading experts
in a field of research in mathematics and its applications. Participation of
junior scientists from the United States in these activities will allow them to
benefit at an early stage of their career from opportunities to meet and network
with top senior scientists from all over the world. They can present their own
results, either in talks or in poster sessions, can learn new methods and
results from the other participants and can take part in the numerous and
scientifically very profitable public and private discussions. As the MFO is
solely devoted to research, workshop participation enables interactions during
the whole week, fostering new approaches and fast progress on a broad range of
research topics in mathematics and adjacent disciplines in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MFO runs its week-long scientific
activities in 4 central programs: The Oberwolfach Workshops, the Mini-Workshops,
the Arbeitsgemeinschaften, and the Oberwolfach Seminars. The main scientific
program is the Oberwolfach Workshop program which consists of about 40 research
workshops per year, each with about 50 participants and organized by
internationally leading experts. The Mini-Workshop program offers 12 mini-
workshops per year, each with about 15 participants, and allows more focused
meetings than the workshops. The purpose of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft (“Study
Group”, 3 times per year) for junior as well as for senior researchers is to
learn about a new active topic outside their current area of research by giving
a lecture on it. The 6 Oberwolfach Seminars are schools organised by leading
experts in the field and address PhD students and postdocs from all over the
world. The aim is to introduce 25 participants to a particularly recent
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support will result in an impressive
increase of participation of early career researchers from the United States. Of
the total proportion of about 22% of visitors coming from the United States,
about 3% of all guest researchers are visiting the MFO with an US Junior
Oberwolfach Fellowship. Scientific quality is assured by careful selection of
programs through an international scientific committee and a scientific advisory
board. Great care is taken to ensure equity, diversity and inclusion such that
mathematicians of any national origin, minority group, gender, religion,
diet/food requirements, disability status and age can apply and are regularly
invited to Oberwolfach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.