* 2230841
* 3D Mechanical Modeling of Epithelial Stratification and Turnover
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* M. Lisa Manning, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2026
* USD 338,480.00

Skin is a biological tissue composed of multiple components and cell types which
work in concert to perform critical functions, such as creating a flexible
barrier to the outside environment and healing wounds. To perform these
functions, skin has multiple layers â€“ a bottom layer composed of cells that can
divide and transform into other cell types, and top layers of cells that rarely
divide and have specialized shapes with specific tasks. Recent research hints
that mechanical interactions between these cell types help keep the layers
separate and regulate cell divisions, but there are few quantitative models to
carefully test this hypothesis. This project will develop a new biophysical
computational model for skin layers that accounts for mechanical interactions
between cells. In collaboration with cell biology experiments, this research
will link model parameters to the expression of specific biomolecules, such as
adhesion molecules or components of the cell cytoskeleton. It will then make
predictions for cell and tissue shapes, as well as the rates at which cells
leave the bottom layer to renew the tissue over time. These predictions will be
tested in experiments. Finally, it will test the hypothesis that cells sense
mechanical signals transmitted through the tissue and consequently alter the
production of adhesion and cytoskeletal molecules, resulting in a mechanical
feedback loop that helps to correctly regulate tissue growth and prevent
disease. The researchers will provide a publicly available simulation code for
3D epithelial tissues, engage students under-represented in STEM fields in
research and professional development experiences, and disseminate lectures and
computational exercises on modeling cell mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to make and test quantitative predictions for the
mechanical response of self-renewing stratified epithelia, using mammalian skin
as a model system. The project will develop a novel 3D computational model
representing cell shapes and tissue layers within the epithelium, constrain the
model with state-of-the-art experimental cell biology and mechanobiology
measurements, and then test quantitative model predictions for global tissue
behavior. The work focuses on two objectives. In Objective 1 the team will use a
first-of-its kind layered 3D vertex model to study the properties of the
barrier/interface between the basal and suprabasal layer in both wildtype and
knockout stratified epithelia, testing the hypothesis that heterotypic
interactions between the two cell types and the basement membrane generate an
effective mechanical barrier, and isolating how specific proteins contribute to
that barrier. In Objective 2 the team will extend the 3D vertex model to study
dynamic motion of cells across the barrier to understand how cell division, cell
death, adhesion changes, and active cell migration drive delamination (i.e.,
allow cells from the basal layer to move to the suprabasal layer). The
hypothesis that specific, cell-autonomous processes inside delaminating cells
work together, possibly via mechanosensitive feedback loops, with tissue-scale
mechanical processes (such as cell-division-driven unjamming) to precisely
regulate cross-layer motion will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.