* 2230727
* PIRE: JUNCTION Japan-US Network for Clean Energy Technologies Involving Oriented Nanotubes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Vasili Perebeinos, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,900.00

Part 1. Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;New clean energy technologies such as
solid-state cooling devices and lightweight power transmission cables will play
an important role in improving energy efficiency and reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. The transformative optical, electrical, thermal, and mechanical
properties of aligned carbon nanotube materials can enable these clean energy
technologies, but further large-scale international collaborative research is
required to reach the ultimate potential for nanotube technologies. The goal of
this work is to build international JUNCTIONs between Japan-based and U.S.-based
researchers that are investigating the properties and performance of large-scale
materials made from oriented carbon nanotubes. This project brings together two
nations with world-leading nanotube expertise to accelerate the science and
technology of aligned nanotube materials. Extensive Japan-based international
research collaborations will allow U.S.-based students attending universities in
the states of Texas, Utah, and New York to leverage unique research facilities
and build deep technical and cultural connections. The program also will support
international research and cultural experiences for Houston-area community
college students, high-school science teachers, and high-school Japanese
teachers, which broadens the education efforts to include a traditionally
underserved culturally and economically diverse cohort. The international
network built in this JUNCTION program will serve as a launching pad for
sustained global research and education to enable nanotube technologies for the
clean energy transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Though the outstanding properties of individual carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) have been known for many years, scaling up these nanoscale
properties for technologically relevant macroscale systems requires answering
fundamental questions regarding carrier and heat¬¬ transport at the junctions
between individual CNTs; at junctions between bundles of CNTs; and at junctions
between CNT regions with different doping levels. The research team will use a
suite of experimental and theoretical methods to address these open questions
regarding the mechanisms of photon, exciton, phonon, and electron/hole transport
in aligned carbon nanotube materials, and will leverage these mechanisms in the
construction of new energy conversion, energy transmission, and thermal
management devices. The specific technical objectives of this project include
the demonstration of chiral thermophotovoltaic and solid-state radiative cooling
devices using thermal emission from oriented CNT films; the demonstration of
clean energy thermal management strategies using aligned CNTs with high thermal
conductivity and high thermoelectric power factor; and the demonstration of
high-electrical conductivity CNT fibers for lightweight, high-strength, high-
ampacity power transmission. These objectives will be accomplished by leveraging
collaborations with Japan-based researchers who are working on nanotube
macromaterial synthesis, solid-state transport theory, material
characterization, and development of energy devices using oriented nanotubes. If
successful, the new knowledge generated in this work will allow engineers and
scientists to develop and scale up these aligned nanotube technologies to
support a clean energy technology sector with improved efficiency, lifetime, and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.