* 2230143
* CNS Core: Small: Managing Electrical and Thermal Energy in Sustainable Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Fatima Anwar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 325,965.00

Sustainable computing systems operate on zero-carbon renewable energy harvested
from their environment, such as solar or wind, and stored in batteries.
Importantly, renewable-powered systems may be deployed in many different
climates that subject them to a wide range of ambient temperatures that
significantly alter the efficiency and correctness of these systems' underlying
components, including their processors, batteries, solar cells, and clocks.
Unfortunately, current systems are either designed for a narrow and ideal
temperature range, and thus are often unreliable under even slight temperature
variations, or must consume significant additional energy to maintain an ideal
temperature within a narrow window, which significantly reduces their energy-
efficiency. To address the problem, this project proposes fundamental research
on the design of sustainable renewable-powered systems that are ectothermic in
that they jointly manage and adapt to variations in the electrical and thermal
energy available in their environment to optimize their energy-efficiency,
performance, and reliability. While the temperature responses of individual
system components are well-known, ectothermic design takes a holistic systems
approach that exploits relationships between components and their environment to
co-optimize system-wide energy-efficiency, correctness, performance, and
reliability. To this end, this project will develop methods for understanding,
modeling, and exploiting the dependencies between computation, heat generation,
the ambient environment, renewable energy availability, and the workload.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes numerous broader impacts. The
project has the potential for significant societal impact and positively address
the climate concerns of computing by improving the energy-efficiency,
correctness, performance, and reliability of sustainable renewable-powered
computer systems. Our project also has the potential for technical impact by
improving the design of renewable-powered systems at all scales--from small
embedded platforms to large data centers. This project plans to engage in
multiple educational activities, including giving tutorials that focus on the
relationship between computing and energy consumption at UMass summer programs
for high school students in engineering and computing, and integrating
ectothermic design into graduate and undergraduate courses. Finally, the project
will emphasize the recruitment of students from under-represented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is funded in part from the DCL on
Design for Sustainability in Computing (NSF-22-060)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.