* 2230696
* PIRE: Climate Resilient Sustainable Food Production: Controlled Environment Hydroponic Agriculture with Novel Wastewater Treatment &amp; Reuse
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jeffrey Adelberg, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Increasingly frequent regional droughts induced by climate change have raised
concerns about food security. Given the high land, water, energy, and carbon
footprints of traditional open field crop cultivation, controlled environment
agriculture using greenhouses or modular containers is becoming more
advantageous. In regions with freshwater scarcity, non-traditional water sources
such as reclaimed wastewater are being considered for irrigation. However, there
are concerns about the unit costs and energy requirements of wastewater
treatment as well as potential microbial risks to consumers. Here, the team
advances the development of a sustainable agriculture platform where irrigation
water contains plant nutrients present in wastewater. An anaerobic membrane
bioreactor (AnMBR) is used to treat wastewater and produce methane-rich biogas.
Recovered methane offset the energy requirements of the system. It can be
converted to carbon dioxide to enrich the atmosphere around the plants to
enhance their growth. The AnMBR uses its inherent membrane and an ultraviolet
disinfection step to remove pathogens from the water. Plants such as lettuce are
grown with a hydroponic (soil-less) nutrient film technique that is engineered
to efficiently use the water and nutrients from the AnMBR. This is a way to
simultaneously reduce water and fertilizer consumption. Recycling the water from
the nutrient film technique allows maximizing the "crop per drop." This project
also supports one postdoctoral fellow, and graduate and undergraduate students
notably from underrepresented groups in science. Its outcomes may provide a
climate-smart solution yielding fresh vegetables in densely populated
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between
investigators in the United States at Clemson University and in the Republic of
Korea at Gyeongsang National University and Korea University. Korea is a global
leader in controlled environment agriculture (CEA). The international
collaboration allows a comparative assessment of different crops, climate
conditions, and cultural perspectives. It enables concept exchange between the
two distinct global regions. A contrast of CEA activities in the USA and Korea
facilitates knowledge transfer about best practices in peri-urban and urban
agriculture. The project has five thrusts: (1) development and testing of the
AnMBR system; (2) development and testing of the nutrient film technique (NFT)
system; (3) integrating sensors for monitoring nutrients and waterborne
pathogens into and out of the systems; (4) studying good manufacturing
practices, microbial risk, and food safety; (5) performing a technoeconomic
analysis and life cycle assessment. Educational integration will be realized
through three unique components: (1) a virtual and physical exchange program
between PhD students of all participating institutions; (2) a tiered, multi-
institutional research and mentoring program incorporating undergraduate
students; (3) a "hack-a-thon" event comprised of interdisciplinary student teams
blended across institutions. The investigators will exchange knowledge with
growers, government representatives, and consumers through the activities of a
Stakeholder Advisory Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.