* 2230142
* Conference: Semi-annual Workshop in Dynamical Systems and Related Topics at Penn State
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Svetlana Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2025
* USD 49,980.00

This award provides funding for participants of “Semi-annual Workshop in
Dynamical Systems and Related Topics at Penn State’' for the years 2022, 2023,
and 2024, to be held at the Mathematics Department of Penn State University. The
first of these meetings will take place on November 3-6, 2022. This represents
the Penn State half of the Semi-annual Workshop in Dynamical Systems and Related
Topics, co-organized for the last 32 years by the dynamics groups at Penn State
and University of Maryland; the Maryland half is held each spring. The workshop
is devoted to recent developments in dynamical systems and their numerous
applications to related fields in mathematics such as algebra, geometry, and
number theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this conference are to promote
the communication of mathematical results; to facilitate interaction and
progress in the theory of dynamical systems viewed in a broad sense, and in
related fields; to nurture the sense of community and common mission in these
fields; and to contribute to the training of graduate students and recent Ph.D.
recipients and to their integration into the dynamics community. Special efforts
are made to attract women participants as well as members of underrepresented
groups. The workshop is intended to provide a focus of activities and a meeting
place primarily for mathematicians from the Northeast region of the United
States working in dynamical systems and related topics, including the strong
groups at Penn State and University of Maryland; and a forum for both young and
established researchers from this region to help exchange ideas with each other
and their counterparts from around the world. Conference information will be
available at:
https://science.psu.edu/math/research/dynsys/workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.