* 2230513
* NSF Student Travel Support for 2022 ACM Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (ACM HPDC)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Dong Li, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 12,000.00

The 2022 ACM International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and
Distributed Computing (HPDC) is a premier international conference for
presenting research results, problem solutions, and insights on the design and
use of parallel and distributed systems for high end computing, collaboration,
data analysis, and other innovative applications. The conference brings together
researchers, developers and users from academia, industry, and national
laboratories to discuss recent advances and trends in many areas related to
parallel and distributed computing. The conference will be held in Minneapolis,
Minnesota, from June 27 - July 1, 2022. The project will fund students to
participate in the conference, to engage deeply with the HPDC research
community. The students will improve their overall research skills and many of
them will be presenting posters and papers. The project serves the national
interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the progress of science as it
provides a forum to disseminate research efforts, connect researchers, and train
the next generation of scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student program
committee for the conference is recruiting students with an emphasis on
diversity and inclusion of underrepresented groups and from a diverse set of
institutions. To ensure that funded students are actively participating in the
conference, they will be required to submit a written report summarizing their
experience at the conference, including what papers and posters they found
interesting and how those papers and posters are related to their current
research. The conference travel grant committee will also meet with the funded
students at the beginning of the conference, to provide advice to students on
how to interact with conference speakers and to set up connections with senior
conference attendees. The funding provided by NSF will have a significant impact
on the careers of the future generation of researchers in high performance
parallel and distributed computing, while encouraging diversity in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.