* 2230413
* GP-IN: Introducing Community College and Pre-College Students to Geoscience through Groundwater Quality Monitoring
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Matthew Kirk, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2025
* USD 363,254.00

Geoscience training is interdisciplinary and includes all of the core sciences
because the value of diverse perspectives is well recognized when designing
geoscience curricula. However, geoscience departments have fallen short in
attempts to extend that quality to the people who make geoscience happen. The
geosciences are the least ethnically and racially diverse of all science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. This lack of diversity holds
back geoscience innovation and threatens the supply of geoscientists available
to meet workforce demands in the coming years. Moreover, geoscientists will play
critical roles in helping solve some of society’s biggest challenges including
challenges related to climate, water, and energy, and diverse perspectives are
needed to develop equitable solutions to these challenges. This award asks the
main question: can geoscience student diversity be increased in agricultural
landscapes through participation in a co-curricular program of groundwater
quality monitoring? This award will provide training in groundwater and
geospatial sciences to 54 undergraduate students from diverse rural communities
in Kansas. It will help the students see the value of geoscience to their lives
and help ensure that a diverse geoscience workforce will be available to meet
the needs of a region that depends heavily on the availability of quality
groundwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the overarching question (i.e., can
geoscience student diversity be increased in agricultural landscapes through
participation in a co-curricular program of groundwater quality monitoring),
this award will create a geoscience recruiting network between a university and
two community colleges and use it to introduce students from diverse backgrounds
to geoscience through co-curricular research on groundwater, a critical resource
for the students’ home communities. Student participants will form three-person
teams, consisting of one student from each partnering institution and will
participate in a variety of technical and professional development activities.
The project's primary goals are to increase the interest in geoscience
disciplines as well as the experiences of students from historically excluded
communities in the geosciences. The program will connect geoscience research to
careers, while simultaneously addressing lack of exposure, sense of belonging,
and financial stress for students who are nearing a critical transition to a
four-year university. By testing and refining this program, this project will
create a roadmap for recruiting diverse students from rural communities across
the midcontinent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.