* 2230850
* Conference on Human-Centered Approaches to Artificial Intelligence Literacy in Informal Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 74,971.00

The New York Hall of Science (NYSCI) will convene a two-day participatory design
conference of to identify research and education opportunities in informal
settings for supporting literacy concerning Artificial Intelligence (AI),
especially for diverse and underserved youth whose communities are impacted by
the bias in some AI processes. AI uses computer systems that simulate human
intelligence. AI systems impact nearly every aspect of daily living, performing
tasks underlying navigation apps, facial recognition, e-payments, and social
media. AI can perpetuate inequities and biased outcomes in the culture at large.
The conference will explore how to promote engagement and conceptual learning
among youth about how AI works and what skills are needed to critically use and
apply AI. The conference will also explore ways to support the interests of
diverse and underserved children and youth in shaping AI and joining the growing
STEM workforce that will use AI in their professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will identify key features and needs with respect to AI literacy and
explore the specific roles that informal learning can play in advancing AI
literacy for youth in diverse and underserved communities. Participants in the
conference will include designers, learning scientists, researchers, informal
and formal educators, and science center professionals. Attendees will work in
separate teams and as a group to explore and critique existing AI tools and
learning frameworks, discuss lessons learned from promising AI literacy
programs, and identify design principles and future directions for research.
Specific attention will be paid to informal mechanisms of engagement, promising
networks, and research-practice partnerships that take advantage of the unique
affordances of informal learning and community services to accelerate AI
literacy for historically excluded youth. The insights gained from this work
will result in a set of research and programmatic priorities for informal
institutions to promote AI literacy in culturally responsive ways. The resulting
published guide and community events will broadly disseminate priorities and
design principles generated by this convening to help informal learning
institutions and community learning organizations identify both assets and
priorities for addressing diversity, equity, access, and inclusion issues
related to AI literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance
new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.