* 2230636
* SCC-IRG Track 1 Designing Smart, Sustainable Risk Reduction in Hazard-Prone Communities: Modeling Risk Across Scales of Time and Space
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Louise Comfort, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,500,000.00

The exponential increase in extreme events over the last decade compels new
methods of managing risk in communities exposed to recurring natural hazards.
This project advances the National Science Foundation’s goal “Growing
Convergence Research” to enable smart and connected communities by initiating
and expanding collective learning capacity through integrating digital twin
technologies and social games. This project proposes to engage decision makers
across sectors and scales of jurisdiction in managing risk by reallocating
attention, time, resources and overcoming barriers to act collectively as
hazardscapes change. This project will use the threat of wildfire across two
communities in northern California as community engagement study sites. Working
with thirteen community partners, the project will develop an innovative
sociotechnical digital twin of the San Francisco Bay Area that integrates
virtual models of physical infrastructure systems, social/commercial networks,
and insurance mechanisms that distribute risk over space and time. Serious games
will be designed to activate learning processes inherent in play to engage
community’s awareness and commitment to collective action.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a complex systems approach to hazard
reduction across multiple scales of risk by developing a new generation of
socio-technical digital twin that integrates models of physical infrastructure
systems and virtual networks of communication with social games to engage
community stakeholders’ awareness and commitment to collective action. Using a
conceptual framework of complex adaptive systems, this project will investigate
whether community learning processes that focus on cognition and action will
mitigate wildfire risk in the short-term and lead to sustainable adaptation to
recurring risk conditions in the long-term. This inquiry advances risk
management theory by testing a prototype sociotechnical framework for developing
shared knowledge to support decision making by multiple actors at different
scales to reduce hazard risk. The sociotechnical digital twin provides a macro
view of risk at the regional scale, as well as detailed views of interactions at
the micro scale, essential to manage operations. Translating risk information
into formats that are easily understood by different groups and embedding
learning processes in gaming scenarios to advance risk reduction is
transformative. A major goal is to shift the perspective from reaction to
extreme events after they occur to anticipation of risk and mitigation of
potential losses before hazards occur. Using serious games, a process of
iterative learning for diverse community actors increases the level of shared
cognition of risk and commitment to action. The project will engage under-
represented minorities in affected regions and support decision-makers in
vulnerable communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the
Smart &amp; Connected Communities program. It is co-funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.