* 2230710
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: The BlueGreen Action Platform, connecting communities upstream and downstream to improve nitrogen management
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Maya Burke, University of South Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aurali Dade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,670,148.00

A strong and sustainable Blue Economy requires healthy watersheds. The Blue-
Green Action Platform, BlueGAP, connects people and organizations across
watersheds to overcome economic and health challenges caused by nitrogen
pollution in their water and local environment. Nitrogen pollution of water may
cause severe health problems. Nitrogen pollution also harms local waters in a
watershed, leading to high concentrations of unwanted bacteria, algae, and
plants that can collapse entire ecosystems. Often, frontline communities are the
most affected. BlueGAP brings new solutions to nitrogen management by: a)
providing information, b) expanding communication networks, c) fostering
community action, d) changing policy, and e) finding sources of financing.
BueGAP’s team includes a diverse group of academic (University of South Florida,
University of Iowa, Stetson Law School), non-governmental (Black In Marine
Science), and quasi-governmental (Tampa Bay Estuary Program) organizations, and
community and private sector organizations. They are partnering with Champions,
initially from six community organizations from 3 differently sized pilot
watersheds in Iowa, Florida, and the US Virgin Islands, to co-design and build
capacity across watersheds. It couples two human-centric components, an Alliance
and an Academy, with the virtual platform. BlueGAP contributes to improving the
health of marine biological resources, water quality, and human health using
information that is presently not readily accessible to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BlueGAP’s vision is to stimulate the Blue and Green
Economies by accelerating convergence on best practices for nitrogen management.
BlueGAP focuses on four objectives: 1. Advance human-centered design of
solutions to pollution, 2. Integrate storytelling with cutting edge scientific
evidence to identify leverage points for action, 3. Create inclusive educational
materials to impact nitrogen management and inform communities, and 4. Establish
a sustainability plan for BlueGAP. The core of BlueGAP is a systems model
focused on local experiences and knowledge to show people the costs and benefits
of actions at specific leverage points of nitrogen management. BlueGAP’s uses
human-centered convergence framework fosters coalitions to solve problems that
communities cannot solve by themselves, keeping frontline communities at the
forefront.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.