* 2230633
* SHINE: Joule Heating as a Solar Active Region Atmosphere Heating Mechanism
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Mehmet Yalim, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 608,966.00

The physics of the solar chromosphere is complex from both theoretical and
modeling perspectives. The plasma temperature from the photosphere to corona
increases from 5,000 K to 1 million K over a distance of only 10,000 km in the
chromosphere. How this happens is the biggest mystery in solar physics today.
This project investigates this process through an observational study of several
NSF and NASA data sets. The work supports early career scientists, including a
female post-doctoral researcher and REU students. This project is jointly funded
by the Solar-Terrestrial Research program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
investigates Joule heating as a solar active region atmosphere heating mechanism
in particular in the lower chromosphere where Cowling resistivity is dominant.
The team will focus on target structures where strong gradients in the magnetic
field strength and field orientation are prevalent resulting in currents such as
light bridges (LBs) inside the umbra of sunspots, magnetic flux emergence into a
field- free or magnetic environment, polarity inversion lines or magnetic
reconnection sites like Ellerman bombs. To conduct this investigation, they will
make a state-of-the-art data-constrained analysis based on observational data
from space-based and ground-based solar observational instruments as well as
tabulated data from theoretical or semi-empirical solar atmosphere models. The
Joule heating focused on is a function of Cowling resistivity and electric
current. To calculate the Cowling resistivity, the team will model the
chromosphere as a non-LTE plasma consisting of purely hydrogen which can be
described by a quasi-magnetohydrodynamic single-fluid theory in which the
interactions between ions and neutrals are followed by the Cowling resistivity.
According to this model, Cowling resistivity is a function of plasma bulk
density, temperature, magnetic field, electron and ion densities. The team will
obtain the magnetic field by applying a non-force-free field (NFFF)
extrapolation technique to NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory vector
magnetograms, the temperature, electron density and/or electron pressure by
inverting spectral data from NASA’s Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph and
NSF’s Dunn Solar Telescope, and the rest of the quantities from theoretical and
semi-empirical atmosphere models. They will make a state-of-the-art data-
constrained analysis to calculate the Joule heating for a set of targets in
three different observational periods. This investigation will be an important
contribution to the existing efforts on chromospheric heating
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.