* 2230778
* EAGER: Observing Extreme Fire Behavior in Canyons
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Craig Clements, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 201,993.00

Fire behavior in canyons is often associated with explosive rates of spread
responsible for many firefighter fatalities around the world. Yet, the dominant
physical processes responsible for explosive fire growth in canyons remain
poorly understood and rarely observed. This project seeks to improve
understanding of canyon fire behavior and associated fire weather by conducting
a field-scale experiment to collect a suite of new observations of a fire
spreading through a steep canyon. This new dataset will help to identify the
critical processes leading to the fire acceleration in steep canyons and will
serve as an international benchmark for fire prediction model development and
provide data that do not currently exist. In the broader scope, the results from
this EAGER project will lead to improved fire risk assessment, increased
firefighter safety, and better management decisions in mountain regions
particularly as wildfires are becoming increasingly more frequent and
destructive due to climate change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a suite of
measurements never previously available, this EAGER project will observe the
complete fire evolution from both airborne and ground based remote sensing
systems. Convection and radiative heat transfer mechanisms sensitive to canyon
topography and resulting fire-atmosphere interactions including fire-induced
winds and turbulence structures will be sampled together with the fire dynamics.
Furthermore, plume dynamics and associated micrometeorology near the fire front
will provide additional context of the interactions between the pyroconvection
and fire environment. These novel observations will serve as a foundation to
explore many questions including how fire-induced updrafts drive fire spread and
how wind alignment with the canyon axis increases convective heating of the
fuels and accelerates the rate of spread. The measurement campaign will be
supported by numerical simulations made using a coupled fire-atmosphere
forecasting system and together will serve as a complete dataset providing an
unprecedented examination of the physics governing fire spread in canyon
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.