* 2230857
* I-Corps:  Developing servomotor actuators using advances in metallic additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Roy McCann, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of electric motors for higher torque position control actuators used
in robotic and industrial automation systems. The worldwide market for position
control actuators is forecast to reach $16 billion by 2026. This market growth
is associated with the transition to Industry 4.0 methods that seek improved
efficiency and faster adaptation to variable market demands by developing
streamlined processes in product development and delivery technologies.
Achieving the benefits of Industry 4.0 practices involves extensive use of
advanced electric motor controls and actuators to connect manufacturing systems
through digital communication networks. In addition, the electrification of
transportation systems such as autonomous vehicles, electric aircraft, and
railways are further increasing the demand for position control actuators and
their associated control electronics. The proposed technology may increase the
ability of industries to expand manufacturing capacity in the US. Further,
electric motor actuators may enable a much larger increase in economic
development associated with emerging markets for advanced robotics, autonomous
vehicles, aircraft, and transportation electrification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of copper
additive manufacturing technologies that enable the design of new types of
electrical machinery including electric motor position control actuators. These
types of actuators are used for precise control of position, velocity and
acceleration in robotics and industrial automation equipment. The designs
enabled by the proposed copper additive manufacturing allows sensor and
electronic control functions to be integrated into a single modular device. In
addition, the proposed technology provides greater than 40% more torque and
power density compared to existing electrical actuators, eliminates cables and
wiring between electric motor actuators and control electronics by integrating
these into a single assembly, and eliminates separate position sensing devices
using magnetic and electrical structures that provide dual functionality of
torque production with position and velocity sensing. These proposed features
may result in reduced size and weight while achieving increased reliability in
extreme temperature, vibration, and liquid
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.