* 2230749
* CONFERENCE: The 2nd micro Flow and Interfacial Phenomena (μFIP)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2023
* USD 4,500.00

This project supports partial travel for 19 U.S. students and early career
engineers/faculty to the 2nd Micro Flow and Interfacial Phenomena (μFIP)
Conference. The conference, one of the premier annual events for researchers in
the fields of transport phenomena, will be held in Irvine, CA, from June 20 to
23, 2022. The μFIP Conference provides a platform for researchers to exchange
information and identify research needs in emerging areas of phase change, micro
flows and interfacial phenomena, encompassing engineering, basic sciences, and
bio-medical disciplines. Eight technical tracks in fundamentals, applications,
and emerging innovations, as well as three panels on leadership, government
funding, and students, are organized in the conference. This μFIP conference
emphasizes on energy applications and promotes interdisciplinary research to
address climate change and water-energy nexus. The in-person platform offered by
the conference is expected to lead to interesting and fruitful technical
conversations that are important and timely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro flows
and interfacial phenomena affect a broad spectrum of the industry and life in
general. Advances in this field enabled by the conference may help improve and
optimize a large number of applications that benefit the society. Both
fundamental and applied sciences will be disseminated, with academic, national
lab, and industrial participation. It is expected that the conference will lead
to novel, collaborative approaches for addressing fundamental and applied
problems in phase change and single-phase heat transfer, single- and multi-phase
flows, bio-chemical and bio-medical engineering, and microflow processes
including microchannel flows and microscale surface phenomena. A special
emphasis is on formal and informal exchanges of ideas between junior researchers
and established researchers in a friendly environment, with a focus on advancing
diversity, equity, and inclusion. Student networking events that consist of a
student presentation session and a student panel will be organized to allow for
ample interactions among the youngest generation of researchers. A special
effort has been placed to promote gender parity amongst the conference
organizing committee and invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.