* 2230683
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Expert Voices Together: Building Trust in Communication Systems by Addressing Online Abuse and Harassment
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Rebekah Tromble, George Washington University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Pozmantier
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,691,316.00

This project addresses the links between two significant problems impacting
trust in contemporary communication systems: (1) the broad and rapid spread of
misinformation and (2) abuse and harassment directed at members of expert
communities. Misinformation-driven harassment campaigns have particularly large
impacts on those at the forefront of efforts to accurately inform the public,
including journalists, scientists, and public health officials. As a result,
this harassment undermines confidence in pivotal sources of knowledge and
reduces expert participation in the information ecosystem. This project will
develop Expert Voices Together (EVT), a socio-technical system that provides
real-time support to experts experiencing online harassment. The project will
initially focus on supporting journalists, later expanding its reach to other
expert communities. EVT aims to support experts in moments of crisis, while also
building individual, organizational, and societal capacity to prevent and
mitigate harms from online abuse and harassment in the long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of scientists, technical specialists,
psychologists, as well as civil society and media representatives will bring
together their expertise in a wide range of fields—including mis-/disinformation
studies, data ethics, systems engineering, experimental and clinical psychology,
human-computer interaction, case management, journalism and mass communication
practice and research—to create a rapid-response socio-technical system that
supports journalists and other experts facing online abuse and harassment. The
system will comprise a secure, rapid-response technical platform, support from
trained case managers, and an intervention “toolkit”. Tailored to meet the
specific needs of each user, the EVT toolkit will offer a menu of options,
including: (1) personalized assistance with digital safety and security, (2)
support monitoring and reporting abuse, and (3) help identifying and building a
community care system. Grounded in best practices from trauma-informed care, the
community care system in particular is designed to bring together peers,
friends, family, colleagues, and mental health care specialists who can provide
support for the expert facing online abuse, while also helping to build long-
term resilience within social networks, institutions, and society as a
whole&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.