* 2230414
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Problems in Online and Matching-Based Market Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Vijay Vazirani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The area of online and matching-based market design started with the seminal
1962 paper of Gale and Shapley on stable matching. Over the decades, it led to
highly successful applications, having economic as well as sociological impact,
including matching medical interns to hospitals, matching students to schools,
and matching kidney transplant recipients with compatible donors. The importance
and impact of this interdisciplinary work led to the award of the 2012 Nobel
Prize in Economics to Alvin Roth and Lloyd Shapley. Over the last two decades,
the revolutions of the Internet and mobile computing opened up altogether new
avenues of research and novel, path-breaking applications. These applications
include the ad auction marketplace of search engine companies, which matches
user queries to advertisers; ride-sharing, matching drivers to riders; markets
matching employers to workers; platforms matching people to each other; and
others. This "second life" of the field has been even more interdisciplinary
than the first, with computer scientists playing a major role along with the
economists. The optimal algorithm for the online bipartite matching problem,
called RANKING, given in a 1990 joint paper of the investigator, has become the
paradigm-setting algorithmic idea in the second life, much as stable matching
was in the first.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recently
developed simple proof of RANKING has opened up new opportunities, leading to
three of the four problems proposed for study under the current project: (i)
obtaining algorithms for online hypergraph matching and its generalizations --
these have applications to network revenue management and ride-sharing; (ii)
extending RANKING to the adwords problem under small bids, so as to get a
budget-oblivious algorithm which will be useful in autobidding platforms; (iii)
obtaining high probability statements for online algorithms, which have thus far
been analyzed in expectation only. The fourth problem addresses the paucity of
general mechanisms for matching markets under cardinal utility functions; this
paucity became apparent via recent work of the investigator, which led to proof
of intractability of the classic Hylland-Zeckhauser mechanism (1979). The
investigator has proposed Nash-bargaining-based mechanisms as a replacement and
wishes to develop efficient implementations for them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.