* 2230116
* EAGER: Towards a Homeostatic Nanobio-Hybrid Mechanical System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Henry Hess, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 308,000.00

Nature’s ability to balance degradation with self-repair enables long-lasting
mechanically active structures. For example, the molecular motors responsible
for the contraction of a heart muscle are replaced every few days, allowing the
muscle to pump blood for a hundred years. In today’s engineered systems, moving
parts age due to mechanical wear and fatigue and have to be replaced while the
system is taken offline. The long-term goal of this EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to create engineered systems which renew
themselves at the molecular level. This award supports exploratory research into
adding repair mechanisms to a nanoscale transport system. By demonstrating the
feasibility of countering specific degradation processes with specific repair
processes, the work will show that a long-lived system which maintains itself in
a functional state could be constructed. The US economy will benefit
significantly if the lifetime of machines and structures can be extended and
interruptions in service can be avoided. The design of “living” engineered
systems will also advance our understanding of the biological structures in our
own bodies. The project will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering. Outreach activities will inspire a new generation of high
school students to pursue an engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological molecular motors enable the construction of
active nanoscale transport systems with applications in biosensing, biocomputing
and nanomanufacturing, where a cargo-carrying or functionalized microtubule is
propelled by surface-adhere kinesin motor proteins. Past work has quantified the
degradation mechanisms of microtubules due to the action of the surface-adhered
kinesin motors propelling it forward. The goal of this project is to take the
next step and to actively counteract specific degradation mechanisms. The
primary microtubule degradation mechanisms of shrinking and breaking can be
potentially counteracted by growth via polymerization and fusing of microtubule
segments. Significant technical challenges in implementing these self-repair
mechanisms exist and the feasibility of achieving a steady state where
degradation and self-repair are balanced has to be determined. Specifically, the
project will demonstrate that growth and fusing can be precisely quantified and
controlled. The outcome of the project will be a potentially transformational
transition towards “living” engineered systems, which self-repair, that is use
active, energy-consuming processes to maintain their functional state at the
molecular scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.