* 2230743
* PIRE: Deeply Decarbonizing Global Industrial Supply Chains: Technology, Organizational Practices, and Institutional Design
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Edson Severnini, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,499,635.00

Drastically reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from industrial production
worldwide while limiting adverse impacts on workers and communities is a major
societal challenge. The industrial sector accounts for around one-third of
global GHG emissions, with cement, chemicals and plastics, and iron and
steelmaking being the three largest contributing industries. Decarbonizing
current processes is complicated by the challenge of replacing fossil fuels as a
heat source and implies changes in labor requirements, which could
disproportionately impact energy communities and vulnerable members of the
energy workforce. Furthermore, a large share of industrial sector output is
traded internationally, potentially disadvantaging producers that face stringent
domestic climate policies and encouraging relocation of production to less
regulated markets. By engaging students and researchers at centers of excellence
and a broad, diverse network of multi-sector, multi-stakeholder partners in
China, Germany, South Africa, and the United States, this partnership will use
data science and case study analysis to generate innovative solutions to the
technological and societal challenges of industrial decarbonization. These
solutions will be rooted in a deep contextual and data-driven understanding of
production geographies and their connected communities in major centers of
industrial activity worldwide. The shared insights and global awareness
developed in this partnership will support national health, prosperity, and
welfare in a clean energy transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
Industrial Decarbonization Analysis, Benchmarking, and Action (INDABA)
partnership is to integrate global expertise in materials science and
engineering, data science, economics, and decision analysis in a convergence
approach to address the challenge of decarbonizing industrial supply chains.
Partnership activities bring together research teams in China, Germany, South
Africa, and the United States to develop data and analysis, to conduct case
study comparisons of regional approaches, and ultimately to form a shared
understanding of global opportunities to demonstrate technologies and
infrastructure to enable deep decarbonization. Specifically, the partnership
will use machine learning techniques to illuminate drivers of industrial
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions at the plant and process level in diverse global
settings and develop use-inspired approaches to evaluate plant- and region-
specific options for decarbonization considering technical, economic, and
societal impacts. The outcome of this research will be the development of a
novel global dataverse and the advancement of machine learning approaches to
examine GHG emissions drivers for industrial plants in three sectors, cement,
chemicals and plastics, and iron and steelmaking. Through international
collaboration, participants in the partnership will examine how industrial
decarbonization investments can be most effectively customized or scaled within
country-, region-, and plant-specific contexts. This partnership will further
accelerate industrial decarbonization by educating diverse audiences via new
curriculum, policy memos, and publications. Together these activities will lay
the foundation for technology demonstrations and coordinated institutional
design to advance global efforts to mitigate climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.