* 2230812
* Collaborative Research: AON: The Arctic Great Rivers Observatory (ArcticGRO)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,08/31/2024
* James McClelland, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 196,846.00

Massive northern rivers transport huge quantities of water and waterborne
constituents from the continents to the Arctic Ocean. During this period of
rapid Arctic change, trends in river chemistry and discharge provide powerful
insights into changes occurring on land and how they may impact the Arctic Ocean
as well as Arctic residents who rely on river and coastal resources. The Arctic
Great Rivers Observatory (ArcticGRO) investigates how the chemistry and
discharge of the Arctic's largest rivers are changing. This is important because
the discharge and chemistry of Arctic rivers reflect processes occurring
throughout their watersheds, thus providing an integrative measure of
terrestrial change. Changes in river chemistry and discharge also influences the
chemistry, biology, sea ice formation, and circulation of the receiving coastal
and ocean waters, so understanding Arctic Ocean processes requires knowledge of
continental inputs via rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Great Rivers
Observatory focuses on the Arctic's six largest rivers; the Yukon and Mackenzie
in North America and the Ob, Yenisey, Lena, and Kolyma in Siberia. Water samples
are collected from each of these rivers six times per year and are analyzed for
a wide variety of biogeochemical parameters including nutrients, organic matter,
major ions and trace elements, and suspended sediments. ArcticGRO also curates
daily discharge data for these six rivers and has begun to gather and
disseminate daily discharge data for nine additional rivers in the Russian
Arctic. The watersheds of ArcticGRO's six primary rivers account for 67% of the
pan-Arctic watershed area and, with the nine additional rivers in the Russian
Arctic, ArcticGRO's coverage increases to 77% of the pan-Arctic watershed. Thus,
ArcticGRO's water quality sampling and curation of river discharge data captures
the vast majority of riverine inputs to the Arctic Ocean. All resulting data are
freely available through ArcticGRO's website (arcticgreatrivers.org) and through
the Arctic Data Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.