* 2230706
* PIRE: US-Japan Partnership in Excitonic Soft Materials for Clean Energy
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Madalina Furis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,499,583.00

This project will establish a long-term interdisciplinary partnership between
the University of Vermont, University of Oklahoma, Yamagata University, and
Osaka University in Japan. It represents a concerted major interdisciplinary
effort dedicated to harvesting, storing, and transferring energy in soft
electronic materials for cost effective, high-throughput energy harvesting
technologies, while training international scientists and promoting
intercultural exchange. This partnership will bring the US-based participants
unprecedented access to the remarkable soft-materials and optoelectronic device
fabrication, characterization facilities, and extensive connections with
semiconductor industries of tomorrow. The unique concentration of resources and
knowhow is unprecedented and enables rapid progress for the future generation of
soft electronic materials. The US-based team and Japan-based collaborators
complementary expertise spans all aspects of synthesis, prototyping, thin-film
growth, structural, electrical, and spectroscopic characterization. The
ambitious goal to decarbonize the US electrical grid by 2035 and the entire
energy sector by 2050 will require policy implementation, engineering
infrastructure, and fundamental research to realize innovations beyond the
state-of-the-art. The project explores fundamental energy conversion processes
in soft materials, which offer potentially transformative form factors necessary
to realize the 2050 targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excitonic soft
materials offer potentially transformative innovations towards high efficiency
photovoltaics and alternative extremely-low-cost and highly scalable solar
energy harvesting and flexible electronics technologies. The project will focus
on specific goals aimed at enabling new energy production and sustainable energy
consumption: a) enhance the coherent energy transfer beyond the naturally
occurring 10 nm range which translates to slow diffusion and efficiency
limitations b) leverage high-quality optical resonators, including gratings and
photonic crystal nano-architectures, towards enabling excitons coupling to
photonic states to form polaritons and further extending resonant energy
transfer over long range, c) explore the hot carrier transfer at organic
interfaces and d) tailor the intra and inter-molecular dipoles coupling to
lattice vibrations towards minimizing the exciton binding energy and lowering
the thermodynamic efficiency limit. It will lay a foundation for an
international research hub with trans-disciplinary expertise in excitonic soft
materials ranging from organic semiconductors to photosynthetic biopolymers
guided by the societal goal of carbon-neutral energy sector by 2050. With a
heavy emphasis on training generations of researchers in international research
collaboration, language, and cultural competency, the project will expand the
partnership for long-term progress towards this ambitious trans-national
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.