* 2230782
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of AI Software to Capture and Identify Circulating Rare Cells in Lung Patients
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Yongjian Yu, Axon Dx LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 999,702.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a new cancer treatment liquid biopsy product
using Artificial Intelligence (AI) that can detect and classify cancer derived
rare cell (CRC) from a blood draw. There are over 100 different types of cancers
and over 1.9 million new cancer cases are expected to be diagnosed in the US in
2022 resulting in over 600,000 deaths (1,670 deaths per day). Cancer is the
second most common cause of death in the US, exceeded only by heart disease. New
treatment therapies are being developed for a substantial proportion of cancers
with many clinical trials for new therapies on-going world-wide. The minimally
invasive, high sensitivity blood test will monitor therapeutic response and
progression at low-cost, supporting development of these new cancer treatments.
Specifically, with a less invasive and more comprehensive diagnostic tool, the
test results will give clinical researchers real-time insights into cancer tumor
biology, providing better understanding of cancer heterogeneity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project combines Artificial Intelligence (AI), specifically deep learning neural
networks used for computer vision, with CRC immunofluorescent reagents
integrated into an immunofluorescent microscope. The main objective of this
effort is to identify and classify CRCs with high accuracy. There is increasing
evidence that CRCs are correlated with cancer type, staging, treatment response,
minimal residual disease, and overall disease progression. However, in a typical
blood sample, there are over 7 million blood artifacts with very few CRCs
present. Current techniques to analyze CRCs are expensive, lengthy, and are
limited in automation. To meet project sensitivity, specificity, and runtime
requirements, the AI image analysis will be further optimized to: 1) find CRCs,
2) discriminate against false positives, and 3) classify CRCs into clinically
relevant types. The developed AI architectures will be selected through
extensive training using thousands of clinical samples compared to expertly
characterized cancer blood pathology images. After high sensitivity and
specificity are demonstrated, development work will continue to mature the AI-
revolutionized CRC liquid biopsy test to meet clinical research use only (RUO)
requirements. For the cancer research community, the product offering will be
used in the conduct of non-clinical laboratory
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.