* 2230803
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Sustainable Agricultural Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Vining, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 29,801.00

The goal of this project is to examine the sustainability of past agricultural
systems and the long-term impacts of these activities on the local environment.
As population drastically increases and societies struggle to increase food
production in turn, simply expanding existing agriculture systems will not be
enough to meet demands. It is necessary to investigate alternative options that
are designed for long-term persistence and resilience. This includes not only
technological innovation, but the social mechanisms that cause the continued use
of agricultural systems, leading to sustainability. Few agricultural studies
have the time-depth necessary to test assumptions of sustainability, yet this is
essential to the responsible management of agricultural landscapes. Archaeology
is uniquely well-suited to addressing these questions through study of the
entire lifespan of a system, and the ability to look at specific instances of
agricultural success and failure. Past humans found ways to cultivate many
diverse landscapes, and this knowledge will be increasingly vital as
aridification and waning soil quality decrease the amount of available fertile
land. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the environmental and
social conditions surrounding the construction and cultivation of non-
traditional agricultural systems. Focus will be placed on the feasibility of
these approaches for modern implementation by examining specific local
conditions that contributed to past agricultural success or failure. One long
term prehistoric system will be studied. Through the integration of soil
analyses, subsurface geophysics, and remote sensing, this dataset will allow for
multiscalar analyses of these ancient agricultural systems. This data will be
used to determine what motivated the creation of raised fields, whether they
were managed locally or through state-level organization, and how these
landscape modifications affected long-term soil properties. This research is
designed to differentiate soil conditions that represent ancient human activity
from recent processes, a distinction needed in archaeological studies. The
integration of multi-sensor geophysical methods used here has the potential to
advance remote sensing approaches, and a new method of low-cost thermal imagery
for agricultural applications is proposed. This dataset will contribute to
knowledge of food security in arid coastal environments and help to understand
how similar environments can be effectively cultivated in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.