* 2230557
* Research Security Training: The Importance of Research Security
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Tommy Morris, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shawna Cox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 477,403.00

This project will produce a training activity about research security and,
through the development thereof, will provide insight about best practices in
designing, developing, and evaluating educational tools for the adult learner.
Specifically, this activity will focus on creating The Importance of Research
Security, a training package with the purpose to enhance awareness and provide
online training about existing and emerging risks and threats to the global
research ecosystem. This project directly addresses the need to strengthen
research security of U.S. government-supported research and development, per the
National Security Presidential Memorandum â€“ 33 (NSPM-33). Dissemination and use
of this training will better protect U.S. research interests from both foreign
and domestic risks and threats. The training module will be Internet-based,
scalable, flexible, and widely accessible to researchers and stakeholders in a
variety of settings, including researchers with disabilities. Training module
design takes into account the end-user, being built using a design science
research methodology and incorporates best practices for engaging adult learners
in an online, self-paced environment. Multiple diversity factors are considered
in the design, and the training materials will be Section 508 compliant. The
development of the research security training module series is collaboratively
funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the Department of Defense
(DOD). This project is funded with a contribution from the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
security training module focused on The Importance of Research Security will be
designed and developed in consultation with a Content Expert Group, which
includes experts in research security across government. Design of the training
course will take an iterative design science approach, seeking to align with
curriculum development and design best practices across the dimensions of topic
coverage, cognitive demand, and presentation mode. The researchers will utilize
a nominal process sequence for development as part of the design science
research methodology. Following the initial design work and consultation, focus
groups will be convened to collect training needs, topical perspectives, and
insights on session length and design of the training program. Focus group
meetings are held throughout to review segments are completed, determine how
well the module meets design objectives, and identify necessary improvements.
The project team will assess the effectiveness of the module by leveraging a
cohort group to assess topic coverage, cognitive demand, and mode of
presentation. Following end user testing, evaluation, and revisions to the
design, the module will be made available for dissemination to research security
stakeholders, including university-based researchers, undergraduate and graduate
students, academic administrators, research security administrators, and
researchers and staff in government agencies and national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.