* 2230345
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Measuring Daily Ionospheric Variability and the 2023 &amp; 2024 Solar Eclipse Ionospheric Impacts Using HamSCI HF Doppler Shift Receivers
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Nathaniel Frissell, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 174,257.00

This project will study ionospheric variability across the continental United
States (CONUS) generated by dawn/dusk transitions and two solar eclipses
occurring in 2023 and 2024. Dawn and dusk produce a complex response in observed
ionospheric variability that is still not completely understood. A network of
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) stabilized/synchronized high frequency
(HF) receivers known as Grapes will be used for the study. Thirty Grape
receivers will be deployed throughout North America to optimize the study of the
ionospheric impacts simultaneously received from two locations. Additional
stations will be funded by the HamSCI amateur radio community. This project will
generate observations to answer the scientific questions: (1) How do dawn and
dusk ionospheric variability vary with local time, season, latitude, longitude,
frequency, distance, and direction from the transmitter? (2) Is eclipse
ionospheric response symmetric with regard to the onset and recovery timing? (3)
How similar is the eclipse to the daily dawn and dusk terminator passage? (4)
Would multipath HF mode-splitting in the post-eclipse interval be similar to
dawn events? (5) Would the response be different for two
eclipses?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the Ham Radio Science
Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) program and will be open to volunteers who want
to field instruments and contribute to scientific analysis and discussion. This
project will also establish a new network of DASI instruments that, due to its
low cost and operation by volunteers, has the potential to provide measurements
for years to come. This project will support students (undergraduate, MS and
Ph.D.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.