* 2230776
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Ocean Vision AI: Scaling up visual observations of life in the ocean using artificial intelligence
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Henry Ruhl, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aurali Dade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,733,169.00

In order to fully explore our ocean and discover the life that lives there, we
need to scale up our observational capacity. To address this need, underwater
imagery is being collected at rates that far exceed our ability to process them,
and new techniques using artificial intelligence are critical. This project,
Ocean Vision AI, will accelerate processing of underwater imagery by combining
expertise in imaging, artificial intelligence, and open data, and creating data
and analysis pipelines that convert pixels to actionable data. Ocean Vision AI
will provide opportunities to diversify an ocean data science workforce and
public engagement through community science portals and game-based education
initiatives. Together, Ocean Vision AI will be used to directly accelerate the
automated analysis of underwater visual data to enable scientists, explorers,
policymakers, storytellers, and the public, to learn, understand, and care more
about the life that inhabits our ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully
explore our ocean and discover the life that lives there, we need to scale up
our observational capabilities both in time and space. To address this need,
underwater imaging, a major sensing modality for marine biology, is being
deployed on a diverse array of platforms. However, as more visual data are
collected, the community faces a data analysis backlog that artificial
intelligence may be able to address. Ocean Vision AI seeks to address this need
by providing a central hub for groups conducting research that use imaging, AI,
and open data; create data pipelines from existing image and video data
repositories; provide project tools for coordination; leverage public
participation and engagement via game development; and generate data products
that are shared with researchers as well as other open data repositories. These
efforts will result in novel intellectual pursuits in fields as diverse as
marine biology, fisheries, biological oceanography, underwater optics and
computer vision, artificial intelligence, ocean engineering, biomechanics,
environmental biology, human-computer interaction, game-based education, and
community contributions to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.