* 2230060
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Detecting and Localizing Non-Functional Vulnerabilities in Machine Learning Libraries
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Saeid Tizpaz-Niari, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2026
* USD 353,357.00

This project aims to improve security and resilience of machine learning (ML)
software. Machine learning has been deployed in many critical domains such as
drug discovery, financial planning, autonomous driving, and malware detection.
This makes it crucial for ML-based software solutions to function properly even
when attacked by malicious actors, leading to a line of research focused on
functional vulnerabilities, attacks that attempt to make ML systems produce
incorrect results. Less studied, however, are other kinds of vulnerabilities
that don't attack the core prediction functionality but still pose security
risks. These "non-functional" vulnerabilities include denial of service attacks,
which attempt to render the system unusable through overloading it; and side-
channel attacks, which analyze features like response time to infer sensitive
information about the models or data they are trained on. This project will
develop methods for detecting and correcting these kinds of non-functional
vulnerabilities and make those methods widely available, as well as disseminate
educational materials to help security researchers and ML software developers be
more aware of these risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a growing number of
reported denial-of-service (DoS) and side channel (SC) vulnerabilities in core
ML libraries such as NumPy and TensorFlow, a systematic approach to identifying
and debugging them has not been explored due to multiple technical challenges:
i) non-functional behaviors are not explicitly encoded in the syntax or
semantics of ML code; ii) existing fault localization methods often fail to
establish causal relationships; and iii) automatic DoS/SC mitigation is largely
lacking for ML applications. This project will develop a novel methodology that
combines evolutionary algorithms with a gradient-based guidance to detect DoS
and quantify the strengths of SC vulnerabilities. For debugging, the project
explores causally guided statistical methods to localize the root causes and
guide an optimal mitigation policy. The project team will make a concerted
effort to increase participation of women, Hispanic, and other underrepresented
communities via special topic courses, research experiences for undergraduates,
and summer camps for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.