* 2230026
* I-Corps: Aerial Virus Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Vikas Berry, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable system that can detect airborne virus particles such
as COVID-19. The currently available airborne viral detection technique operates
in a sequential manner by first collecting particles from air samples and then
sending the sample for processing with an intensive and expensive liquid-reagent
(reverse transcription polymerace chain reaction (RT-PCR)) testing. The
potential customer profile encompasses individuals concerned with the air that
they and their family members are breathing. This technology may also serve
organizations concerned with their constituentsâ€™ health in hospitals, public
transportation (e.g., taxis, airliners, railways), schools, hotels, businesses,
homeowner associations, and government agencies. The solution enables a timely
identification of an infectious agent and minimizes the spread by isolating
contaminated areas for swift localized sanitation, which helps prevent costly
and aggressive over-sanitation and rapid depletion of personal protective
equipment and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of technology that can detect airborne COVID-19 and other viral
particles in a small space. The proposed device seeks to directly provide
guidance to the occupants of the room, enabling them to make informed decisions
about safety. The detection of viral particles in air is critical to enabling
intelligent decision-making about safe usage of the space. This technology
integrates a COVID-reactive surface with a highly sensitive detection
technology. In the presence of a virus particle, the spike protein on the
surface of the virus interfaces with the active sensor, leading to a change in
the resistivity of the device, which triggers a message on the device-screen and
an alarm. To enable aerial interaction with the sensor element, an aerodynamic
casing has been designed and developed. The flow profiles have been modeled
using computational fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.