* 2230809
* Saving a Lost Ecosystem: Restoring and exploring the exceptionally preserved fossils of the Cleveland Shale (Late Devonian)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Amanda McGee, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 01/31/2026
* USD 785,162.00

The Cleveland Museum of Natural History is currently undergoing a large-scale
transformation project, which includes the building of new permanent exhibits
and storage facilities. The Museum’s paleontology collections house fossils from
a unique time in Earth’s history, when what is now Cleveland, Ohio, was a
tropical ocean that supported an unfamiliar ecosystem. Many of the distinctive
plants and animals found here went extinct when the environment changed
dramatically at the end of the Devonian Period (~358 million years ago). The
fossil record in Cleveland provides a remarkable glimpse into the past impacts
of drastic environmental change—information with far-reaching implications for
the future. The Museum has the world’s largest collection of Cleveland-area
Devonian fossils; however, they are currently at risk due to inadequate storage
conditions. The Museum’s scientists recognize that now is the time to save this
valuable record of Earth’s past. Their goal is to build a stable environment for
this collection, document all the evidence it contains before it degrades
further, and expand access to enable more scientists to use this extraordinary
resource. Additionally, photographing and 3D-scanning the fossils will allow
global audiences to interact with them in new and exciting
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Devonian Period ended in millions of years of
upheaval marked by drastic environmental change, multiple extinction events, and
the loss of the majority of marine life. These extinctions had dramatic impacts
on life in the oceans and on vertebrate evolution. Numerous traits of modern
vertebrates—including jaws, teeth, and pelvic fins—first appeared in the
Devonian fish found in the geologic formation known as the Cleveland Shale
Member. Many of the species uncovered in these local Cleveland deposits are not
found anywhere else in the world. The fossils are exceptionally preserved,
retaining features like soft tissues and rarely found morphological information.
However, pyrite disease is currently threatening the preservation of the
Museum’s Devonian fossil collection. Reactive pyrite that occurs naturally in
the Cleveland Shale can oxidize in humid conditions, creating iron sulfide,
which can destroy morphological features and entire specimens. Therefore, the
Museum’s goal is to move the collection into a climate-controlled space with new
cabinets, publish the vertebrate paleontology dataset to global aggregators for
the first time, make and publish 3D surface scans of specimens to retain
information about morphology, and use these records in educational outreach to
teach the public about how much the Earth has changed and will continue to
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.