* 2230117
* RAISE: IHBEM: Inclusion of Challenges from Social Isolation Governed by Human Behavior through Transformative Research in Epidemiological Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2025
* USD 711,148.00

Project INSIGHT is a collaborative effort to develop novel and transformative
research aimed at incorporating human social, behavioral, and economic
interactions in mathematical epidemiological models. Project INSIGHT addresses
two sets of questions about behavioral responses to social isolation during the
COVID-19 pandemic: (1) How does compliance with isolation policies drive disease
mitigation outcomes? and (2) Does social isolation lead to unanticipated
negative social outcomes, and if so, how? Social isolation and individual
distancing are key tools in mitigating large-scale infectious disease outbreaks.
Yet, social interactions are crucial for the health and prosperity of
individuals and their communities. Social isolation is associated with negative
outcomes such as substance use and abuse, domestic violence, and reduced mental
and physical health. These negative effects are often pronounced in rural, low-
income, and older communities. The primary goal of INSIGHT is to model both
positive and negative effects and thereby improve our understanding of the
course of the COVID-19 pandemic and its long-term effect on society. This
project is funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences (SES) and the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences (BCS) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project INSIGHT develops realistic epidemic models
incorporating behavioral responses of compliance and adherence as follows: (1)
Isolation compliance. Using a classical segmentation of populations into
compliant and non-compliant groups, a switching function is defined to account
for changes in behavior. Games with appropriate payoff functions that inform
individuals’ behavioral choices are used. (2) Opioid misuse treatment adherence.
A model according to severity of substance use disorder is created, implementing
treatment adherence with game-derived utility functions and incorporating drug-
seeking behavior of affected individuals, Model parameters like recovery and
deaths are accounted for via well-defined behavioral functions. (3) Domestic
violence. Focusing on intimate partners, economic-dependent functions are used
to capture partners’ choices such as abuse, forgiveness, seeking help, or
leaving the domestic violence cycle. The modeling efforts use data from several
national and local sources. The outcome of Project INSIGHT modeling efforts is a
synthetic, in-depth view of the balance of positive (reduction of disease
transmission) and negative (substance abuse, domestic violence) implications of
social isolation as a response to pandemic situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.