* 2230162
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Hypergraph Signal Processing and Networks via t-Product Decompositions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Lau, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 254,145.00

This collaborative research project aims to develop a new hypergraph signal-
processing framework based on tensor representations to exploit multi-way
interactions in data from complex relations. Simple graphs can model only
pairwise relationships among data, which prevents their application to modeling
networks with higher-order relationships. Hypergraph signal-processing
techniques, on the other hand, are more powerful since they can account for the
underlying polyadic relationships among data nodes. Hypergraph signal-processing
tools can be used in different areas, including data science, communication
networks, epidemiology, and sociology, and in numerous applications - from
robotics and self-driving navigation to remote sensing and cyber-physical
systems. Point-cloud 3D imaging in remote sensing, for instance, is an emerging
and critical technology wherein the tools under development in this project can
be applied. In concert with the scientific goals of the project, the team of
researchers will develop educational modules on graph and hypergraph signal
processing to introduce this emerging field to a broad set of students at their
home institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research effort radically departs
from prior work that relied on symmetric canonical polyadic tensor
decompositions. Instead, the theoretical underpinnings are based on the more
recently introduced t-product operation in tensor algebra, which allows tensor
factorizations that are analogous to matrix factorizations and
eigendecompositions. The advantages of adopting t-eigendecompositions are
compelling - they preserve the intrinsic structure of tensors and the high-
dimensional nature of their signals; most importantly, the orthogonal eigenbasis
derived from this formulation allows for a loss-free Fourier decomposition and
computationally efficient calculations. The new framework will thus allow for
the generalization of traditional graph signal-processing techniques while
keeping the dimensionality characteristic of the complex systems represented by
hypergraphs. To this end, core elements of the new hypergraph signal-processing
framework will be introduced, including shifting operators, convolutions, and
the definition of various hypergraph signals. The hypergraph Fourier space will
also be defined, followed by the concepts of bandlimited signals, sampling, and
learning. The benefits of the new framework will be demonstrated in applications
such as spectral clustering, denoising, and
classification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.