* 2230086
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Cross-Disciplinary Training for Joint Cyber-Physical Systems and IoT Security
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Peyman Najafirad, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2027
* USD 399,493.00

Critical infrastructures, such as the power grid, water systems, and
manufacturing plants, continue to be targeted by stealthy and debilitating cyber
and physical attacks. These attacks not only hinder our national security but
also jeopardize our economic prosperity. Several hurdles impede addressing the
security of such critical assets, including the integration of new possibly
vulnerable sensing technologies deep within such realms, in addition to the
profound lack of relevant training experts from academia and both private and
public sectors. Along the same line of thought, the shortage of empirical data
originating from such realms, in conjunction with the complexity of such
systems, further exposes the problem when facing the challenges of sophisticated
state-sponsored attackers. To this end, this project serves NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science by offering well-rounded training to research
scientists coming from diverse related areas. The project puts forward
multidisciplinary curricula in addition to catalyzing critical infrastructure
training and research, while establishing active and actionable dissemination
partnerships with numerous stakeholders, tangibly influencing the security of
such interrelated, highly-important societal systems. The project also widely
influences the training of women and minorities in these imperative cross-
disciplinary areas across the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uniquely
curates contextualized, large-scale benign and malicious cyber and cyber-
physical empirical data from real infrastructure systems to strongly enable
hands-on training and research. The project then develops automated
methodologies to annotate such data while indexing and sharing it with relevant
research scientists to empower forward-looking research workforce development.
The project also designs, delivers and integrates cross-disciplinary curricula,
composed of undergraduate and graduate courses and a certificate program,
dealing with evolving topics such as, physical modeling of system dynamics,
related empirically driven data science applications, and joint operational
security analytics. It also offers unique training opportunities with relevant
private and public sector partners for both pre- and post-graduation trainees,
rendered by capstone projects, internships, and competitive placement options.
The project also designs and implements various security techniques, along with
realistic emulation and simulation toolsets, to offer practical training
expertise to researchers. The project utilizes virtualized lab setups to offer
self-paced training of such developed training material, while achieving
considerable outreach to relevant researchers across the US and beyond. The
project fosters a community of impactful experts in the critical infrastructure
security area to widely-disseminate such developed training materials and labs
through coordinating and hosting yearly workshops at the collaborating
institutions. The project is steered by an established program evaluation body
that is composed of leading NSF Industry-University Research Partnership
experts, pedagogy facilitators, and representative researchers from operational
local and national training and research centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by OAC and the CyberCorps
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.