* 2230997
* Western Regional Noyce Network
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Donna Ross, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,829,382.00

The project aims to serve the national need of supporting STEM teachers as
collaborators towards advancing teaching and learning and persisting in the
teaching profession. The national teacher shortage was exacerbated by the
COVID-19 pandemic, with STEM teaching positions among the hardest to fill.
Equity gaps have worsened, and teacher diversity does not come near to
reflecting the diversity of the student population. Meanwhile, expectations for
teachersâ€™ content and pedagogical knowledge have increased. Given this context,
the goals of the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program have never been more
urgent. While each institution with a Noyce project works individually to
recruit, prepare, and retain STEM teachers, this project supports a larger
community that works collectively to enhance and magnify efforts to increase the
quality preparation of Noyce recipients while reinforcing their commitment to
teaching careers. Known as the Western Regional Noyce Network (WRNN), this
project builds on the success of ongoing efforts to foster community and support
for Noyce recipients and Noyce project leaders. Specifically, in order to
motivate teachers to persist and thrive in the teaching profession, this project
aims to expand the involvement of Noyce recipients, especially current
recipients and recent graduates, and to strengthen their community ties through
purposeful activities designed with explicit networking goals. Project
activities include (1) annual conferences, (2) professional development
offerings, (3) regional networking associated with statewide educator
conferences hosted by professional societies, (4) development of an online
learning community, and (5) robust formative and impact evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This WRNN project integrates the efforts of 13
institutions across a 14-state region of the western United States. The
collaborating institutions are: the University of Oregon (lead) and,
alphabetically, California Polytechnic State University, California State
University, Fresno, California State University, Northridge, California State
University, Sacramento, Pacific University, Planetary Science Institute, Rice
University, San Diego State University, San Francisco State University,
University of Portland, University of Texas at Arlington, University of Wyoming.
It is designed to expand involvement by Noyce projects and their Scholars and
Fellows, promote professional networking, foster exchange of ideas among Noyce
recipients and program leaders, and facilitate professional development. The
WRNN expects to serve approximately 900 participants over three annual
conferences, to engage 450 participants in aggregate in professional development
opportunities, to support another 665 participants in regional networking
events, and the online learning community will be open to thousands. Questions
that will be explored center on examining the networks that Noyce
Scholars/Fellows and alumni develop as a result of WRNN activities and the
benefits that these networks confer. Varied formats of professional development
allow for exploration of affordances and constraints of in-person and virtual
activities. By promoting networking throughout all activities and offering
targeted activities that address identified needs and interests of Noyce
teachers, hundreds of thousands of students in high-need schools across the
region will benefit beyond the lifetime of this project from highly prepared and
well-connected STEM teachers. This Noyce conference project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.