* 2230748
* PIRE: Building Decarbonization via AI-empowered District Heat Pump Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,01/31/2023
* K. Selcuk Candan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Increasing concerns about climate change, clean energy, and energy security
demand that our society transition to a net-zero carbon economy that serves the
triple bottom line of planetary health, societal well-being, and economic
prosperity. This PIRE project is focused on innovating Artificial Intelligence
(AI) techniques with an understanding of human need and behaviors to enable an
efficient, human-centered, resilient, and socially justifiable operation of
district- and community-scale heat pumps systems that promote a regional scale
adoption of building decarbonization. In an increasingly urbanized world, there
is a pressing need to address the critical challenges of climate change through
the built environment because the building sector accounts for nearly 40% of the
primary energy use in the U.S. and associated greenhouse gas and CO2 emissions,
with about 50% of that energy dedicated to heating, cooling, ventilation, and
lighting. In addition, people spend more than 90% of their time indoors which
means that addressing their needs and comfort in a sustainable way is critical
for climate resilience planning. Electrification of heating and cooling systems
is widely acknowledged as a core and non-negotiable strategy for
decarbonization. Many major U.S. metropolitan areas have put the adoption of
electric heat pump technologies on the roadmap reaching building decarbonization
in the next decade. Taking advantage of the wide adoption of district
heating/cooling heat pump systems in Nordic countries, this project seeks to
leverage the data and testbeds provided by our core international partners from
Sweden and Denmark and the AI innovations provided by the U.S. team to catalyze
the readiness to support the scaling up and adoption of human-centered and
equity focused AI empowered district system operation strategies at a regional
and global scale. Findings from this project will be disseminated through two
International Energy Agency’s Annex teams (81 and 84) which will reach to
researchers from more than 20 countries. Through their outreach activities,
including focus group discussions and workshops, the team will work closely with
partners from government and community stakeholders to promote community-focused
and equitable district heat pump adoption, implementation, and operation. Two
new cross-institutional education programs are designed to promote convergent
international education in human centered sustainable built environment: a)
Summer International Graduate Bootcamp and Exchange Program; and b) Smart Built
Environment Certification Program. Leveraging partner institutions’ other
existing flagship programs ranging from K-12, undergraduate, and workforce
training, the project will train a diverse, convergent workforce well-versed in
science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM), AI, and
socioeconomics to tackle global challenges of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to: 1) data science – the
development of new human-interactive AI tools to help facility managers and
building owners (i.e., users) to make timely decisions and to help incentivize a
faster and wider adoption of building decarbonization; 2) building science – the
development of novel and scalable models and algorithms for occupant-centric and
socially equitable controls driven by occupant, environmental, and community
needs; and 3) social science – engaging communities and decision-makers in the
design of AI systems to incorporate their environmental, social, economic, and
equity needs in the models. Specific anticipated engineering/science
contributions include: 1) novel causally-informed Bayesian network with dynamic
causal discovery and thermography-based big data analysis for a scalable
performance monitoring, energy diagnosis, and prognosis of district heat pump
systems, 2) a comprehensive AI learning based occupant needs and behavior
modeling framework to bridge the gaps within human-building-community
interactions and promote energy equity across the district, 3) new physics- and
data-informed learning models for forecasting and optimization under
uncertainty, and 4) holistic data sets collected from pilot sites in
Sweden/Denmark and the U.S. that use an energy justice lens and are developed
through a community-informed approach. The project team's international industry
partners, including a heat pump manufacturer and district energy system
management companies, will guide the project to streamline the potential
technology transfer process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.