* 2230684
* 2022 NSF Student Poster Competition &amp; Networking Event at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (IMECE); Columbus, Ohio; October 30-November 3,
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Wenbin Yu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 47,750.00

The objective of this award is to provide travel support for 30 students who are
currently working with Principal Investigators through NSF funding from the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) or Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) programs to present at a special poster session at the 2022 ASME
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE), to be
held in Columbus, OH, from October 30 to November 3. The award will also
facilitate a breakfast networking event for rising researchers and junior
faculty that is expected to be attended by 400 participants. The networking
event will be open to all eligible conference attendees. The poster travel
awardees will be selected based on application, which will include a brief
resume, a one-page statement of why they want to attend the conference, and
confirmed participation. Consideration in the selection process will be given to
the inclusion of members of underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions
that the students represent, and diversity of programs within engineering. The
award will benefit the nation through the education of a skilled and diverse
engineering workforce better prepared to provide transformative solutions the
challenges of their chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This participation
support is expected to benefit students' professional, scientific, and technical
development as they present their NSF funded research projects to the broad
Mechanical Engineering community. Attendance at the conference will provide the
students a wonderful opportunity to learn about the engineering profession and
state-of-the-art research in their fields via access to technical and
professional development talks by domestic and international speakers. Students
will enhance their communication skills through lively discussions of their work
with the top researchers in their fields. They will also have an opportunity to
attend many technical presentations, join the keynote and plenary sessions
featuring technological pioneers, and network with potential mentors,
colleagues, and employers. The breakfast networking event will provide an
opportunity to students and faculty alike to delve into longer discussions about
career opportunities and trajectories with senior faculty and industrial
representatives, who will serve as facilitators and
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.