* 2230398
* SBIR Phase I:  Software-Defined Sub-Terahertz Imaging Radar for Algorithmic Agility and All-Weather Transportation Safety
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Ramesh Annavajjala, BLUEFUSION INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the development of a universal, affordable, and sustainable
sensing solution to enable perimeter security and transportation safety under
all weather conditions. Current sensing solutions available today are based on a
single modality, expensive to deploy, and not robust to adverse weather
conditions. Current solutions also employ proprietary sensor processing
interfaces, do not provide the quality of data needed for decision-making by
continuous learning, are hard to upgrade, and have poor size, weight, and power
specifications. In contrast, the proposed technology leverages the strengths of
multiple sensing modalities on a single, converged, open compute platform to
enable robust perception in adverse weather conditions while offering
significant advantages to the total cost of ownership. The technology has a wide
range of applications in sectors as diverse as automotive, robotics, enterprise,
aerospace, and defense. The solution developed under this project has the
potential to save lives by reducing the number of road accidents, improving the
driver reaction time, protecting vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and
bicyclists, reducing the downtime for a shipping company, minimizing the costs
associated with collision claims and repairs, and detecting, classifying,
alerting, and tracking threats on the ground and in the air.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
develops a novel, scalable, centralized sensing platform and a multi-spectral
sensor prototype to realize ultra-fine resolution in range, Doppler, azimuth,
and elevation domains using commercial, off-the-shelf processing elements.
Advanced compression algorithms are employed to transport sensor measurements
over secure, open, low-cost, and low-latency interfaces to the centralized
processing unit to enable multi-modal sensor processing, early sensor fusion,
and high-dimensional perception for higher-level decision-making. The de-coupled
sensing and processing architecture produces unprecedented access to
measurement-level data to enable artificial intelligence and machine learning-
based algorithmic discovery. False-alarm-constrained global object detection
algorithms are employed to enable localization, navigation, and mapping for
operation under adverse weather conditions. Proof-of-concept sensor hardware is
developed with laboratory and field experiments to validate the architecture,
technology, algorithms, and software. Some of the key technology risks addressed
in this proposal are antenna design and fabrication at millimeter frequencies
and above, cascading of multiple radio frequency transceivers to realize a large
number of spatial channels, and hardware-level synchronization across the
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.