* 2230365
* CEDAR: Neutral wind drivers of variability in the prereversal enhancement
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Brian Harding, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 289,807.00

The Earth's ionosphere is the region of space near Earth (~90-1000 km above the
surface) where a significant population of plasma (ions and electrons) exists.
It is important to be able to predict changes in this region of space because it
affects radio propagation, GPS, over-the-horizon radar, satellite communication,
and orbital re-entry. One spectacular feature of Earth's ionosphere is the so-
called "pre-reversal enhancement" (PRE), which occurs at sunset and causes the
entire ionosphere to move upward by up to 100 km. In this project, new data from
NASA's Ionospheric Connection Explorer (ICON) spacecraft will be used to
understand which mechanisms cause the PRE to change from one day to the next and
from one longitude to the next. Different mechanisms have been previously
predicted theoretically, but they have never before been tested with data. The
results of this research could facilitate better predictions of equatorial
spread F, which has deleterious effects on communication and navigation systems.
In addition to the scientific impact, this project will benefit education and
STEM workforce training via mentoring of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises an analysis of data from
ICON and the Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO). The science question is: What
mechanisms control the longitudinal and day-to-day variability of the PRE? The
science objective is to determine the features of neutral wind observations that
are correlated with changes in the strength of the PRE across longitudes and
from day to day. First, a validation study will be performed to ensure that ICON
plasma drifts and PRE estimates are consistent with JRO measurements. Next,
longitudinal patterns of PRE strength and neutral winds will be determined and
compared, with and without the aid of a standalone electrodynamo solver. Day-to-
day variability will be studied by comparing changes in the PRE from one day to
the next with changes in the wind. This work will elucidate mechanisms that
cause the PRE and will therefore benefit future work that is aimed at predicting
and modeling PRE variability and equatorial spread F
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.