* 2230811
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Functional and genomic diversity in vitamin B1 metabolism and impacts on plankton networks and productivity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Alexandra Worden, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,298.00

Many organisms, from humans to microbes, need to acquire vitamins by ingesting
them as food or taking them up directly from the environment. Vitamins are
important to individual organisms, but they also have the potential to alter the
health and productivity of entire ecosystems. This project will explore the
production and consumption of vitamin B1 (thiamin) by planktonic cells that are
the base of the ocean food chain. It will also examine the way that different
microorganisms may interact harmoniously and/or competitively in metabolizing
thiamin and similar molecules. A network analysis of data will help determine
the role that these substances play in controlling microbial biodiversity and
photosynthesis in sea water, and the response of microorganisms to changing
ocean conditions. This project will also train postdoctoral scholars, graduate
students and underdergraduates, and will support a teacher professional
development program that prepares low-income, historically underrepresented, and
other educationally underserved students from rural areas to graduate from high
school, enroll and succeed in higher education, and pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plankton evolved diverse strategies to acquire thiamin,
including salvaging thiamin-related compounds from the environment. This project
will: 1) survey metabolic adaptions related to thiamin in plankton, using
comparative genomics and evolution (high throughput DNA sequencing); 2) test
important functional predictions using cultures and analytical chemistry
(chemostats and mass spectrometry); 3) measure plankton interactions in natural
and artificially stimulated phytoplankton blooms. This investigation will join
the oceanographic cruises of two major field campaigns in the North Atlantic
Ocean. The results will be integrated using several computational approaches to
interpret variations in microbial community structure, the role of biochemical,
genomic and taxonomic diversity in maintaining biodiversity patterns of today's
oceans, as well as potential future oceans, and microbial networks. Specific
aspects of thiamin metabolism pathways will be explored in the context of
understanding microbial chemical interactions. These different levels of
biodiversity and thiamin cycling will be investigated across transitions between
productive phytoplankton blooms and the stratified, oligotrophic conditions that
typify the warmer oceans predicted under several environmental change scenarios.