* 2230828
* Fundamental Study on Nanotechnology Enabled Arc Welding of High Strength Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2025
* USD 380,707.00

This project seeks to advance the fundamental understanding of nanoparticle-
enabled mechanisms for enhancing arc weldability of high strength aluminum
alloys. Due to their exceptional mechanical performance, high strength aluminum
alloys are desired for numerous structural applications. For example,
incorporating lightweight structural components into functional assemblies by
welding is critical to reduce fuel consumption and emissions for transportation
applications. However, most of these high strength alloys are difficult to weld
because of cracking, which significantly hinders their widespread use. Recently
a nanotechnology enabled welding approach involving adding nanoparticles to the
molten weld pool has been experimented with to improve arc welding of aluminum
alloys, but lack of control and poor fundamental understanding have hindered its
practical use. In this project, a novel nanotechnology-enabled arc welding
process, involving a specially fabricated nanocomposite feed wire, is studied to
overcome the problem of poor weldability of high strength aluminum alloys. This
facilitates the manufacture of large-scale, light-weight structures and
components for aerospace, automotive and biomedical applications, thus impacting
US industry and enhancing National prosperity. This project has rich
educational, training, and outreach components, including new curriculum
developments, diverse K-12 and university student involvement, outreach, and
technology transfer activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to understand how nanoparticles enhance weldability and eliminate hot
cracking during arc welding of high strength aluminum alloys. Hot cracking in
arc welds occurs due to thermal stresses, columnar growth and incomplete
backfilling. For this research Al-Zn-Cu-Mg (AA7075) is used as the model
aluminum alloy while gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) as the model welding
process. The project first focusses on the fabrication of nanocomposite
consumable wires via extrusion and wiredrawing of ingots cast by a flux-assisted
liquid-state nanoparticle incorporation and dispersion process. Next, both
experimental and analytical studies are conducted to understand how
nanoparticles influence the solidification behavior of AA7075 during arc
welding. Standard crack susceptibility testing, microstructural study, and
thermal analysis during the solidification process are performed. The research
involves examining how nanoparticles affect the solidification time of the
melting zone, liquid fraction during solidification, and refinement/modification
of both primary and secondary phases. The project studies how nanoparticles
induce changes in thermal flow and liquid fraction throughout the welded
material, influence the solidification behavior and eliminate hot cracks. The
project characterizes nanoparticle effects on weld microstructures and
mechanical properties, establishes process-microstructure-property correlations
and generates new knowledge for nanoparticle effects on weldability during arc
welding of traditionally hard-to-weld aluminum alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.