* 2230673
* Travel: Student Travel Grant for 2022 Logic Programming and Non-Monotonic Reasoning Conference and Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Daniela Inclezan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 12,000.00

This grant supports student for select students participating in the Doctoral
Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the 16th International Conference on Logic
Programming and Nonmonotonic Reasoning (LPNMR) that will be held in Genova
Nervi, Italy, September 5-8, 2022. This is a well-established international
conference that facilitates interactions between researchers and practitioners
interested in the design and implementation of logic-based programming languages
and database systems, and researchers who work in the areas of knowledge
representation and nonmonotonic reasoning. This activity will bring together a
broad community of researchers in the field and support junior researchers at
this critical early-career stage. The DMC creates the opportunity to bring in
participants who might not have attended an AI conference due to lack of
resources. This is especially true for those at smaller institutions and those
which have less developed AI programs. Engaging such participants has the
potential to draw more talent into AI research, improve research ideas in their
formative stage, and engender collaborations across the breadth of disciplines.
This event provides students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on
their work at a critical time in their research and enables them to explore
their career objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.