* 2230352
* EAGER: CRYO: Thermomagnetic Refrigeration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mona Zebarjadi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 327,419.00

This project is jointly supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many critical physics phenomena and phases are
only observable and occur at ultra-low temperatures, below 1K. Futuristic
quantum-based devices for applications in quantum computing, sensing, and
communications are dependent upon ultra-low temperature physics. Advances in
refrigeration technologies enabling sub-Kelvin refrigeration are therefore
crucial to continue and expand our understanding of fundamental and applied
physics. The current widely used refrigeration technology to achieve sub-Kelvin
is based on the usage of the rare helium isotope, 3He. Given the projected
shortage and the high price of liquid helium, it is crucial to develop
alternative technologies enabling future sustainable quantum computing, sensing,
and communications. Among potential solutions, solid-state technologies with no
moving parts are attractive since they do not require maintenance. One of the
solutions, which is the focus of this proposal, is the Nernst-Ettingshausen
refrigeration. In addition to being fully solid-state, these refrigerators have
an extremely simple design and are made out of a single material. The Nernst-
Ettingshausen refrigeration refers to the observation of a developed temperature
difference along the sample as a result of heat pumping when an electric field
and a magnetic field are applied to a solid material, usually a semi-metal.
Bismuth and its alloys with antimony are shown to be efficient thermomagnetic
materials in the 50K-150K temperature range. The newly discovered quantum
materials, the so-called topological semimetals, have the potential of extending
the refrigeration operating temperature to ultra-low temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on PI team's primarily developed first-principles
module, this proposal includes studying the thermomagnetic properties of
topological semimetals, theoretically with no fitting parameters, and using
descriptors and machine learning to identify new thermomagnetic materials for
sub-Kelvin refrigeration. The proposal envisions three major thrusts: (1)
Identify materials with a large figure of merit at ultra-low temperatures, below
1K, (2) Experimentally characterize the thermomagnetic properties in the 2K-100K
range, and (3) Build and test a proof-of-principle refrigerator prototype. The
intellectual merit of the proposal is in the systematic studying of a large
group of newly discovered materials, which is only possible due to recent
advances in computational methods, including the team's recently developed
first-principle-based code. Building and validating a complete theoretical-
experimental set of tools to evaluate the potential of materials enables a fast
pace in the discovery of materials' unique properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.