* 2230271
* Workshop: Exploring Academic Unit Change at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Sarah Wise, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 05/31/2024
* USD 211,261.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
developing and disseminating knowledge about innovative, effective change
processes and strategies for two year colleges. The project will convene a four-
part workshop for a wide variety of two-year college (2YC) STEM
faculty/staff/administrator teams interested in advancing curricular and
cultural change in their academic units. Workshop activities will result in
several outcomes: 1) the workshop’s consensus recommendations on processes and
strategies that support change in the 2YC context, 2) a curated set of resources
that workshop participants find promising to support such change, 3) a variety
of change-related awareness-raising activities and change projects, implemented
at the participating 2YCs, 4) a self-sustaining network of 2YC STEM faculty,
staff, and administrators engaged in advancing academic unit-level change, and
5) articles and other dissemination products sharing the workshop outcomes to
the broader 2YC community and higher education change communities. These
outcomes are significant because most academic unit-level improvement projects
to date have focused on the four-year college context, whereas this project is
focused on making systemic improvements in STEM education at
2YCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four workshop sessions will be spread across a
year to further the project goals of 1) exploring change processes in-depth, in
2YC STEM academic contexts and 2) supporting participating 2YC teams in engaging
their units or institutions in a local project related to advancing academic
unit-level change. Each session intends to be 2-3 hours in length and be
attended by 50 2YC faculty, staff, and administrator teams, representing at
least 15 different institutions. Session topics aim to explore understanding 2YC
STEM unit change needs, conceptualizing effective change processes at 2YCs,
sharing plans and feedback around change-related projects at participating 2YC
STEM units, and sharing results and lessons learned from implemented projects.
Overall, the sessions seek to promote change efforts in STEM units in
participating 2YCs, produce new knowledge around the types of change that are
desired at 2YCs, and identify which evidence-based processes and structures are
most likely to be effective at supporting and sustaining change in these
contexts. The project team will be led by two 2YC STEM faculty members with
professional development experience and supported by researchers with expertise
in evidence-based institutional change. Researchers plan to apply the
organizational learning framework across the project’s programs, research, and
evaluation activities to support the design of an effective workshop and to
synthesize the contributions of workshop participants. The organizational
learning framework helps examine the individual, group, and organizational
factors and processes that influence the ways change ideas and initiatives are
received and integrated (or not integrated) by an organization. The framework
will support a qualitative analysis of workshop artifacts to identify processes
and structures supportive of change in STEM units at 2YCs. This work will help
distinguish processes enabling cultural changes, which are more likely to be
sustained. The project team and interested participants intend to collaborate on
writing up consensus recommendations and other findings from the workshop series
to be disseminated through a number of higher education change and two-year
college organizations, including the Accelerating Systemic Change Network, the
Council for the Study of Community Colleges, and the Community College Research
Center. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in
Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education
supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges.
The program description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in
undergraduate STEM education at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.