* 2230458
* Conference: Grant-Seeking Workshops in Computer Science for Smaller, Independent, Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Samantha Sabalis, Council of Independent Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2026
* USD 183,846.00

This grant supports efforts by the Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) to
increase the number of research grants in computer science sought by and awarded
to faculty members at small to midsized independent predominantly undergraduate
institutions (PUIs). The award supports a series of three workshops targeting
faculty members in computer science and related disciplines to write effective
and compelling proposals to the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Research Initiation Initiative (CRII) and
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of these workshops are to:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Train up to 180 early career faculty members in computer science and related
disciplines from predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to submit
competitive proposals to the CAREER and CRII programs.&lt;br/&gt;2) Prepare
grants administrators at up to 180 institutions to better collaborate with
faculty members in computer science on seeking and managing NSF research
grants—and, in the process, strengthen the grant-seeking capacity of these
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;3) Increase the number of grants awarded to CIC member
institutions in NSF’s CRII and CAREER programs for computer science and related
disciplines, with the goal of twenty awarded projects by
2025.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.