* 2230331
* I-Corps: Peripheral Artery Disease Treatment and Arteriogenic Hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Ethan Lippmann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of biomaterials and vascular therapies. This project may enable the
exploration of arteriogenic therapeutics such as hydrogels, in clinical
applications. The potential treatment may serve as a novel treatment option that
is minimally invasive and provide an effective long-term solution. This hydrogel
technology may also provide a learning opportunity for the medical field to
better understand how therapeutics impact patient care and biological functions.
For instance, use of the hydrogel has the potential to reduce the overall cost
of care for patients, providers, and payors while improving patient quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
an adaptable biomaterial that could be used to treat multiple indications.
Better understanding the utility potential of such a technology would open doors
future advanced arteriogenic therapies. This product may have the ability to
grow large, smooth-muscle lined arterioles capable of handling bulk blood flow.
Use of the proposed hydrogels could improve patient care and treatment of
ischemic conditions, such as peripheral arterial disease (PAD) or stroke. The
hydrogel is a polymer-based biomaterial containing an active peptide, which
works to promote the growth and integration of new blood vessels. Minimally
invasive relative to existing treatment options, injection of this hydrogel at
sites of arterial occlusion may help to naturally restore blood supply to the
effected tissues and prevent further complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.