* 2230770
* Center of All-Solid-State Batteries for a Clean Energy Society
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Carlo Segre, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,499,867.00

Part 1, non-technical&lt;br/&gt;Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is critical to
address the grand challenge of climate change. Renewable energy integration and
vehicle electrification, keys to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, require
energy storage at scale with safety and low cost. This PIRE team will conduct
fundamental research to advance science and technology of all-solid-state
batteries (ASSBs), which have the potential to transform rechargeable batteries
for vehicle electrification and integration of renewable energy by offering
next-generation energy storage devices with higher specific energy at both
battery-cell and battery-pack levels, longer cycle life, lower cost and superior
safety compared to Li-ion batteries (LIBs). The anticipated economic benefit
(reduction in the cost of battery packs on the energy base by 50% over LIBs)
along with unprecedented electrochemical performance (150% increase in the
specific energy) and intrinsic safety will usher in a new era of vehicle
electrification and renewable energy integration for a sustainable society with
clean energy. By working with international partners from 7 institutions in
Europe, the researchers will achieve the challenging goal of advancing science
and technology in ASSBs. Through collaboration with industrial partners, the
research team will expedite technology translation from laboratory discovery to
commercial products. Further, they will collaborate with several minority-
serving elementary, middle and high schools in Chicago to inspire
underrepresented minority students to pursue STEM education and career. By
working with City of Chicago, the researchers will launch a workforce
development program, offering short courses and workshops to mid-career
employees and underrepresented minorities, which can accelerate transition of
the workforce into clean energy, electric vehicle, and energy storage
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2, technical&lt;br/&gt;To address the
multi-faceted challenges faced by ASSBs, the PIs have assembled a multi-
disciplinary team and will work with international partners with synergistic
expertise, particularly with Prof. Braga at University of Porto, Portugal â€“ the
inventor of a new solid Li-glass electrolyte with ultrahigh ionic conductivity
at room temperature (&gt; 10-2 S/cm), wide electrochemical window (stable with
Li metal and resistant to oxidation up to 8 V vs. Li/Li+), and low glass
transition temperature (~75oC). The team will investigate and integrate
conventional and unconventional charge storage mechanisms to achieve ultrahigh
specific energy, high power, long cycle life ASSBs with intrinsic safety. Anode-
free cells with Li plating/stripping at both anode and cathode enabled by Li-
glass electrolyte will be studied for the first time. The electrochemical
principles for such Li plating/stripping cells and those for anode-free cells
with Li plating/stripping at the anode and de/intercalation at the cathode will
be established to offer guidelines for design of ASSBs with unprecedented
specific energies. In-situ and ex-situ characterizations will be performed to
unravel the underlying mechanisms controlling interfacial properties of ASSBs.
Density functional theory calculations, molecular dynamics and continuum models
will be used and integrated to address the multi-length scale modeling from the
electrode/electrolyte interface to single particle, multiple particles, and
eventually to cell-level responses. The atomic level, sub-continuum level and
cell-level understandings developed from these modeling efforts will assist the
fundamental understanding of chemical/electrochemical stability between the
electrode and Li-glass electrolyte, mechanical contact, Li plating/stripping, Li
dendrite formation, ionic transport, and degradation physics of ASSBs. Through
these scientific advancements, this PIRE project will lay a solid foundation for
design, synthesis and fabrication of high-performance ASSBs at scale in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.