* 2230329
* Conference: Reimagining Rights in the Americas
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Joseph Berra, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,999.00

Respect for human rights is the backbone of democratic self-government. The
development of the human rights frame has itself progressively democratized and
become a central part of the language and practice of social movements,
including movements for racial justice, climate justice, the rights of
Indigenous people, and the rights of persons in human mobility. The Reimagining
Rights in the Americas Conference will explore the leading edge of human rights
norm creation in these areas by convening scholars, advocates, members of
impacted communities and representatives of international human rights bodies.
Additionally, it will address the gaps and contradictions that exist between
recognition and protection of human rights in the United States political and
legal system, the human rights demands of impacted communities and social
movements, and the work of promotion and protection of human rights in the
Inter-American System for Human Rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Reimagining
Rights in the Americas Conference will coincide with the visit of the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights to the UCLA campus for its 187th Period of
Sessions. The Conference is designed with various components to achieve the
goals of advancing the human rights frame in the areas of race, indigeneity,
migration, and the environment, and enhancing its applicability to the
challenges faced in these issue areas in the United States context. The
Conference will open with a Symposium on the topic of “Bringing Human Rights
Home: bridging the gap between the international and domestic frames for human
rights in the United States.” Following the Symposium, Commissioners and Special
Rapporteurs of the Inter-American Commission will visit Skid Row in Los Angeles
to meet with the unhoused community and their advocates. During the period of
sessions, the Conference will host a series of keynotes on the human rights
frame from perspectives of racial justice, the rights of Indigenous peoples, and
the rights of persons in human mobility. The Conference will also co-sponsor a
civil society forum with the Commissioners on International Women’s Day to
discuss the intersection of gender and the rights of women with these same issue
areas. Finally, the Conference will end with a special convening of the
Commissioners and Special Rapporteurs of the Inter-American Commission, Special
Rapporteurs from the United Nations Human Rights Council, and leading subject
matter experts from both academia and social movements on the topic of the
Climate Crisis and Human Rights. Symposium papers will be published in one of
the signature journals of UCLA Law School, and a record of the other Conference
proceedings will be made available on the website of the Promise Institute for
Human Rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.