* 2230000
* Seventh Annual KUMUNU-ISU Conference in Partial Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Pelin Guven Geredeli, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,161.00

This project aims to bring together senior and early career researchers,
including graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, in the 7th series of the
“KUMUNU-ISU Conference on PDEs, Dynamical systems, and Applications". KUMUNU-ISU
has historically been organized as an annual regional weekend Meeting
alternating between the University of Kansas, the University of Missouri-
Columbia, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and Iowa State University. The 7th
KUMUNU-ISU Conference will be held at Iowa State University (ISU) April 22-23,
2023. The goals of this conference are: (i) to provide an opportunity for a
diverse group of well-regarded researchers to disseminate their recent results
in applied mathematics and partial differential equations (PDE); (ii) to
facilitate the interaction and exchange of ideas among all conference
participants. This project intends to positively impact the educational and
research programs of the participating graduate students, postdocs and early
career faculty. In particular, the organizers will make a great effort to
encourage the participation of researchers who are female and/or from
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Conference will
provide a scientifically profitable platform for showcasing recent developments
in: (i) the mathematical and numerical analysis of the PDE’s which govern fluid
and fluid-structure interactions; (ii) the qualitative properties of general
infinite dimensional dynamical systems; (iii) the analysis of coupled
parabolic/hyperbolic evolution equations. This project intends that the KUMUNU-
ISU Meeting will facilitate mutually beneficial interaction and possibly forge
new research collaborations amongst the participants – senior and junior
researchers alike – who might generally not have large opportunity to share
their views outside their respective research circles. The Conference website is
https://faculty.sites.iastate.edu/peling/7th-kumunu-isu-conference-pde-
dynamical-systems-and-applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.