* 2230036
* SCC-IRG Track 1:  Common SENSES (Standards for ENacting Sensor networks for an Equitable Society) : Community-Led, Science-Driven Climate Resilience in Boston, MA
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Moira Zellner, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,499,464.00

Communities across the world are experiencing a challenging paradox:
accelerating development in the context of climate change. Often, the impacts
are concentrated in disadvantaged communities, requiring new approaches to
pursuing local and equitable solutions to climate resilience. Common SENSES will
demonstrate such an approach by integrating cutting-edge science with community
priorities in conjunction with a capital redevelopment of Blue Hill Ave. in
Boston, MA, a long-neglected thoroughfare running through the heart of the
city’s historically Black communities. Networks of sensors installed throughout
Blue Hill Ave.’s neighborhoods will measure the threat of environmental hazards,
including extreme heat and rainwater flooding, from street to street. These data
will be explored collaboratively with community stakeholders in workshops that
will culminate in proposals for the placement of green infrastructure (e.g.,
rain gardens, green roofs) optimized to mitigate hazards in the neighborhood
following the redevelopment. The project is a community-city-university
partnership between the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative (DSNI) and Project
RIGHT, which serve communities along the Blue Hill Ave. corridor; the City of
Boston’s Mayor’s Office of New Urban Mechanics (MONUM); and an interdisciplinary
team affiliated with Northeastern University’s Boston Area Research Initiative
(BARI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common SENSES will make four major advances. (1)
It will generate new techniques for modeling sensor data to quantify disparities
in hazards from block to block within communities, or microspatial inequities.
(2) It will develop new practices and tools for participatory modeling, or the
process of generating solutions by placing complex data in the hands of
community stakeholders. (3) It will evaluate the impacts that green
infrastructure can have on mitigating microspatial inequities in communities.
(4) It will demonstrate how sensor networks can be best integrated with
community needs and perspectives to have true public impact, something that this
emergent technology often lacks. The project will have extensive benefits for
the Blue Hill Ave. corridor and will demonstrate a model for similar projects
locally and globally. The team will work with the City of Boston to replicate
the approach in other projects throughout the greater Boston region. This
project will also publish the Common SENSES playbook, a non-academic publication
summarizing the insights, tools, and practices developed throughout the project
to enable other communities to incorporate in their own pursuit of local
solutions to climate resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.