* 2230864
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled Personalized Employability Curriculum (APEC)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Terrisa Duenas, ESTE(TM) LEVERAGE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,299.00

The broader/commercial impact of this NSF Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project begins with an online self-assessment by middle-school
girls to identify their innate interests within the fields of entrepreneurship,
science, technology, or engineering. Current U.S. trends show a high attrition
of girls with interests in these fields, beginning at the middle school level.
There is a subsequent drop-off over the ensuing academic years, and this results
in small numbers of women occupying these types of roles in their adult careers.
The assessment analysis and personalized roadmap will help clarify, support, and
nurture the individual’s journey in their growth and development towards their
career choices including careers in STEM and entrepreneurship. Ongoing
refinement and enhancement of the assessment tool will help inform needed
changes to the educational curriculum and/or shifts in societal thinking to help
close the ongoing gap in women occupying highly skilled roles. The potential
commercial and socioeconomic impact of the assessment and follow-on resources
defines a marketable product with associated workforce that spans across the
family, academic, governmental, and societal institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this project is a
unique framework assessing innate interest in the fields of entrepreneurship,
science, technology, or engineering and leveraging these data to create a
personalized artificial intelligence (AI)-driven career exploration, skills
development, and employability curriculum. The goal is to confirm that the use
of deep learning to provide these girls with a dynamic career exploration
roadmap can successfully counter the common societal forces that negatively
impact their pursuit of innate interests and development of the skills necessary
for careers as entrepreneurs, scientists, technologists, and engineers. It is
hypothesized that early identification of these innate interests preempts
identity stereotypes. To combat confirmation bias that girls aren’t good at the
fundamental skills needed for these careers, machine learning and AI-enabled
data aggregation is used to correlate these innate traits with resources that
foster associated job skills, offer opportunities and challenges that are
suitable to the user, and provide opportunities to connect with successful role
models to address the lack of representation of women in these areas. The
initial scope of the project will target middle school girls and their
parents/guardians with expansion to the broader audiences of teachers, mentors,
coaches, and society in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.