* 2230817
* EAGER: Building Idiomaticity into Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Suma Bhat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Idiomatic expressions are an essential component of everyday language use and
the hallmark of native language ability. Consider the phrase throw away;
proficient speakers can effortlessly understand that the phrase takes a
figurative meaning in “Britain threw away all the achievements of the last
decade.” and a literal sense in “He threw away his cigarette and buried his head
in his arms.” This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will build a
high-quality dataset for computers to understand the differences between
figurative and literal senses of these expressions in general English text. The
main novelty of this project will be in collecting a large class of idiomatic
expressions and sentences containing them to let computers learn the inherent
variability between a variety of idiomatic phrases. Collecting many sentences
with phrases that have a figurative and literal meaning will permit computers
better understand the nuances with which these expressions are used in everyday
conversations and writing. Beyond understanding them, the collected. examples
will help computers use these expressions like native speakers do when
automatically writing text and even suggest appropriate expressions in specific
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is essentially
interdisciplinary spanning the areas of linguistics and computation and will
investigate novel paradigms for natural language processing that are
idiomaticity-aware. As such, it will have two research aims: (1) creating a
high-quality dataset of phrasal verbs annotated with their context-specific
senses and their literal/figurative equivalent forms, and (2) testing the
performance of state-of-the-art idiomaticity-aware algorithms. Because idiomatic
expressions vary widely in form and structure, the focus on phrasal verbs (also
known as verb-particle constructions) in the context of the exploratory project
will permit studying a very frequent class of idiomatic expressions that are
syntactically different from those in currently available datasets. The primary
risk of this project stems from its exploratory nature of creating large corpora
with sufficient coverage for language model training. Given their prevalence in
natural language, the dataset of phrasal verbs in English will supplement
available datasets on idiomatic expressions in terms of their variety. Moreover,
their figurative and literal ambiguity in context (apart from their polysemy)
will permit a diverse look at the phenomenon of non-compositionality that
characterizes idiomatic expressions. Thus, the dataset will serve as a training
and test bed for algorithms that detect, interpret, and generate a broad class
of idiomatic expressions. This effort will lead to new natural language
processing algorithms for accurate interpretation and generation of idiomatic
expressions towards a more human-like language processing ability in
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.