* 2230363
* CEDAR:  Euler potentials for field-aligned and shell  currents in the ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Evgeny Romashets, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 219,902.00

The Earth’s ionosphere is the part of the upper atmosphere that has a relatively
high concentration of charged particles, largely due to solar radiation. This
region, from about 50 km to 1000 km above the Earth’s surface, has complex
electro-dynamic processes that have important effects in a wide range of areas
from the surface magnetic field to radiation in space. The PI seeks to engage
undergraduate researchers to study the field-aligned currents in the ionosphere,
in which the electric current flows along the Earth’s magnetic field lines. This
work will allow the students to learn how to analyze and interpret ionospheric
data. The PI also aims to recruit minority students into Physics from different
backgrounds via a series of workshops organized by the American Institute of
Physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to use Euler potentials which can be
derived analytically from magnetic field and applied for tracing current
streamlines and charged particles trajectories. This project will use Euler
potentials to reconstruct shell currents from ground-based and space-based
observations, which has not been done before. This project is important for
understanding ionosphere-magnetosphere-thermosphere coupling. An analytical
description of electric current systems in the ionosphere will be given for the
first time. The results will be useful for planning and managing low-altitude
satellites and predicting GPS signal disruptions. The main expected outcome of
the project is to find shell currents distribution in the ionosphere, important
for reliable calculations of Joule heating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three objectives: 1) To determine Euler potentials for the magnetic field in
the ionosphere and in its vicinity, 2) To use the Euler potentials for
calculation of charged particle motion, and 3) To find electric current
streamlines using the Euler potentials. Field-aligned currents (FAC) and induced
magnetic field variations with good temporal and spatial resolution can be
obtained from Ionospheric data and empirical models. However, the merging
between FAC and shell currents (SLC) is not determined. The application of the
methods in the ionosphere will make the ionospheric currents modeling more
reliable and closer to reality. This method can define each magnetic field line
and track changes over time. The formation and evolution of field-aligned
currents can be monitored as well. The proposed Euler potentials method can find
the induced magnetic field analytically, which is a much easier and faster
process that the Biot-Savart integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.