* 2230795
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Optimal Adaptive Enrichment Design in Randomized Trial
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Xingyuan Fang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 127,596.00

The increasing costs of clinical trials negatively impact public health by
reducing drug companies' willingness to undertake clinical trials and delaying
new drug development. A typical clinical trial may cost millions of U.S.
dollars, depending on therapeutic areas and scientific goals. In designing
clinical trials, one needs to balance (typically conflicting) aims in
scientific/biological aspects, statistical power, and cost. This decision-making
problem is very complicated in personalized medicine, where multiple
subpopulations need to be simultaneously considered. Existing approaches for
designing adaptive trials either do not involve optimization of objectives or
optimize in very restrictive settings. This project considers adaptive
enrichment design, a flexible trial design framework that allows trial
administrators to adjust patient enrollment rules during the trials. It has been
shown to often provide superior cost effectiveness and better statistical power.
The research aims to design new methods and algorithms to optimize adaptive
enrichment design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimal design problem with two
planning stages and two subpopulations is formulated as a large-scale linear
programming model, which can be solved by off-the-shelf LP solvers. Due to the
exponentially increasing LP size, such LP solvers cannot be directly applied to
the practical situations with more planning stages and subpopulations. This
project will develop specialized algorithms and modelling techniques to fully
exploit problem structures to solve two-stage two-subpopulation models much
faster, and extend them to larger models previously regarded as unsolvable.
Furthermore, user-friendly open-source software will be developed to enable
scientists to construct their own optimal adaptive enrichment
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.