* 2230527
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Cultivation Strategies in Pastoral Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xinyi Liu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 27,127.00

The goal of this dissertation project is to research labor investment in plant
cultivation in mountainous regions which were optimal for mobile pastoralism.
The diachronic nature of archaeology provides an increasingly important lens
into the development, maintenance, and repercussions of human populations’
survival strategies. A better understanding of food security at the community
level is a crucial research avenue, particularly in light of the world’s current
challenges facing global warming, increasingly frequent weather events, and
food/water insecurity. Communities in the study region maintained networks of
interactions. This region enabled a globalization event connecting peoples and
spreading ideas, technologies, and domesticated animals and plants. There has
been considerable momentum in recent years to uncover the management of animals
within these prehistoric, multi-resource, agropastoral communities. However, the
role of plant cultivation within these systems is less studied. This project
will examine how pastoralists of varying mobility negotiated their labor and
time to grow crops that facilitated the spread of these plant domesticates.
Additionally, this project will aid in engendering beneficial partnerships
between United States scholars and multiple other nations and provide learning
opportunities for students to acquire archaeobotanical and archaeological
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the historically less-
studied agricultural practices conducted by mobile pastoral groups. During the
earliest introduction of domesticated plants did communities adopt a labor-
intensive cultivation strategy or did they modify prexisting strategies (the
source of the domesticated plants) to fit a more extensive agropastoral
lifestyle characteristic of mountainous mobile pastoralism? To answer this
question, the project utilizes a systematic analysis of weed taxa from nine
sites coupled with stable carbon and nitrogen isotope measurements of charred
cereal grains (wheat and barley). Weed taxa and crop stable isotopes are
complimentary lines of evidence to understand labor investment in plant
cultivation by acting as proxies for watering, manuring, and weeding. The
research will address not only locally specific questions regarding subsistence
choice, but also global themes about the variability of agropastoral choices
within challenging environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.