* 2230428
* Conference: Improving the Greenland Data Ecosystem for Scientific Insight
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Twila Moon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,911.00

Climate change is causing rapid warming in Greenland and on the Greenland Ice
Sheet. Changes in Greenland have impacts around the globe, from adding
freshwater to ocean ecosystems in the North Atlantic to raising sea levels in
Florida and other faraway places. Scientists are studying Greenland changes and
producing important and useful data and science tools. As the amount of data
increases and the number of tools available to help with science expands, it is
critical that people producing, using, and applying Greenland-focused data are
coordinating with each other. This workshop will bring together people who
create and use Greenland data so that they can discuss data needs and outline
ways that tools can be made more useful. They will also identify gaps in
knowledge, data, and tools that need to be addressed. In this way, the workshop
will help the Earth sciences community to work together to ensure that data is
usable and used, and to create new knowledge more effectively. Follow-through on
workshop recommendations will also help Earth scientists work effectively with
other researchers and non-scientists, like decision makers or local townspeople.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greenland-focused research is crucial for addressing
issues including ocean ecosystem transformation, rising global sea levels, and
Earth system links that may increase or decrease how quickly climate impacts
appear. The National Science Foundation and others have supported key data,
tools, and programs related to Greenland research. As these projects mature,
coordination and community discussion are required to ensure that projects are
working together, gaps in data, tools, and workflows are identified, and there
is a shared vision to support efficient and effective research across a
broadening group of participants. This 2-day (virtual and in-person) interactive
workshop will gather data and tool creators and users to discuss needs, identify
open opportunities, and chart the developments in Greenland data and tools to
support the next decade of science in service to society. The workshop will
enhance coordination in the Greenland Earth science community, develop community
recommendations for more effective and efficient data-to-insight and insight-to-
application workflows, and ensure the Earth science community is well prepared
for collaboration with other researchers and nonscientists. These improvements
will have widespread positive societal benefits, connected closely with urgent
topics such as sea level rise and ecosystem change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.