* 2230892
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Unraveling the Nature and Onset of Instabilities in Suspension Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Parisa Mirbod, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,069.00

Flows containing particles (suspension flows) are found in countless settings in
nature and in technology; examples range from silt-laden water streaming in a
river to blood coursing through a cell-counting analyzer. Pure Newtonian fluids
are well-known to undergo instabilities that lead to significant changes in the
flow behavior. Suspension flows also experience instabilities; however, the
mechanisms that drive suspension flow instabilities are not yet understood. In
this project, proven techniques for characterizing instabilities in pure
Newtonian fluids will be applied to suspension flows instabilities. This
approach should reveal how such instabilities can be probed and manipulated in
service of developing better ways to predict how the particles move and are
distributed in practical applications. The proposed project is also expected to
have significant educational impacts, including providing training on complex
flow problem-solving for the next generation of scientists and engineers,
attracting and training new graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups and communicating the main ideas in a non-technical form
to students at all levels of the educational system and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to demonstrate
that the vast fundamental and applied knowledge of instabilities in pure
(Newtonian) flows can be harnessed to achieve breakthrough understanding of
instabilities in suspension flows. Specifically, this project will test the main
Newtonian insight that structuring the flow geometry can unfold the transition
process to reveal well-separated, non-turbulent transitions arising from
instabilities that can be manipulated by imposing suitably designed
perturbations. The project employs new laboratory experiments and existing
theory to explore suspension flows in structured channels. First, the laminar
steady state will be characterized as a function of Reynolds number for a
specified particle size and selected average particle volume fractions. The
research then examines both pure Newtonian fluid and suspension flows
instabilities. The outcomes of this project should lay the foundations for
future studies to investigate new and heretofore uncharted fundamental fluid
physics that arises when inertial particles are added to the flow. The results
of our work should set the stage for the discovery of new methods to manipulate
flow and particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.