* 2230587
* Dissecting the Trigger of the Chromatin Modification Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* R Keith Slotkin, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2026
* USD 999,999.00

The living world functions through feed-forward and feed-back cycles,
establishing self-perpetuating patterns that can persist over vast timescales. A
major question that remains unanswered is how self-perpetuating biological
cycles are first initiated. This project has the advantage of being able to
trigger one such cycle reproducibly, generating a rare opportunity to understand
how a biological cycle is originally initiated. This project uses cutting-edge
techniques to understand the mechanism of the first trigger responsible for
initiating a feed-forward cycle that regulates DNA newly introduced into plant
cells. By placing new DNA into cells, this project will experimentally dissect
the mechanism of the earliest stages initiating regulation. The results of this
project will inform academics and industry on how to improve plants while
avoiding the initiation of troublesome cycles of unwanted regulation. This
project will also directly train the next generation of scientists, providing
them with thorough mentoring to prepare them for careers in biology, data
analysis and technology. In addition, this project will perform outreach to a
new audience at the Jackie Joyner Kersee Center in East St. Louis. This program
will benefit groups that have traditionally not seen themselves as eligible for
a career in science due to lack of representative models in science, and is
perfectly suited for the after school programs run by the Jackie Joyner Kersee
Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of chromatin modifications is an
essential first step that leads to the long-term heritable epigenetic silencing
of transposable elements and some transgenes. Once initiated, chromatin
modifications such as cytosine DNA methylation, are replicated and, in plants,
can be propagated at specific loci across generations for centuries. However,
the mechanisms dictating how DNA methylation is first targeted to a locus is
poorly understood. The preliminary data in support of this project involved
building the tools to study the first round of new (de novo) chromatin
modification, and these data demonstrate that the production of scaffolding,
non-coding RNAs at a locus is the key, milestone event required for de novo DNA
methylation. This kind of event can be best studied in plants due to the
recruitment of a specific RNA Polymerase (Pol V) to generate these scaffold
RNAs. The overarching goals of this project are to understand how scaffold RNA
target regions are selected and how Pol V is first recruited during de novo DNA
methylation. This work utilizes cutting-edge techniques to dissect, at the
molecular level, an unknown mechanism responsible for establishing de novo DNA
methylation and triggering the long-term biological cycle of heritable,
epigenetic silencing of transposable elements and
transgenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division and by the
Plant Genome Research Program in the Integrative Organismal Systems
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.