* 2230861
* NSFDEB-NERC: Understanding drought and post-drought legacy effects in tropical forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sassan Saatchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 480,484.00

This project addresses a significant gap in understanding of how tropical
forests respond to drought, from the level of individual trees to that of the
forest ecosystem. The research will leverage a large-scale drought experiment in
a tropical Amazon forest in Brazil with the use of a new radar sensor. The
results will provide advances in understanding the effects of drought,
particularly at tree and forest scales. The tower-based radar sensor detects
changes in vegetation water content at much higher resolution than is possible
using satellite radar sensors. Researchers will integrate this forest-scale
radar signal with detailed plant physiology data. The team will also compare the
drought experiment with post-drought measurements to study the effects of long-
term drought on forest recovery. The research is funded in partnership with the
UK's Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) as an international
collaboration between U.S. and U.K. laboratories. This study will also support
the training of a postdoctoral researcher and two "Science and and Impact"
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of large-scale forest ecosystem
experimentation and multi-scale measurements in the Amazonian rain forest has
several objectives. The project will create new capacity to monitor the effects
of drought on tropical forests by using high-resolution tower-based radar water-
content signal. The tower-based sensor data will be compared and calibrated with
plant tissue water potential measurements and moisture release from leaf
(/canopy) or woody (/stem) tissue. The plant and radar drought-stress response
data will be further used to infer altered overall function during drought at
tree and forest scales, using measurements of water use (transpiration) and
hydraulic conductance in trees and soil. The project will also perform a test of
whether, after the experimental drought has been removed, the radar-plant water
potential relationship can inform scientific understanding of the rate of
recovery in plant status metrics (water content and water potential), and in
overall tree and forest functional capacity (transpiration, hydraulic
conductance). This will determine how quickly the forest is able to recover from
the drought, whether there are post-drought legacy effects, and whether the
forest remains at risk of functional failure under future drought. Finally, the
results will be compared and integrated with satellite-based signals from both
existing and emerging satellite-radar data-streams. The relationships will be
used to develop the potential to dynamically map and predict drought risk in
tropical forests, and to improve the detection of biomass change from space. In
addition to training a postdoctoral researcher in an international collaborative
project, the investigators will engage stakeholders (land surface modellers; and
land use/climate mitigation planners) through two Science &amp; Impact workshops
at the start and end of the project to identify improvements in monitoring and
model-based prediction of land-atmosphere interactions, and early warning of
drought risk to forests for use in land-use planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.