* 2230723
* PIRE: Co-Creating Research and Education Capacities to Understand, Visualize and Mitigate Climate-Change Impact Cascades and Inequities in Central Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Terrasa Ulm, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,499,365.00

The news brings more and more reports of the growing impacts of climate change
around the world: shrinking water reservoirs, severe drought, flooding, forest
fires and dangerous heat waves, to name a few. These impacts are beyond human
experience, catching us off-guard and therefore are causing catastrophic losses
to lives, livelihoods, and properties. To make matters worse, one impact often
has a domino effect or "impact cascade". It is becoming clear that, while
climate change will impact us all, some of us are more at risk than others.
Those living of the ‘edges’ of society, under social and economic stress, will
suffer the most and are the least prepared. This project mobilizes diverse
partners and social groups in the U.S. and Mexico to understand, visualize, and
address the myriad impacts of climate change on water resources, ecosystems,
food and agriculture, health, and livelihoods - in and around Mexico City. It
also reveals how these impacts vary across populations and landscapes. The
researchers integrate diverse data - including rainfall, temperature,
population, land use/land cover - and tools to anticipate future impacts. The
overarching goal is to create new ways to simulate and virtually inhabit future
climate change/impact scenarios to be used by communities and policy makers to
implement mitigation measures. This project, thus, re-imagines the way research,
policy, community action, and education can join forces to address climate
change and social justice. Its outcomes will be applicable not only in the U.S.
and Mexico, but globally. The project also supports the training of graduate
students at Clark University, notably from underrepresented groups in science,
and outreach to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do diverse social groups
co-create a shared understanding of complex climate-change impact cascades to
water, ecosystems, food, health, livelihoods? How do we map and model impact
inequities? How do we transform governance and social learning to chart
sustainable, socially just, climate-resilient pathways? Here, the team works in
a setting powerfully emblematic of this global climate and sustainability
challenge: Mexico-Lerma-Cutzamala Hydrological Region, that includes Mexico
City. To respond, for the first time, their approach combines four components in
synergy: C1) Co-creation with partners (including pilot communities) of an open-
source GIS/Remote Sensing-based Regional Climate-Change Atlas to map and
spatially analyze social, climate and environmental conditions; C2) Co-creation
of a System Dynamics Model informed by GIS, representing interactions/impacts
among climate change, water, population, urbanization, land-use/land cover
change, ecosystems, food, health, and livelihoods – and revealing of impact
inequities and injustice; C3) Piloting of eXtended Reality (XR) decision
analysis, simulating climate-change/development scenarios diverse stakeholders
can inhabit virtually and interact with in groups, informed by C1 and C2; C4)
Integration of research and education such that they reinforce each other,
including the co-creation of courses and field research that U.S. students and
their peers in Mexico can experience together as learning
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.