* 2230397
* Travel Grant: 2022 IEEE CSS Workshop on Control for Societal-Scale Challenges
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2023
* USD 40,400.00

This award will support a conference for the development of a roadmap for the
control community that identifies societal-scale challenges and research paths
for addressing them. The roadmap will seek to identify key societal drivers,
emerging technological trends, and outline methodologies that squarely address
the fundamental challenges by embracing these drivers and leveraging advances in
enabling technologies. By doing so, the conference will underscore scientific
challenges that the community should pursue, and investigate workforce education
and training curricula, with the grand goal of a solid impact by our community
on the societal-scale challenges. The funding will be used for travel support
for attendees from the United States to participate in the conference and
contribute to these deliberations. The 2022 IEEE CSS Workshop on Control for
Societal-Scale Challenges (CSS-CSC) is planned to be a decennial event organized
by the global control community. The 2022 IEEE CSS Workshop on Control for
Societal-Scale Challenges will be an in-person event and will be held in
Stockholm, Sweden, June 17-18, 2022. This is intended to be the first of a
decennial series of such events, and will be cosponsored by the IEEE Control
Systems Society. The main goal of this workshop is to produce a scientific
roadmap for the future of our discipline, Control for Societal-Scale Challenges:
Roadmap 2030. This roadmap will include themes such as climate change, sharing
economy, public health, neuro-engineering, robotics and automation, cyber-
physical human systems, smart societies, 6G networks, and Artificial
Intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSS-CSC workshop is being organized by
an international committee of scientific excellence, leaders in the control
community. Many of the attendees are of equally well-known stature, if not even
more so, and have made seminal contributions to the community over the last four
decades. This workshop will contribute to the fundamental goal of identifying,
underscoring, and advancing potential contributions from the control community
for addressing societal-scale challenges that are emerging in the 21st century.
This conference is expected to pave the way for a series of such events, with a
similar large scope, to occur once every decade. The entire focus of this
workshop is in achieving a broader impact on all walks of society including
energy, transportation, healthcare, robotics, manufacturing, and overall quality
of life. The technologies, the challenges, the opportunities, the methodologies,
the tools, the validation testbeds, education, training and retraining of
workforce, are the key elements that will be explored in the conference. All in
all, every aspect of the proposed conference is intended to achieve a broader
impact on the scientific community, and in fact the entire society, as we
advance into the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.