* 2230483
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision Docking for Automated Charging of Unmanned Platforms and Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Fred Daneshgaran, INNOTECH SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,048.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable automated and autonomous charging
of a wide array of electric vehicles (e.g., electrified robots, cars and trucks,
and drones) in adverse weather conditions. Examples include autonomous systems
used in farming and logistics, electric vehicles in ports, and electric trucks.
Despite tremendous progress and the proliferation of electric vehicles, an
adequate, cost-effective, autonomous, and available charging infrastructure is
currently lacking. This gap between need and availability is far worse in high
power applications such as trucking. The proposed technology increases the
deployment of autonomous mobile robots and drones in industries like agriculture
and logistics which are currently suffering from labor issues. The technology
may increase the deployment rate of commercial electric vehicle fleets that can
contribute to reducing greenhouse gasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to solve a key problem in the automation of the charging
process for electric vehicles, namely precision localization and docking in
adverse weather conditions. The conventional methods of localization for docking
(e.g., infrared or vision-based) have limitations such as insufficient precision
and limited performance in less-than-optimal environmental conditions. This team
presents a high precision automated docking solution in the presence of clutter
and removes objects that are potentially harming the Line of Sight (LOS). The
goals of the proposed research and development are: 1) establishing that time
averaged, multi-path signal characteristics in multiple spectral bands can
identify locations within a known map or during a close proximity approach of
the electric vehicle to the charger; 2) developing models suitable for Monte-
Carlo modeling and simulation of an indoor environment or region in proximity of
a charger benchmarked by some measurements and using such simulations for
verification success; and 3) developing a high precision transponder based on
wideband signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.