* 2230019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the impacts of Pleistocene megaherbivores on vegetation stability and resilience in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jacquelyn Gill, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 56,118.00

Large herbivores play an important role in shaping modern-day Arctic ecosystems
by promoting plant growth, diversity, and nutrient cycling. They may also buffer
the effects of climate change on tundra ecosystems by reducing permafrost thaw
and the expansion of shrubs. Until ~12,000 years ago, the Arctic was home to a
diverse array of herbivores (woolly mammoths, bison, wild horses, caribou, and
muskoxen) coexisting in an environment called “mammoth steppe.” It is thought
that this environment was maintained by large herbivores, similar to modern
African savannas. As a result, some have suggested that “rewilding” large
herbivores could be a viable management strategy for the Arctic. However, we
know little about how much these ecosystem properties rely on herbivore
diversity because few high-latitude systems support multiple species in high
numbers today. The fossil record provides a natural archive of how large
herbivores and climate change influenced Arctic plant communities through time.
This project builds on dissertation-level research examining a paleoecological
record from Squirrel Lake, Alaska to understand the effect of prehistoric
herbivore diversity on the long-term stability of Arctic ecosystems and identify
the species that made up the ice age herbivore community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the role of large herbivore
diversity on Arctic ecosystem properties by creating a multi-proxy sediment
record of the plant and animal diversity that surrounded Squirrel Lake (Kotzebue
Sound, Alaska) in a period spanning from today to ~55,000 years before present.
Sedimentary ancient DNA and density of radiocarbon dated animal remains will be
used to investigate patterns of megaherbivore and plant diversity surrounding
the lake through time. Proxies for vegetation, megaherbivore presence, and
paleoclimates will inform the reconstruction of a chronology of megafaunal
presence and environmental change. This dataset will be used to measure the
effect of herbivore diversity on different components of ecosystem stability
(resistance, resilience, recovery, and latitude), providing a quantitative
framework to understand the impacts of these animals. This research will inform
the current debate about herbivore reintroductions as a management tool for
Arctic ecosystems and contribute data on the processes that shaped the mammoth
steppe. The results of this study will be shared with local communities in the
Kotzebue Sound area in a public, interactive exhibit, and used to build a
virtual reality experience aimed at middle schoolers in Alaska and
Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.