* 2230205
* SBIR Phase I:  Distributed Ledger Technology Based Collaborative Project Management Platform
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Ananth Natarajan, PROBLOCH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2023
* USD 251,462.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the performance and accountability
of capital projects which have significant economic and social impact. Large
capital projects, such as infrastructure and energy, have long-term benefits to
economies, affect local communities, and have geopolitical implications.
Projects in important sectors such as defense, science, and healthcare often
suffer massive cost and time overruns, making efficient and verifiable project
execution highly beneficial. These projects are very complex and challenging to
manage; they require multiple internal stakeholders to work together and affect
many external communities. The proposed solution is a platform that enables
self-regulating project networks and integrates schedules, contracts, and
information flow across companies. This platform will be based on distributed
ledger technology and smart contracts, making them transparent, efficient, and
secure. The proposed solution will create a new, reliable, measurable paradigm
for capital projects and allow multiple companies to collaboratively plan and
collectively build them. It will also aid regulatory oversight, and projects
will include all stakeholders. The platform will be revolutionary for complex
projects planning and building, significantly improving cost and schedule
performance, and bringing greater accountability to the multi-trillion dollar
capital project market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop a platform using blockchain technology that improves the performance
and accountability of capital projects. The technology will enable significantly
improved transparency, while making projects more cost and schedule efficient.
The platform will result in more responsive and responsible symbiotic project
ecosystems and advance the application of directed, acyclic, graph based
distributed ledger technology to multi-party enterprise workflows. The
collaborative governance platform will enable self-regulating project networks
of authenticated stakeholders, utilizing a consensus-based single-source-of-
truth, and automate contract execution and value exchange. The platform will
synchronize schedules, contracts, and payments into one system with verifiable
consensus across all participants. The technology will incentivize project
performance by mitigating the effects of complexity and enable artificial
intelligence and machine learning applications for projects by providing
verifiable data. The focus will be on developing the architecture and business
model of the platform. The team will conduct market research to identify the
primary commercial consumers and potential revenue streams. The project will
build a proof-of-concept to demonstrate the feasibility of the platform. The
anticipated results include a functional prototype of the platform and a
validated business model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.