* 2230391
* RUI: PurSUiT: Biodiversity discovery of shell-building amoebae (Arcellinida: Amoebozoa) in low pH bogs and fens
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Taylor Sehein, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 04/30/2026
* USD 477,890.00

Testate amoebae in the order Arcellinida (Amoebozoa) are an ancient lineage of
microbes whose tests (i.e. shells) have been preserved in the fossil record
dating back to 800 million years ago. Arcellinida tests were first observed by
light microscopy in the 1880’s and over 1,000 species were classified by
descriptors including the size, shape, and composition of the tests. Because of
their preservability, Arcellinida species have been used as bioindicators for
changing environmental conditions, including responses to warming temperatures
and the presence of pollutants. However, genomic variation within these
morphospecies suggests that cryptic diversity exists. Because information on
species is critical to understanding small-scale distribution patterns and
detecting changes in response to environmental disturbances, unraveling species
boundaries in this group is essential. Preliminary work, including broad
community sampling and metabarcode analyses of amoebae in low-pH bogs and fens
across New England, has uncovered novel clades for which there are no references
in public databases. Moreover, patterns of variation in Arcellinida genomes
suggest gene flow between geographically distant populations; however, the
mechanisms of genetic exchange between cells are unknown. The goals of this
project are to develop a toolkit for diversity discovery that links cell
morphology to genomic data, and then deploy this toolkit across sites in the
Northeastern United States. By establishing a baseline for Arcellinida diversity
across the Northeast, this research will provide a foundation for monitoring key
taxa in habitats that are predicted to change with fluctuating climatic
conditions. It will also provide research and educational opportunities in
state-of-the-art methods for undergraduates and a postdoctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The definition of “species” based on the ability
of populations to exchange genes through reproduction emerged from studies of
plants and animals. Microbiologists, however, are re-examining this approach to
species delineation given that: 1) many microbial lineages are uncultivable; 2)
cryptic species are frequently encountered; and 3) the presence of a microbiome
within each individual prevents deployment of conventional genomic tools (e.g.
RADseq). Hence, a multifaceted approach that integrates traditional
morphological characterization and targeted molecular techniques (i.e.
Arcellinida-specific metabarcoding and single-cell transcriptomics combined with
a taxon-rich phylogenomic pipeline) will be used to uncover cryptic lineages
within the Arcellinida and define new species across geographically and
ecologically distinct bogs and fens in the Northeastern United States.
Preliminary analyses reveal the presence of numerous cryptic species underlying
morphotypes in New England, indicating that many additional species are yet to
be discovered at these and other locations. Approaches developed here will not
only uncover significant biodiversity within the Arcellinida but will also
provide a framework for future studies of uncultivable microeukaryotic
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.