* 2230357
* I-Corps: An Intuitive Design Platform for Sustainable Multifamily Residential Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Taro Narahara, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of design tools for multifamily residential housing that can
facilitate the connection between early stages of visual thinking activity and
more mature stages of development and refinement. Such tools have the potential
to improve the quality of future housing complexes. Due to the unprecedented
increase in demand, efficiency and speed appear to be prioritized in the
professional practice of designing commonplace housing complexes. During urban
multifamily residential design, architects and developers are often under
pressure to achieve financial and performance objectives such as base building
efficiency, design compliance, and energy use intensity in short schematic
design periods. While architects must meet new sustainability standards, they
are also expected to demonstrate creative solutions for humanizing mass housing
for the well-being of residents. Developers are also facing challenges in
fulfilling complex requirements for local communities in regard to the impacts
of new projects, including public access and shading effects on neighborhoods.
While there are some emerging tools to auto-generate building schemes with
environmental and financial performance measures to aid professionals'
productivity, the experience with these tools is not as intuitive as the natural
experience of sketching on paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a collaborative design platform for the schematic
design of a multifamily residential project. Users in the architecture,
engineering, and construction industries have a long history of conceptualizing
design graphically, utilizing standard architectural representation formats such
as plans, sections, and physical models, that are mostly static in nature. This
system will allow designers to quickly create a series of parametric designs and
dynamic digital models that can be changed on the fly with minimal input. The
and intuitive interfaces. Using this method, a diverse range of users, from
novice designers to practitioners not only in architecture but also in real-
estate development, may participate in the design process, allowing them to more
effectively incorporate qualitative contributions from early phases of design
into more developed phases. This proposed tool provides functions to produce
schematic designs using simple line-based sketches provided by users and
assessments for preliminary financial and environmental criteria that are
critical factors in today's professional practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.