* 2230806
* Developing and testing an eco-evolutionary theory for range limits
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Christopher Weiss-Lehman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 01/31/2026
* USD 884,862.00

The project will test how ecological and evolutionary processes determine
species' range boundaries. A species' geographic distribution refers to the
places where populations of that species can be found. The edge of a species'
distribution is its geographic range boundary - the species can be found within
this boundary, but not outside of it. Although all species have boundaries, the
underlying mechanisms determining where and how they form remain poorly
understood for two key reasons. First, some of the hypothesized mechanisms are
difficult to manipulate in natural settings. Second, researchers have
historically approached this problem from either an ecological or evolutionary
perspective which can be difficult to merge. Here, the researchers will use a
combination of computation models and laboratory experiments on flour beetles
growing in artificial landscapes to test multiple hypotheses behind the factors
that determine species' geographic distributions. A better understanding of the
factors that determine range limits will be crucial for improved management of
invasive and endangered species and for predicting how species will change their
ranges in response to climate change. In addition to potential insights into
pressing conservation concerns, the researchers will actively engage the public
through interactive activities at local farmers’ markets to teach the public,
particularly children, about the importance of ecology and evolution in natural
populations and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use
microcosms of the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum, a common agricultural
pest species, to manipulate the rate of change in environmental conditions, the
level of dispersal, and the presence of an ecological competitor. These factors
will be systematically varied to test each of their direct and interacting
effects on the formation and location of range limits. Further, the researchers
will use single patch controls to test for adaptation to different environmental
conditions in the absence of dispersal from populations in other environmental
conditions. DNA of beetles from the microcosm landscapes and the single patch
controls will be sequenced to identify the genomic basis of adaptation and
quantify the amount of genetic drift at the range edges. These experimental
results will be combined with genetically explicit simulation models to test
additional parameter values not tested in the mesocosm experiments. Overall, the
project will provide critical data testing how environmental gradients and
interspecific interactions interact with dispersal, adaptation, and genetic
drift to affect range limits. This information may also be useful in controlling
this agricultural pest species. The project will provide training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Population and Community Ecology, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Evolutionary
Processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.