* 2230629
* CAS- Climate: Assessing the potential of artificial upwelling to mitigate coral bleaching during heat waves
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Yvonne Sawall, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 663,001.00

Global warming is considered to be the most severe threat to coral reefs by
causing heat stress events that lead to coral mass bleaching and reef
degradation. This situation motivates the development of interventions that
mitigate coral bleaching, such as artificial upwelling (AU). AU uplifts cool
deep water to the surface. The overarching objective of this project is to
provide improved understanding of how AU could be used for surface water cooling
by identifying AU scenarios (depth, intensity) that mitigate coral bleaching
effectively, while imposing minimal risk of unwanted side effects. The project
will substantially improve understanding of how AU could be used to mitigate
coral bleaching during thermal stress, by providing knowledge about the effects
of different AU scenarios (different depths and lengths of AU pulses) on coral
performance and on reef community structures. Investigating both short- and
longer- term effects on coral performance and also assessing effects on
community structures go beyond most manipulation studies that investigate
organism-specific short-term responses. The resulting data set will be relevant
not only for engineers, but also will provide critical knowledge for the coral
reef ecology community about the coral’s ability to persist in a warming
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that favorable results can be
achieved by creating daily short-term thermal relief via pulsed AU (e.g.,
&lt;5h/day) with waters from the mid- to lower photic zone (e.g., ~30-100 m).
The immediate and lasting effects of AU on coral physiology during heat stress
will be tested by (1) assessing the short-term physiological effects of pulsed
AU treatments on heat-stressed corals, (2) assessing the long-term physiological
effects of heat stress and pulsed AU experiments on coral recovery and thermal
tolerance, and (3) testing the combined effects of pulsed AU experiments,
variable temperature, and covarying environmental parameters on corals and coral
reef communities. The project location at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean
Sciences, Inc. (BIOS) is ideal due to its proximity to coral reefs and available
research facilities that provide a highly suitable framework for near-natural
manipulation studies, including the Bermuda Marine Mesocosm Facility supported
by an NSF Facility grant. Students will be involved via existing BIOS-hosted
intern programs, including an NSF-funded REU program. Undergraduate and graduate
students will learn about the project in BIOS-run university courses. Public
outreach will be attained in particular through the development of a new
solitaire-like digital game called “EcoChains: Coral Futures”, where players
will respond strategically to ocean warming, ocean acidification, sedimentation,
outbreaks of crown-of-thorns starfish, and more in coral reefs. Furthermore,
numerous visiting school and university groups will have the opportunity to
observe the experimental setup and learn about the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the CBET/ENG
Environmental Sustainability program and the Biological Oceanography Program in
the Division of Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.