* 2230621
* I-Corps:  Bandage-integrated platform for feedback-mediated wound therapy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Vladimir Pozdin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of an advanced
wound care technology that may provide personalized wound care therapy, guided
by molecular diagnostics, to improve patient outcomes at reduced cost. Wound
care management is a major healthcare challenge with over 6 million sufferers in
the US alone, leading to huge economic and health costs. Medicare wound cost
projections ranged from $28.1 to $96.8 billion, with surgical and diabetic
wounds being the most expensive. The increasing wound prevalence has resulted in
economic burden, reduced mobility, and significantly reduced quality of life for
the patient. By offering real-time monitoring and therapy, the proposed platform
may reduce the occurrence of complications, thus decreasing the risk of chronic
wound development. In addition, timely therapeutic intervention using the
proposed platform may allow for efficient wound management, decreasing the risk
of traumatic amputations and mortality. Commercialization of a personalized
wound therapy platform also may improve chronic care, which traditionally has
low adherence. Further, the collected medical data may enable predictive wound
analytics to further improve patient outcomes. These predictions may enable
wound care providers to offer more accurate assessments and better treatment
regimens, resulting in improved clinical efficacy and reduced societal
burdens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a conformable platform that provides feedback-mediated wound therapy for
personalized wound care. One of the biggest challenges in the development and
validation of a new medical technology is poor patient adherence, which results
in compromised efficacy validation in clinical trials. Technological
advancements in the field of material science have enabled the development of
wearable platforms for wound care. However, these platforms are not truly
conformable, thus limiting their practical deployment. The proposed technology
uses a novel fabrication methodology to realize a conformable platform for
imperceptible devices. The methodology results in a highly flexible platform
that enables controlled deformation to accommodate rigid circuit components,
while maintaining flexibility for user comfort. The proposed platform combines
spatial wound monitoring and therapy with a feedback mechanism to improve
therapeutic efficiencies. The platform measures spatial changes in multiple
wound biomarkers (uric acid, lactate, pH, and temperature) to obtain complete
information on wound health. The information is subsequently used to treat the
wound spatially with photobiomodulation. The conformability of the platform
allows for direct placement over the wounds for extended periods of time,
providing real-time monitoring and therapy without causing patient
discomfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.