* 2230479
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Backyard Buoys: Equipping Underserved Communities with Ocean Intelligence Platforms
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jan Newton, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aurali Dade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,983,024.00

This project, titled Backyard Buoys, empowers Indigenous and other coastal
communities to collect and use ocean data to support their blue economy:
maritime activities, food security, and coastal hazard protection. Innovations
for this project include a sustainable process for community-led stewardship of
affordable ocean buoys and a web-based application that renders data easy to
understand and bridges to Indigenous knowledge. An additional benefit of getting
wave buoys in the water at diverse and under-measured sites is the generation of
data from highly-localized coastal areas available for large scale scientific
research to improve climatology and predictions, especially important in light
of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Backyard Buoys empowers Indigenous and
other coastal communities to collect and use ocean data to support their blue
economy: maritime activities, food security, and coastal hazard protection. We
bring together regional ocean observing networks of the U.S. Integrated Ocean
Observing System (IOOS), underserved Indigenous communities, and a sensor
company to work collectively to democratize local wave measurements and provide
a solution to the existing hurdle of observing technologies that are too
expensive to purchase and to sustain. Through co-design of an implementation and
stewardship plan, as well as low-fidelity data servicing apps formulated in
Phase I of the NSF Convergence Accelerator, this project seeks to to
revolutionize status quo by using lower-cost tools and deepening the human and
data connections that collectively will allow for an effective system that has a
focus on the hyper-local scale – sorely lacking in the design of existing ocean
observing systems – while assuring it is within a globally-connected network.
This is critical for effective advanced planning to ensure a safe blue economy
for the communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.