* 2230932
* 2022 NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees Conference Sustainable Nanotechnology Focus - Visionary Breakthroughs facilitated by Nano
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Daniel Herr, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 82,580.00

Held annually since 2001, the National Science Foundation’s Nanoscale Science
and Engineering (NSF-NSE) Grantees Conference is a two-day annual event that
brings together nanoscale educators, researchers, and experimentalists from
academia, government, and industry to highlight information on the research and
education activities funded by NSE grants. The virtual 2022 conference explores
the timely topic of sustainable nanotechnology. Specifically, it will raise
awareness of this emerging global issue and consider visionary directions and
breakthrough options for addressing this challenge. The conference will foster
interactions among academic, government, and industry leaders across a diverse
array of nanotechnology fields. Final versions of the conference materials,
e.g., videotaped keynote, panel, and poster presentations, panel discussions,
abstracts, and bios, will serve as conference proceedings. The global audience
may access this material, following the event, at
http://www.nseresearch.org/2022/, along with archival information from previous
events. The live interactive panel discussions on grand challenges in and
potential convergent solutions for sustainable nanotechnology will foster
creative interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration. Additionally, the live
poster sessions provide opportunities for real-time one-on-one interactions
between presenters and participants. Finally, this event will identify and
explore emerging sustainable nanotechnology trends; societal, ethical, and
economic implications; and accessible workforce training considerations. These
collective perspectives will help to enable academic researchers, industry,
government, and communities prepare for and proactively capitalize on targeted
breakthrough solutions and systemic high-impact opportunities. The conference
organizers will seek to recruit a diverse set of speakers, especially those from
groups traditionally under-represented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This conference’s primary goals are to promote dissemination of
innovative research progress in sustainable nanotechnology, to facilitate
research partnerships, and to identify future research directions. The first day
of the conference will emphasize Science and Engineering Foundations for
Sustainable Nanotechnology and the second day will focus on Nanotechnology for
the Environment, Society, and Workforce Development. Keynote speakers, panel
discussions, and poster sessions serve to promote inter-university and academic,
industry, government, and national-laboratory interactions. These interactions
represent a vital step toward the advancement of the goals of the National
Science Foundation, US National Nanotechnology Initiative, and the 21st Century
Nanotechnology Research and Development Act. To achieve these goals, the 2022
Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees conference will feature keynote and
panel presentations, panel discussions, and posters that highlight visionary and
strategic breakthrough opportunities sustainable nanotechnology. Specific
session topics include Tools and assessment metrics for a sustainable
nanotechnology landscape; Guiding principles for sustainable quantum biology;
Breakthrough syntheses and processes for eco nanomanufacturing; Nanotechnology
for clean and sustainable energy conversion; Nanotechnology for clean and
sustainable energy storage; Nanotechnology for enhanced climate sustainability;
Nanotechnology for sustainable nanomaterials and a clean geoenvironment; Nano
EHS to concurrently monitor and improve the environment and health; Compelling
evidence-based nano-ethical and legal socio-economic (ELS) policy for enhanced
understanding, perception, and behaviors (SEI); and Concurrent Training and
Education in Sustainable High-Performance Nanotechnology. Each keynote address,
panel presentation, panel discussion, and poster session will serve as a
training opportunity for all attendees, as the expert conference presenters will
provide in-depth intra- and interdisciplinary insights across a broad array of
nanotechnology fields. NSF-funded researchers and NSF Program Directors will
moderate live panel discussions. Additionally, the live interactive poster
sessions will foster in-depth conversations with poster team representatives, as
well as additional discussions of the Conference presentations. Questions
addressed in the panels included: What is known about these topics in the last
decade? What are the critical gaps in understanding? What are the opportunities
for the future? This shared information provides a wealth of knowledge that can
catalyze new collaborative and convergent research directions and opportunities.
It also will enable an enhanced body of teaching sustainable nanotechnology
related materials at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels. Following the
event, the global audience may access final versions of the conference materials
at http://www.nseresearch.org/2022/ , along with archival information from
previous events. The organizers will strive to ensure that conference related
publications properly acknowledge NSF support. The conference organizers will
seek to recruit a diverse set of speakers, especially those from groups
traditionally under-represented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.