* 2230023
* RAISE: IHBEM: Behavioral Heterogeneity and Uncertainty in Epidemiological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Peter Frazier, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2027
* USD 656,371.00

In this project, existing epidemiological models are developed further to
address two fundamental challenges: heterogeneity and uncertainty.
Epidemiological models are mathematical and computational tools that can help
guide public-health decisions to mitigate morbidity, mortality, and economic
impacts of communicable diseases. Their effectiveness could be further improved
by addressing two issues. First, people differ from one another in their
perceptions of risk, social network size, number of contacts per day,
willingness to engage with public-health measures, and in their receptivity to
mis- and dis-information. This heterogeneity is a major challenge in accurately
characterizing human behavior that is central to ensuring prediction accuracy in
epidemiological models. Second, uncertainty pervades all epidemiological
modeling. All models rely on input parameters, such as the fraction of
infections that are asymptomatic, that cannot be known with certainty, yet model
predictions can vary dramatically as the unknown parameters vary over plausible
ranges. Ignoring this intrinsic uncertainty in key input parameters can lead to
overly confident predictions of models and, in turn, to poor decisions that do
not consider an appropriate range of potential outcomes. This model development
is carried out working with organizations of public health officials at state
and federal levels to ensure relevance and practicality. This project is funded
jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Social and Economic
Sciences (SES) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a range of statistical and machine-
learning methods are employed on publicly available data sets to fit parametric
and non-parametric models of human behaviors relevant to epidemiological models.
Advanced techniques are developed and used to elicit human behavior from
contact-tracing data, adjusting for the missing data and selection bias that is
inherent in such data. The resulting analyses provide input into optimization
methods that are designed to optimize policy interventions while explicitly
accounting for heterogeneity and uncertainty. Tailored optimization methods
optimize over both short time scales (days), through optimization of graph
models that depict social networks and through eigenvalue optimization problems
on contact-structure models that minimize rates of spread, and over longer time
scales (weeks or months), that take into account behavioral response to
interventions, such as fatigue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.