* 2230530
* Research Security Training: The Importance of Disclosure
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Kausalai Wijekumar, The Texas A&M University System
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shawna Cox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 470,808.00

This project will design and develop a training module about research security,
and evaluate user perceptions of learning. Specifically, this module will focus
on the importance of proper disclosure in the conduct of federally funded
research. This project directly addresses the need to strengthen research
security of U.S. government-supported research and development, per the National
Security Presidential Memorandum â€“ 33 (NSPM-33) and the CHIPS and Science Act of
2022. Dissemination and use of this training will better protect U.S. research
interests from foreign and domestic risks and threats. The training module will
be Internet-based, scalable, flexible, and widely accessible to researchers and
stakeholders in various settings, including researchers with disabilities. This
training module will increase awareness and understanding of the origins and
requirements of the current disclosure process and articulate the importance and
benefit of trust through transparency. It will also address several essential
elements associated with the risk of non-disclosure when awarding participant
organizations and individuals who willfully fail to disclose. The development of
the research security training module series is collaboratively funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the
Department of Energy (DOE), and the Department of Defense
(DOD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research security training module, focused on
the importance of proper disclosure of foreign collaborations, will be designed
and developed in consultation with a Content Expert Group, which includes
experts in research security across government. The module will employ the
Situated Cognition Theory. Learners will be exposed to context-based case
studies, interactive branching scenarios, and simulations of real-life
disclosure scenarios in an academic research security setting. Following the
initial design work and consultation, focus groups will be convened to evaluate
the module's ease of use and measure the efficacy of the learning process. The
evaluations will also allow learners to reflect on their perceptions of the
module's content and online learning environment and delivery. The project team
will assess the module's effectiveness via surveys, interviews, and group
exchanges. The evaluation phase will include a compilation of Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQs) documentation of the learner's feedback during focus group
testing and other course effectiveness testing methods. Following end user
testing, evaluation, and revisions to the design, the module will be made
available for dissemination to research security stakeholders, including
university-based researchers, undergraduate, and graduate students, academic
administrators, research security administrators, and researchers and staff in
government agencies and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.