* 2230356
* Quantifying Plant Mediation of Ecosystem Multifunction in Response to Fire and Warming
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Rachel Mitchell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/28/2026
* USD 249,994.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfire and warm temperatures
affect how ecosystems function, but their impacts can also be mediated by plant
communities. For example, wildfire and warming may speed up decomposition rates
in the soil, but this trend can be slowed if the plant community produces leaves
that are thicker and tougher to decompose. Ecosystems are shaped by disturbances
like fire, and when these disturbances change, some species may be unable to
survive. This project examines how fire severity and experimental warming
interact to shape plant traits, plant communities, and multiple ecosystem
functions such as decomposition and plant productivity. The project studies
ponderosa pine forest understory communities in Arizona. This work is of
critical importance as the climate warms and increasingly severe fires occur
over large area of the western United States. Results from the study provide
valuable information about biodiversity, ecosystem function, and ecosystem
stability in the future. In addition, the project trains a new generation of
scientists in ecosystem science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project implements an
experimental manipulation of temperature that mimics future climate scenarios
across a fire severity gradient that encompasses a range of fire severities. The
project addresses three key hypotheses: 1) Fire severity, climate alteration,
and their interactions will strengthen abiotic filtering relative to untreated
controls; 2) Fire severity, climate alterations, and their interactions will
reduce plant trait diversity relative to untreated controls; and 3) The relative
importance of indirect, plant mediated effects of fire severity and climate
alterations will increase over time, ultimately leading to a reduction in
ecosystem function in burned and warmed plots. Changes in the plant community
and ecosystem function are quantified, and then used to calculate two metrics of
ecosystem function. Finally, structural equation modelling is used to answer our
overarching research question: How does the understory plant community mediate
the effects of fire severity and climate change on ecosystem multifunction over
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.