* 2230119
* RAISE: IHBEM: Understanding and Predicting Behavioral Responses to Epidemic Risks and Control Policies: Implications for Epidemiological Models and Policy Design
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rongsong Liu, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 417,122.00

The global COVID-19 pandemic has revealed how critically the success of public
health measures depends on understanding human behavioral responses to both
infection risks and policy recommendations. Core mathematical epidemiological
models have provided useful insight about pandemic risks, but typically do not
account for the wide variety of people’s responses to the risk from the disease
and the ways these responses shape ongoing transmission. Behavior affects
disease spread: nature affects people, and people affect nature—connecting the
natural and human systems in feedback loops that determine the course of
outbreaks. The multi-disciplinary research team will bridge disciplines,
toolkits, and data to advance knowledge about these feedbacks between human
behaviors and infectious disease outcomes. The PIs will extend mathematical
epidemiological models by including heterogeneity in behavioral responses to
risks and social norms (e.g., mask/vaccines acceptance) involving feedback from
both aggregate public health outcomes and the diverse responses from
individuals. The models will be informed by data from three countries with
unique characteristics representing health risks, public policies, information
sources, and government trust: the United States, Norway, and Sweden. Real-world
data will be supplemented by data collected in controlled settings—through
surveys and behavioral laboratory experiments—to gain a deeper understanding of
the individual factors and social processes that shape people’s responses to
epidemic risks. The project will improve the abilities of epidemiological models
to predict both disease outcomes and the economic impacts of public health
regulations or guidelines, enhancing the capacity of public policy-makers to
design and evaluate epidemic control measures during future
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and estimate
behavioral reaction functions that can be included in systems of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) that comprise most epi-models, with the goal of
better informing policy design during novel epidemics. The PIs will focus on two
overarching research questions: Q1 How do people’s behavioral reactions
influence the evolution of an infectious disease outbreak through feedbacks on
pathogen spread? and Q2 How are people’s behaviors during an outbreak moderated
by the pronounced uncertainties and frequent policy changes that are
characteristic of novel epidemics? To address these questions, the PIs will: (i)
develop a new epidemiological-behavioral system of coupled ODEs, (ii) use
observational, survey, and experimental data and methods to estimate people’s
reactions to epidemic risks and top-down control policies, (iii) integrate our
empirical findings into our new epi-model, and (iv) use their parameterized epi-
model to conduct retrospective and prospective policy simulations and
comparisons. In addition, the PIs will use observational data from three
developed countries that undertook distinct policy approaches to the on-going
COVID-19 pandemic: the United States, Norway, and Sweden. Moreover, the PIS will
design surveys and behavioral laboratory experiments to gain a deeper
understanding of responses to risk in contexts that are similar to novel
epidemics. This multi-method approach will provide opportunities to test
hypotheses about the mechanisms that underlie associations in the observational
data and examine the external validity of the survey and laboratory
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the
Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.