* 2230433
* I-Corps: Postoperative Risk Prediction for Heart Failure Patients
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Dongping Du, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a risk assessment platform embedded with novel machine learning
algorithms to predict mortality and adverse events in heart failure patients
after cardiac treatments and surgeries. The technology seeks to: 1) address
uncertainty and data imbalance issues prevalent in healthcare data, 2) extract
important features and biomarkers relevant to post-operative risks, and 3)
develop new tools for ultrasound image analysis to predict the probability of
adverse events. There is currently no established technology for healthcare
professionals in the cardiac care field to analyze multiple data sources for
risk assessment pre- and post-cardiac treatment. The proposed technology may
help clinicians leverage advanced machine learning tools for treatment outcomes
assessment and clinical decision-making. The technology may also promote the use
of data science approaches and computer models in other clinical applications.
The project seeks to enable accurate risk prediction and enhance confidence in
post-operative treatment, improving the quality of cardiac care, and ultimately
benefitting cardiac patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of a software application to predict post-operative risk for
end-stage heart failure patients after cardiac surgeries such as heart
transplantation or left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation. The
software application has a back-end server with novel machine learning
algorithms trained using electronic health records (EHR) from previous heart
transplant and LVAD recipients. Risk prediction is performed using customized
machine learning algorithms and statistical risk models. Novel clustering
techniques are used to identify groups of patients with similar characteristics,
clinical variables of importance, as well as noise and outliers present in the
data. The software also offers an easy-to-use interface that provides clients
with clinically useful information and a visualization of risk factors linked to
the risk prediction for an individual patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.