* 2230887
* EAGER: Effects of Leaf Diversity on Aquatic Insect Colonizer Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Julia Earl, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 197,022.00

The diversity of animals often increases with the diversity of plants in a
community. One reason for this might be that animals choose habitats with more
diverse plants. These diverse plants may provide a higher variety of nutrients
or other resources to support a more diverse animal community. Diversity can be
measured by the variety of species, variety of the roles that species play, or
the variety of evolutionary histories of those species. This project examines
the importance of these different types of diversity by manipulating the
mixtures of dead tree leaves in artificial ponds and estimating the diversity of
insects choosing those ponds. To examine the diversity of aquatic insects, the
research will also consider the variety of species, species roles (particularly
diet), and evolutionary histories. This research will provide important
information on how the diversity of trees surrounding aquatic habitats affects
aquatic biodiversity, providing guidance on forestry management relating to the
conservation and restoration of aquatic communities. This project will also
involve mentoring undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented
backgrounds to perform scientific research, as well as provide outreach on the
diversity of trees and aquatic insects to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will simultaneously manipulate species,
functional, and phylogenetic diversity of leaf litter in pond mesocosms and
examine effects on species, functional, and phylogenetic diversity of aquatic
insect colonizers. The research will also examine the form of the relationship
to determine if an increase in resource diversity affects colonizer diversity
with a form that is linear, log-linear, or quadratic with an intermediate peak.
This information will be important to guide future work on potential mechanisms
of why aquatic insect diversity is related to particular types of leaf litter
diversity. The experimental design will use a species pool larger than the
highest species richness treatment to avoid confounding species richness and
community composition, and checks will be performed to prevent confounding leaf
litter species, functional, phylogenetic diversity, and average leaf traits.
Researchers will measure continuous functional traits of aquatic insects by
measuring their size and using stable isotopes to estimate trophic position and
trophic niche breadth, which will provide better resolution at the species level
than previously used categorical traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.