* 2230692
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Course Correct: Precision Guidance Against Misinformation
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Srijan Kumar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Pozmantier
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,370,316.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This project,
Course Correctâ€”Precision Guidance Against Misinformation, is a flexible and
dynamic digital dashboard that will help end users such as journalists to (1)
identify trending misinformation networks on social media platforms like
Twitter, Facebook, and TikTok, (2) strategically correct misinformation within
the flow of where it is most prevalent online and (3) test the effectiveness of
corrections in real time. In Phase II, Course Correct will partner with local,
state, national, and international news and fact-checking organizations to test
how well the Course Correct digital dashboard helps journalists detect
misinformation, correct misinformation, share message interventions containing
the verifiable truth into misinformation networks, and verifying the success of
the corrections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to (1) extend our use
of computational means to detect misinformation, using multimodal signal
detection of linguistic and visual features surrounding issues such as vaccine
hesitancy and electoral skepticism, coupled with network analytic methods to
pinpoint key misinformation diffusers and consumers; (2) continue developing
A/B-tested correction strategies against misinformation, such as observational
correction, using ad promotion infrastructure and randomized message delivery to
optimize efficacy for countering misinformation; (3) disseminate and evaluate
the effectiveness of evidence-based corrections using various scalable
intervention techniques available through social media platforms by conducting
small, randomized control trials within affected networks, focusing on
diffusers, not producers of misinformation and whether our intervention system
can reduce the misinformation uptake and sharing within their social media
networks; and (4) scale Course Correct into local, national, and international
newsrooms, guided by dozens of interviews and ongoing collaborations with
journalists, as well as tech developers and software engineers. By the end of
Phase II, Course Correct intends to have further developed the digital dashboard
in ways that could ultimately be adopted by other end users such as public
health organizations, election administration officials, and commercial
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.