* 2230589
* I-Corps:  Reconfigurable, modular, electric vertical take-off and landing unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Thanakorn Khamvilai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a modular unmanned air vehicle (UAV) system capable of being
reconfigured to adapt to the requirements of diverse payload transportation
missions and objectives. Vehicles with these capabilities have the potential to
supplant various purpose-built, mission-specific vehicles for a reduced cost
thanks to less complex operating procedures, reduced vehicle development and
upgrade cycles, and economies of scale. More broadly, the proposed project
extends the development of autonomous solutions currently tackled via human
workers to the reduction of hazard exposure for humans with increased
efficiency. A possible application of modular aerial vehicles is to lift various
types of payloads to perform remote sensing or object manipulation at height,
thus reducing the risk of falling for workers, which is the primary cause of
fatal accidents in construction according to the census of fatal occupational
injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a modular, reconfigurable unmanned air vehicle (UAV). The proposed system
consists of a collection of self-contained compatible rotorcraft modules that
may be assembled in various configurations to fulfill diverse tasks. The
research conducted for the development of this system involves three areas: the
development of aerodynamic and structural models for modular vehicles, the
design of control strategies for an arbitrary number of vehicles and novel
configurations, and the implementation of efficient computer programs for the
determination of optimal vehicle configurations given a task. Different module
shapes have been studied and it was shown that three-dimensional, highly
symmetric shapes inspired by the Platonic solids have the potential to yield
versatile and structurally efficient vehicles. In addition, several methods for
the efficient control of very large configurations have been developed with the
goal of optimizing different criteria such as agility or power consumption. Such
methods may be used in conjunction with the structural properties of modular
vehicles to create computer programs capable of generating configurations with
improved dynamic and structural properties given some task
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.