* 2230900
* RTG: Geometry, Group Actions, and Dynamics at Wisconsin
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Chenxi Wu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,068,495.00

The Research Training Group (RTG) in Geometry, Group Actions, and Dynamics at
Wisconsin will train early career researchers in mathematics at the
undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and faculty levels in a manner designed
specifically for mutual interaction and support between all levels. The training
will prepare participants for further study, independent research, professional
development, and careers in industry as well as the academy. The RTG will
support undergraduate research conducted in collaboration with, and as an
extension of, the Madison Experiment Mathematics Lab at Wisconsin, both in
semester long programs as well as Summer Research Experiences. It will provide
support for graduate student research and professional development, and support
for postdoctoral scholars, as well as running a series of research workshops and
professional development seminars. All of this support will be augmented by the
enhanced mentoring afforded by the RTG and will create professional connections
and mentorship bonds across all levels. The affiliated faculty have extensive
experience in professional development, outreach, and mentorship that promises
to foster and support success from traditionally under-supported
populations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The academic expertise of the faculty
affiliated with the RTG spans a wide array of topics in analysis, geometry,
group actions, and dynamical systems. Research conducted under the RTG will
include topics such as statistical and dynamical properties of flat surfaces,
the geometry of random subgroups of hyperbolic groups, the combinatorics of
curves on surfaces, random groups, analysis on graphs, low-dimensional topology,
and dynamics on moduli spaces. The research will be integrated into the
professional development of all participants, creating interactions and
mentorship between researchers at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.