* 2230789
* I-Corps:  Green Manufacturing of Recyclable High-Performance Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Yan Xia, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of plastic composite materials to supplant metal as the structural
material of choice. This class of materials is increasingly used in aircraft,
automobiles, and wind turbines for their high strength to weight ratio. However,
these materials are limited by slow manufacturing and expensive components, such
as carbon fiber, that cannot be recycled. The proposed technology may accelerate
the manufacturing of composites by up to 10-fold, reducing the carbon emissions
of manufacturing and accelerating production of wind turbine blades and
lightweight, fuel-efficient aircraft and automobiles. The proposed materials are
lighter than exiting composite materials and are recyclable, reducing landfill
waste and allowing manufacturers to reuse expensive components for new parts. In
addition, these materials may replace epoxies as the predominant matrix for
high-performance fiber-reinforced composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a class of resin formulations that
improves the manufacturability and fiber-binding properties of
dicyclopentadiene-based thermosets. Dicyclopentadiene-based materials are highly
resistant to chemicals and ballistic impact but are difficult to manufacture
into composites. The proposed technology employs additives to ring-opening
metathesis polymerization compatible with dicyclopentadiene-based resins that
impart the final material with polar functionality and recyclability. The
resulting materials show good compatibility with polar fiber surfaces and are
easy to manufacture quickly, on demand, and with traditional manufacturing
techniques. In addition, the proposed materials may be chemically degraded at
end-of-life, allowing for recovery of valuable fiber reinforcements, and
reducing the waste in landfills with oversized
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.