* 2230616
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Co-designing for Trust: Reimagining Online Information Literacies with Underserved Communities
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ahmer Arif, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,611,462.00

Misinformation – inaccurate or misleading information – has emerged as a growing
threat to American democracy since it undermines citizen trust in public
information and institutions. It often does so by exploiting personal beliefs,
emotions, and identity, thereby triggering responses that expand social divides
and encourage individuals to actively resist competing claims. Solutions must
not only provide the public with skills for determining the truthfulness of
claims, but must also provide resources for addressing the social and emotional
impacts of misinformation. This requires a fundamental reimagining of our
approach to digital literacy, so that it is better grounded in the everyday
realities of the communities most impacted by misinformation. This is
particularly true for underserved communities, who are disproportionately
targeted by misinformation. The project will address this need by creating local
solutions alongside digital literacy interventionists – the community
organizations, librarians, teachers, and others already focused on providing
formal and informal education to address misinformation within their
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will build community-oriented
infrastructure that enables underserved communities to design, collaborate on,
and share educational resources that address misinformation. It will leverage
participatory design with digital literacy interventionists to create locally-
contextualized digital literacy resources for rural communities and Black,
Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) communities. It will also design and
implement a socio-technical platform that supports digital literacy
interventionists to engage in the ongoing design of educational resources as a
Community of Practice (CoP). This platform will allow us to scale and sustain
the work to generate an enduring impact on how the nation addresses
misinformation. Ultimately, this project will generate knowledge of how
participatory design processes can be developed to scale local interventions. It
will also advance our understanding of how sociocultural contexts and knowledge
systems can shape digital literacy interventions, so that these interventions
are better able to motivate and support diverse communities as they resist
misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.