* 2230180
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Community Based Approach to Address Contaminants in Drinking Water using Smart Cloud-Connected Electrochemical Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Pradeep Kurup, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,495,019.00

Clean and safe water is a basic necessity for a community to survive and thrive.
However, millions of people are exposed to unsafe levels of drinking water
contaminants including toxic and persistent heavy metals and ubiquitous “forever
chemicals” such as per– and polyfluroalkyl substances (PFAS). Despite strict
regulations, and well-established laboratory methods for detecting these
widespread and persistent contaminants, these pollutants sometimes go undetected
because of infrequent sampling and testing. In this project engineers, computer
scientists, and social scientists from the University of Massachusetts Lowell
will work closely with community stakeholders (residents, neighborhood groups,
nonprofits, drinking water utilities, and regulators) to pilot a smart Internet
of Things (IoT) enabled water-quality monitoring and alert system in several
socio-economically diverse communities of Massachusetts. Given that drinking
water contamination and exposure occurs disproportionately in economically and
racially disadvantaged communities with older infrastructure, the proposed
technology will empower underprivileged groups to use the data to advocate for
remediation efforts. The transdisciplinary sociotechnical systems approach to
implement a smart community engaged water-quality monitoring and alert system
will be a new paradigm for addressing similar large scale societal and
infrastructural problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this SCC project, the
investigators will (1) deploy citizen-scientist-operated electrochemical
electronic tongue (E-Tongue) devices for rapid, onsite, water quality testing of
contaminants such as lead and arsenic, (2) co-design with community stakeholders
a user-friendly app and cloud-computing platform for data analysis, and (3)
foster shared learning and collaboration among community stakeholders to build
social cohesion and trust in water testing technologies and the local
authorities. Furthermore, this work will develop spatiotemporal machine learning
algorithms and a cloud-computing platform that will take the responses from the
individual E-Tongue devices and produce predictions of contaminant type,
concentration, probable source, and extent of the contamination. This
information will be used to quickly notify the public health authorities for
intervention and alert affected residents to take appropriate actions. Through
the design, development, and testing of a smart sensing and cloud-computing
system, the proposed transformative research will contribute to the fundamental
understanding and practical design of novel spatiotemporal analytics, mobile
computing, and machine learning techniques for real-time water contaminant
threat detection and early warning systems. The research will also advance our
knowledge and understanding of the technologies, training, and relationships
required to facilitate a sustainable, scalable sensor platform for water quality
testing and increase awareness and social trust in water testing technologies
and local authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.