* 2230630
* PIRE: Multi-Domain, Multi-Scale, Policy-Aware Digital Twin for Offshore Wind Energy Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Usman Khan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,498,144.00

For the US to achieve the offshore wind goals of 30 Gigawatts by 2030,
approximately 2000 offshore wind turbines (OWTs) need to be installed in the
coming years. Only 7 are currently operating in US waters. For comparison, close
to 6000 foundations are operating in European waters. The size, expense, and
importance of OWTs to mitigating climate change necessitates to consider them as
civil infrastructures. Such infrastructures must be built to last for over 50 or
even 100 years. However, a conception of OWTs as infrastructure has not caught
up with their rapid growth. Most OWTs are typically designed for a 25-to-35-year
service life. In a few decades, the industry will face a consequential decision-
making challenge as to whether to decommission, rebuild, or retrofit these
assets. This challenge is not limited to the US. It has global implications
considering the global expansion of offshore wind energy. Here, the team
develops a joint modeling framework for decision making about OWT safety,
operation and maintenance, life extension and design. International
collaboration is essential because the developers, designers, and operators for
offshore wind energy farms are almost entirely from Europe. Leveraging the
European experience from their international collaborators, the researchers use
both quantitative and qualitative data collected directly from OWTs, the workers
who service them, and the decision makers who enable their development. Their
goal is to find solutions to improve the resilience of offshore wind turbines,
notably while confronted to more frequent extreme weather events. By improving
OWT service life, this project paves the way to efficiently develop the US
clean-energy infrastructures. The project also provides support and training to
1 postdoctoral associate, and graduate and undergraduate students notably from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the team develops an extensible and customizable joint modeling
framework for policy and safety aware digital twins. They use a physics-data-
policy-safety co-modeling paradigm, integrated with the help of Agent Based
Models. A digital twin is a computational model of an actual OWT (or systems of
OWTs) that is maintained and updated based on measured data. The proposed
framework is formulated and studied within the context of the Block Island Wind
Farm in Rhode Island state waters, the Coastal Virginia Offshore Wind Pilot
Project, in US federal waters, and the Levenmouth Demonstration Turbine in the
United Kingdom. It enables short, medium, and long-term modeling, learning, and
assessment of the offshore wind farms. It uses measured data and integrate with
policy, labor, and safety aspects. The multi-domain, multi-scale nature of the
renewables and related structural elements is modeled by a physics-based
Bayesian Assimilation Framework. It is complemented by data-driven machine
learning and transfer learning. The project includes national and international
stakeholder engagement programs to facilitate a diverse and inclusive co-
production of knowledge. The project has integral educational components
including K-12 outreach, professional trainings, and development of graduate
students within a transdisciplinary research environment to support the future
workforce needed in the offshore wind industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.