* 2230054
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Justice in Data: An intensive, mentored online bootcamp developing FAIR data competencies in undergraduate researchers in the water and energy sectors
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* June Young Park, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 298,830.00

Dramatic development of information technology has produced an unprecedented
volume of data around the world, providing an opportunity for researchers to
leverage cyberinfrastructure (CI) to develop data-driven solutions to global
issues. However, the research workforce in the energy and water fields are often
under-equipped to incorporate CI into their workflows. This project creates a
unique cybertraining opportunity for undergraduate researchers in the energy and
water fields through an online, weeklong bootcamp, summer mentoring, and a
closing research symposium. Students train in every facet of CI, from data
access and sharing to data analytics and visualization, which are precursors to
knowledge and discovery. The bootcamp and training materials will increase the
application of Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) data
principles in research, encouraging a transition towards just practices in
research. Faculty participation in two workshops complement and extend the
mission of the undergraduate researcher components. The overall goal of this
project is to develop and test an extracurricular CI instructional framework
while also identifying the CI adoption and implementation needs of the
established research workforce, thus fulfilling NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop and
test an accessible framework and instructional materials for expanding CI
adoption among diverse, budding researchers and to broaden the adoption of CI in
established research laboratories. To do so, the project creates an intensive
weeklong FAIR data principles and introductory machine learning bootcamp with an
innovative research justice theme for undergraduate students conducting summer
research in water or energy and delivers two workshops. The bootcamp explores
high-impact topics for new CI users, including large-scale data access, data
analytics, and data visualization. Mentoring of bootcamp participants will
continue throughout the summer, and an end-of-summer online research symposium
provides a forum for bootcamp participants to describe how they (1) applied FAIR
principles in their summer research and (2) developed workflows and tools for
research-related tasks, which may be developed into publishable resources. The
two workshops identify opportunities for expanding CI in civil engineering
research and explore ways to improve and scale bootcamp content and delivery.
The FAIR bootcamp content is designed to encourage students to internalize the
content and integrate it into their research, while simultaneously increasing
the potential for participants to share their new knowledge and skills with
summer research colleagues. This novel bottom-up approach to spreading CI
knowledge strengthens the future science and engineering workforce by rapidly
growing the number of active researchers with CI
competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.