* 2230153
* POSE: Phase I: An Open-Source Ecosystem for the Creation and Use of Accessible Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Open Education Resources
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Robert Beezer, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 267,268.00

This project is funded by Pathways to Enable Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE)
Program which seeks to harness the power of open-source development for the
creation of new technology solutions to problems of national and societal
importance. Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) educational
materials that are open-sourced and made freely available to learners and
educators, known as Open Educational Resources (OER), require an infrastructure
that exceeds the quality of commercial alternatives. This project scopes the
creation of an Open-Source Ecosystem (OSE) consisting of two existing open-
source products: PreTeXt for authoring scholarly documents and textbooks
suitable for all areas of STEM, and the Runestone learning engineering and
analytics portal for publishing OER textbooks that support both instruction and
education research in K-12 and higher education. The long-term societal impacts
of this OSE are open-source textbooks that are made freely available to the
nation’s STEM classrooms and students through the Open-Source Ecosystem’s
support of instructors, authors, and researchers. Furthermore, the OER has the
potential to reflect cutting-edge advancements in STEM education research by
removing the barriers between researchers, authors, instructors, and students.
PreTeXt-authored works can be converted into HTML, print, and braille formats,
enabling the resulting Open Educational Resources to be accessible to a wide
range of learners at no cost, an equitable approach to ensuring that all
students have the same access to education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scoping
activities include curating methods to create multifaceted, accessible, and
interactive STEM education content, and providing mechanisms for students,
instructors, content authors, and researchers to seamlessly interact with
textbook materials to produce and utilize analytics. The team will hold virtual
meetings of stakeholders throughout the first half of the project, culminating
in an in-person summit at the end of the project. Evaluation of the project will
include qualitative feedback from meeting participants and experts across the
larger STEM OER community, including those from alternative OER platforms and
aggregators. The project aims to support the development of an infrastructure
and governance structure for a sustainable and robust Open-Source Ecosystem in
service of Open Educational Resources communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.