* 2230127
* CyberTraining: CIP: Training and Developing a Research Computing and Data CI Professionals (RCD-CIP) Community
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Rick Wagner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 6,701,999.00

Today’s science and engineering research community is interdisciplinary in
nature and continually evolving beyond the boundaries of single disciplines,
often requiring not only depth but also breadth of knowledge across those
disciplines. In particular, science has a growing need for advanced computing
resources and professionals who can serve as a bridge between the worlds of
scientific research and advanced computing infrastructure, or
cyberinfrastructure (CI). This project recognizes and supports these complex
needs by training and individually mentoring a cohort of Interdisciplinary
Research CI Professionals (IDR-CIPs) who use acquired technical competencies and
soft skills to work successfully with research teams. The IDR-CIP trainees are
drawn from communities including: domain scientists, interdisciplinary research
professionals, faculty, and students. IDR-CIP trainees are embedded into
research projects, giving them the opportunity to develop CI skills, and as a
result, become part of a larger community. The training program produces
experienced CIPs using the following core activities, including: developing
individualized training programs; conducting training cycles that support new,
current, and returning trainees; embedding trainees within the participating
institution’s projects and programs; mentoring scientific research project
matching; sponsoring a Faculty Fellows program; fostering communities through
sponsoring IDR-CIP trainee participation; and advocating for trainees to become
fully funded staff in CIP positions. An outcome of this project includes the
definition of new IDR-CIP workforce career paths that reflect their importance
for the research enterprise and has the potential to impact how research is done
in the NSF ecosystem. The recruitment process actively reaches out to a variety
of underrepresented communities, thereby advancing an important aspect of NSF’s
goal to broaden participation in science and engineering. It is vital for the
competitiveness of our nation to have such cyberinfrastructure professionals
available to support researchers and their increasingly complex computational
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2022, the NSF named Growing Convergence Research
as one of their 10 Big Ideas. Convergence research interconnects experts who
work together to solve problems that require a broad and diverse set of
knowledge, methods, expertise, scientific disciplines, and CI capabilities.
However, the lack of interdisciplinary cyberinfrastructure (CI) professionals
(CIPs) presents a barrier to advancement. This project's main goal is to
mitigate this barrier by developing a training program that aligns with the
competencies and backgrounds of each individual trainee. An important
contribution of this project to the pedagogical challenge of training a CIP
workforce is to articulate and organize training around four major elements: 1)
Recruitment &amp; Training: strategically reach out to new communities; develop
a flexible training cycle that supports new, current and returning trainees;
create a curated collection of training materials for CIP training programs; 2)
Science &amp; Engineering Project Matching and Mentoring: Based in CIP skillset,
identify S&amp;E projects and match each CIP with a mentor; connect trainees to
the NSF ACCESS Computational Science Support Network (CSSN); 3) Scientific
Research Consulting: Mentor and track trainees as they transition to an
independent consultant phase; facilitate CIP trainee transition to full time
professional positions by identifying appropriate career paths; 4) Fostering a
CIP Community: connect program CIP trainees through meetings and social media;
foster interactions with other CIP and CyberTraining programs; sponsor trainees
to become trainers and to join other HPC communities. This training program
fills an important gap in the CI research ecosystem and helps enable convergence
research through the creation of new CIP positions with appropriate job titles
and career pathways, and transition CIPs to fully funded staff positions. The
CIP training program will raise awareness of CI resources in new communities,
provide an avenue for their increased integration into research projects, and
support long-term strategic CI development. CIP training materials will be
publicly available to reach beyond the NSF cyber workforce via a public website.
As a result of the proposed collaboration and outreach, this program will impact
thousands of users and help develop the next generation of the CIP research
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.