* 2230550
* Magnifying Innovation: Understanding Organizations’ Adoption of Novel Design Practices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,269.00

To continue to enhance the innovation that is essential for the US economy and
to address critical societal challenges, new and better processes for innovation
must be both developed and adopted by key innovation drivers - from boardroom
executives to basement startups. The primary goal of this work is to understand
how and why industrial design organizations adopt innovation methods or fail to
do so, and to identify and transfer best practices for method adoption to the
academic and industrial innovation communities. The project will investigate the
adoption of new innovation methods through the study of methods and practices
that are currently receiving mixed adoption in large industrial R&amp;D
settings. In particular, the studies will target the adoption of Biologically
Inspired Design (BID) and Patent Mining (PM), which are particularly timely and
relevant to today’s societal challenges, in order to identify the
characteristics associated with the success or failure to adopt new design
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design research is concerned with developing
tools and methods to enhance design, either by increasing efficiency or
effectiveness or both, along one dimension or another (e.g., to reduce the time
to generate a new design, to generate more innovative designs, to generate
designs with fewer resources, to employ assistive technologies). Yet, despite
our best efforts, we find that the tools and methods developed through research
are rarely broadly adopted in industrial settings. This research program seeks
to understand both the barriers and catalysts of industrial adoption of new
design methods by focusing on the adoption cycles of two novel and rising
methods of design: Biologically Inspired Design (BID) and Patent Mining (PM).
Each method was selected as representative of current trends in design:
interdisciplinarity, sustainable design, and data-enhanced design. This
investigation of the complex system of design will seek to understand the design
needs of large industrial R&amp;D innovators (including those of Global 500
brands) and large government R&amp;D organizations as a subset of strong
influencers in the design methods domain within a much larger innovation
ecosystem. We will begin with a series of semi-structured interviews to identify
barriers and catalysts to adoption, followed by widely distributed surveys to
understand experiences with design methods in a much larger sample. The final
stage will provide in situ, non-retrospective analysis of Biologically Inspired
Design and Patent Mining by comparing three modes of dissemination: workshops,
collaborative projects with industry, and semester-long distance learning
courses. Taken together, these studies will allow us to triangulate among common
practices and patterns that will assist future researchers with the direction,
dissemination, and adoption of their work. Another outcome of this research will
be a network of industrial researchers who may be leveraged for future work of
this type, along with a set of operating protocols for reducing “research
friction” within academic and industrial partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.