* 2230535
* Research Security Training:  Risk Management and Mitigation
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Bill Yates, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shawna Cox
* 10/31/2023
* USD 306,449.00

This project will develop and evaluate a training activity about research
security based on an assessment of current understanding and knowledge gaps
among researchers about research security. This activity will explore actions
researchers and their institutions can take to assess, reduce, and manage risks
to the security of research proposed and under development, unpublished research
data, and other information and to uphold scientific values. This project
directly addresses the need to strengthen research security of U.S. government-
supported research and development, per the National Security Presidential
Memorandum – 33 (NSPM-33) and the CHIPS plus Science Act of 2022. Dissemination
and use of this training will better protect U.S. research interests from both
foreign and domestic risks and threats. The training module will be Internet-
based, scalable, flexible, and widely accessible to researchers and stakeholders
in a variety of settings, including researchers with disabilities. The training
module will have standard content while also providing research institutions the
flexibility to add content to address their local practices and incorporate
training into their local systems. The development of the research security
training module series is collaboratively funded by the National Science
Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Department of
Energy (DOE), and the Department of Defense (DOD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research security training module focused on risk management and mitigation will
be designed and developed in consultation with a Content Expert Group, which
includes experts in research security across government. Training development
will be guided by the ADDIE (Analyze, Design, Development, Implementation,
Evaluation) model, a widely used, flexible, and robust model for curriculum and
course design. Following the initial design work and consultation, focus groups
will be convened to identify potential instructional challenges, evaluate
learners’ existing knowledge and misconceptions, recognize technical and
structural requirements, and determine the type and extent of instruction
needed. The project team will assess the effectiveness of the module by
performing user testing where training materials and instructional methods are
rehearsed with a small group of learners before finalizing the materials, and
then conducting a pilot study with real-world target learners to assess the
effectiveness of the completed training module. Following end-user testing,
evaluation, and revisions to the design, the module will be made available for
dissemination to research security stakeholders, including university-based
researchers, undergraduate and graduate students, academic administrators,
research security administrators, and researchers and staff in government
agencies and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.