* 2230697
* Conference: Accelerating the Future of AI and Data-driven Education
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Ivon Arroyo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,990.00

This NSF Convergence Accelerator Workshop will create smart and integrated
platforms, devices and processes for education technology. Current educational
technologies often do not sufficiently leverage basic research on learning, nor
have a culture of continuous improvement, nor meet the needs of diverse
learners, nor leverage the growing power of computers. One issue is the
disconnected, fragmented, and often closed nature of different sectors:
educators, parents, commercial ventures, not-for-profit organizations,
stakeholders, researchers, and communities. A concerted effort among diverse
stakeholders is needed now to create real and immediate solutions. Significant
technology exists for digital instruction. Experts in academia (learning
science, AI, human-computer interaction, education, psychology), industry and
government will identify barriers and solutions to the delivery of high-quality
online education; they will inform best practices in design, generate future
development and testing, and leverage technology and new modes of platform
design. This workshop will support communities to reason about fruitful near-
term approaches for scaling up innovative pedagogies. We will increase the
number of trials of new products; test more often and fail faster; identify
promising interventions, and evaluate the conditions and circumstances that
increase the probability of successful products. &lt;br/&gt;The scientific
agenda will investigate and augment human learning at large scale in authentic
education settings (online, hybrid, and on-the-job). The workshop will establish
a framework for new AI, learning science, and education theory and technologies
to understand, model, infer, and respond to learning. It will explore new
theory, algorithms, big data, and systems that optimize every point in the
education process to understand students, organize what they can learn, and
optimize how they learn. The workshop will couple use-inspired AI research with
foundational AI and learning science research in a virtuous cycle and forge new
partnerships among diverse stakeholders as they bridge the divide with novel
tools from engineers, makers, technologists, and designers. It will make a laser
focus on projects that present well-defined deliverables within
3-years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.