* 2230507
* Conference: 2022 Underwater Ideas Lab
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Joseph Roy, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 380,899.00

America’s oceans and coastlines contribute greatly to the national economy,
supporting several hundred thousand ocean-dependent businesses, several hundred
billion U.S. dollars in economic activity annually, and millions of jobs.
Therefore, advancing understanding of our oceans and coastlines is important for
the national economy. Improving sensing and communication capabilities in
marine, freshwater, as well as polar environments is critical for making
significant discovery-based and use-inspired research advances that can lead to
more accurate predictions of geohazards and harmful algae blooms, improved
coastal resilience, better mitigation of climate change, and more resilient
coastal infrastructure. Typical terrestrial sensing and communication
technologies cannot be readily deployed in marine and freshwater environments
and especially in harsh polar environments. This challenge significantly limits
the scientific research and engineering developments in these environments. The
objective of this Ideas Lab workshop is to foster the creation of transformative
ideas and interdisciplinary teams that will advance engineering technologies to
address the most pressing sensing, communication, and data transmission
challenges in diverse underwater environments. These new engineering
technologies will not only advance the scientific research of the diverse
underwater environments, but also contribute to the growth of the economy and
benefit the society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Ideas Lab workshop is designed
with a collaborative, action-oriented agenda to facilitate innovative team-
building and foster the development of novel interdisciplinary proposals with
transformative approaches to address the technological challenges of conducting
research and building cyberinfrastructure for water and ice environments,
specifically in the areas of sensing, communications, localization, energy
harvesting, while considering miniaturization and minimizing environmental
impacts. The expected outcome of this workshop is to create new collaborations
between engineers, data scientists and domain experts across disciplinary
boundaries to address critical sensing and communication challenges underwater,
under-ice, below the seafloor, and across the ice-water-air interfaces. The
mission of this workshop aligns well with the NSF’s strategic goal of creating
new knowledge about our world, advancing the frontiers of research and
accelerating discovery through strategic investments in ideas, people and
infrastructure, and with the United Nation's Ocean Decade
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.