* 2230438
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Multi-site Fabry-Perot Interferometer Measurements of Thermospheric Neutral Winds and Temperatures in Western South America
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Luis Navarro Dominguez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 08/31/2025
* USD 157,945.00

The complex processes occurring in the ionosphere-thermosphere (IT) coupled
system have been historically studied using both space-borne and ground-based
instrumentation such as the Fabry-Perot interferometer (FPI), an instrument
capable of measuring thermospheric winds near 250 km. A particularly important
region including the geomagnetic equator that has remained largely unsampled
with respect to these winds is the area of the Western South America (WSA)
extending from 35°S to 5°S. The relationship between the speed and direction of
these winds and the plasma dynamics within the WSA caused by the Appleton
fountain effect over the geomagnetic equator has remained largely unexplored.
The objective of this award is to advance the current understanding of the
equatorial thermospheric and ionospheric dynamics within the WSA sector. The
deployment of a large-scale meridional chain of FPI instruments combined with
the existing all- sky imaging systems would serve as an important and
resourceful tool for space weather research. The project will significantly
enhance the collaboration between US and international researchers. At the new
FPI site, where limited educational and technological resources exist,
educational outreach activities will include visiting local schools and engaging
students in STEM topics. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
improve the current understanding of the IT dynamics in the WSA region extending
across the Equatorial Ionization Anomaly (EIA) and the magnetic equator using
simultaneous data from three Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPI) already in
operation. The other objective of this project is to combine the FPI data with
the all-sky imagers (ASIs) data to support studies of the Midnight Temperature
Maximum and Medium Scale Traveling Ionospheric Disturbances (MSTIDs) and
Equatorial Spread-F that affect the dynamics of the IT system. A new FPI
instrument will be deployed to a site in Argentina to observe thermospheric
winds and temperatures close to the southern EIA crest. This deployment will
create a chain of FPIs evenly separated by ~ 7o that would measure wind and
temperature parameters in a 2000 km latitude span with four sites. The project
will provide long-term regional neutral winds and temperatures in WSA that will
help understand how the dynamics of the low latitude region are affected by the
presence of a spatially and temporally variable EIA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.