* 2230953
* I-Corps: Bioresorbable drug delivery patch for the localized treatment of Crohn's Disease
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Christopher Bettinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a novel therapy for Crohn's disease-related strictures.
Approximately 750,000 Americans are diagnosed with Crohn's disease, and up to
50% of patients with Crohn's may require at least one surgical resection within
10 years of diagnosis for the structuring condition. However, the surgical
approach has concerns including potential post-surgical morbidities, possible
poorer quality of life, and a higher risk of unemployment, and disease
recurrence with surgery is common, with 50-60% of patients needing re-
operations. There is currently not a widely used intestinal-retentive
therapeutic within the field of gastroenterology. A typical customer is a
gastroenterology physician treating patients with Crohn's disease complicated by
strictures. This physician generally works for an academic hospital or a private
practice and bills a healthcare insurance company for therapy on behalf of his
or her patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a novel therapeutic that may offer an improved effective therapy
for Crohn's disease-related strictures than options currently available on the
market. Specifically, the status quo for non-surgical treatment of Crohn's
disease strictures is endoscopic balloon dilation, which relies on mechanical
force to stretch open intestinal blockages. The proposed technology may develop
a biologic delivery therapeutic that acts directly at the site of stricture,
potentially secreting anti-inflammatory pharmaceuticals in a time-controlled
manner through biodegradation. The proposed technology may allow for repurposing
traditional, but lesser effective systemic pharmaceuticals, into a platform
therapy that delivers longer and more localized therapies that may unlock
alternate treatment options for conditions such as Crohn's disease
strictures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.