* 2230354
* I-Corps: Novel molecule discovery by precisely predicting and modulating human pathology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Lei Xie, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology accelerating molecular discovery relevant to meeting
urgent challenges in agriculture, environment, energy, and human health/well-
being. This system seeks to enable reliable prediction of molecule functions
where no similar data has been observed as training data in classic artificial
intelligence (AI) algorithms. This solution may provide for the development of
new functional molecules such as nitrogen-fixing molecules, compostable plastic,
high-efficiency batteries, nanocages for molecular delivery, and safe and
effective medicines for incurable diseases. Furthermore, out-of-distribution
generalization is a challenge in AI in fundamental research in computer science
and mathematics. This system seeks to demonstrate a framework that could be
adopted in a broad spectrum of fields beyond the life sciences such as public
health, political science, economics, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project develops a molecular discovery platform based on studies in
machine learning, biophysics, and systems biology. The solution is fueled by
omics data generated by next-generation sequencing and high-throughput
techniques and powered by state-of-the-art deep learning. The novelty of the
approach is its way of integrating data from diverse resources into a unified
framework to represent complex biological systems, and enabling machine learning
for hypothesis generation. An outcome may be novel therapeutics that have the
potential to treat complex diseases such as cancers, neurodegenerative diseases,
and substance abuse disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.